### Part 1
<b>my brooch [<i>kevinati</i>] to my daughter, and</b> the brooch is worth <b>twelve hundred dinars. And</b> this woman subsequently <b>died, and the Sages fulfilled her statement.</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said to them</b> that <b>the sons of Rokhel should be buried by their mother,</b> i.e., he cursed them. Rabbi Elazar meant that it is not possible to bring a proof from this incident, as these sons were wicked people. Consequently, when dealing with them the Sages did not act in accordance with the <i>halakha</i>, but allowed their mother to give this valuable piece of jewelry to their sister, circumventing the <i>halakhot</i> of inheritance.

### Part 2
The Gemara states: <b>The first <i>tanna</i></b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> who holds that there must be an actual act of acquisition or the money still belongs to the giver. <b>And Rabbi Natan and Rabbi Ya’akov also</b> hold <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b> However, they add that <b>even though</b> the giver <b>died one does not say: It is a mitzva to fulfill the statement of the dead. And</b> the Sages in the clause beginning: <b>Some say,</b> hold <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who say that the statement of a person on his deathbed effects acquisition through mere speech.

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi,</b> who <b>said</b> his opinion <b>in the name of Rabbi Meir,</b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar. However,</b> he maintains that <b>where</b> the giver <b>died we say: It is a mitzva to fulfill the statement of the dead. And the Rabbis say: They should divide</b> it, because <b>they</b> are <b>uncertain</b> about the <i>halakha</i> in this situation. <b>And</b> according to the Sages in the clause beginning: <b>Here they said, the discretion</b> of the agent <b>is preferable. And Rabbi Shimon HaNasi came to teach us</b> a relevant <b>incident</b> but does not express an additional opinion.

### Part 4
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> those studying this issue: <b>Is</b> the <b>Rabbi Shimon HaNasi</b> mentioned here himself <b>a <i>Nasi</i>, or</b> does the <i>baraita</i> mean <b>that he spoke in the name of the <i>Nasi</i>?</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear that</b> which <b>Rav Yosef,</b> who was precise in his statements, <b>says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon HaNasi.</b> This indicates that he was an actual <i>Nasi</i>. <b>But</b> you can still <b>raise the dilemma: Is he a <i>Nasi</i>, or</b> does the <i>baraita</i> mean <b>that he spoke in the name of the <i>Nasi</i>,</b> as Rav Yosef may merely be quoting the above <i>baraita</i>? The Gemara has no answer for this question, and states that the dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
The Gemara returns to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: Rav Yosef says: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon HaNasi,</b> that the money should be returned to the heirs of the sender. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But don’t we maintain</b> that <b>the statement of</b> a person <b>on his deathbed is considered written and delivered?</b> If so, the agent should give the money to the heirs of the recipient.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Yosef establishes</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a healthy person,</b> not someone on his deathbed. The Gemara asks: <b>But he said</b> that the money should be returned <b>to the heirs of the sender, and we maintain</b> that <b>it is a mitzva to fulfill the statement of the dead,</b> even if he issued these instructions when he was healthy. The Gemara answers: Emend Rabbi Shimon HaNasi’s statement and <b>teach: Return</b> the money <b>to the sender,</b> not to his heirs, as this is referring to a case where the sender had not died.

### Part 7
end of chapter

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who brings a bill of divorce from a country overseas and says:</b> The bill of divorce <b>was written in my presence but it was not signed in my presence;</b> or if he said: <b>It was signed in my presence but it was not written in my presence;</b> or: <b>All of it was written in my presence and half of it was signed in my presence,</b> i.e., he observed the signing of only one witness; or: <b>Half of it was written in my presence and all of it was signed in my presence,</b> in all these cases the document is <b>invalid.</b>

### Part 9
If <b>one</b> agent bringing a bill of divorce <b>says: It was written in my presence, and one</b> other agent <b>says: It was signed in my presence,</b> it is <b>invalid.</b> If <b>two</b> agents <b>say: It was written in our presence, and one says: It was signed in my presence,</b> it is <b>invalid. And Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> the document <b>valid.</b> If <b>one</b> agent <b>says: It was written in my presence, and two</b> agents <b>say: It was signed in our presence,</b> it is <b>valid.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks with regard to the entire mishna: <b>Why do I</b> need all <b>these further</b> examples? <b>Didn’t it teach</b> these <i>halakhot</i> <b>once,</b> as the mishna states (2a): <b>One who brings a bill of divorce from a country overseas is required to say: It was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence?</b> This indicates that if one did not state this declaration, then the bill of divorce is invalid. The Gemara explains: <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> were derived <b>from that</b> mishna alone, <b>I would say:</b> He is <b>required</b> to issue this statement <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but if he did not say</b> it the bill of divorce is nevertheless <b>valid</b> after the fact. Therefore, this mishna <b>teaches us</b> that the bill of divorce is invalid.

### Part 11
§ The mishna taught that if the agent said: <b>Half of it was written in my presence and all of it was signed in my presence,</b> the document is <b>invalid.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>which half</b> of the bill of divorce did he claim he saw written? <b>If we say</b> that he saw <b>its first half</b> written, <b>but didn’t Rabbi Elazar say: Even if</b> the husband or scribe <b>wrote only one line of it for her sake,</b> the agent <b>is no longer required</b> to check if the rest of the bill of divorce was written properly? <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said:</b> He testifies that he saw that <b>its latter half</b> was written, and he does not testify with regard to the first half, which is the primary section of the bill of divorce.

### Part 12
§ The mishna taught that if he said: <b>All of it was written in my presence and half of it was signed in my presence,</b> i.e., the agent observed the signing of only one of the witnesses, it is <b>invalid. Rav Ḥisda says: And even</b> if <b>two</b> people <b>testify to the signature</b> of the <b>second</b> witness, and the court ratifies this signature, nevertheless it is <b>invalid. What is the reason</b> for this ruling? After all, the court has the agent’s testimony with regard to one signature and the confirmation of two witnesses for the second signature.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: The document must be authenticated <b>either entirely through</b> the process of <b>the ratification of a bill of divorce,</b> i.e., the bill of divorce must be ratified like any other legal document, by two people attesting to the validity of the signatures of both witnesses, <b>or it</b> must be <b>entirely</b> ratified <b>via</b> the <b>rabbinic decree</b> that the agent is deemed credible when he states: It was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence.

### Part 14
<b>Rava objects to this: Is there any</b> situation in <b>which if one</b> person <b>said</b> it, the document is <b>valid,</b> i.e., if the agent would have attested to the signature of the second witness the bill of divorce would be valid, and <b>now that there are two</b> witnesses who attest to the signatures it is <b>invalid? Rather, Rava says: Even</b> if