
### Part 1
<b>The verse speaks of two <i>terumot</i></b>; <b>one</b> is <b>standard <i>teruma</i> and one</b> is <b><i>teruma</i> of the tithe.</b> Since they are mentioned together, they can be compared: <b>Just as standard <i>teruma</i> is taken by estimate,</b> as there is no requirement for the amount separated to be measured precisely, <b>and</b> it can be taken <b>by thought,</b> as one is not required to physically separate it before consuming the remaining produce, <b>so too, <i>teruma</i> of the tithe may be taken by estimate and by thought. And</b> this comparison also teaches that <b>just as the homeowner has permission,</b> i.e., the right, <b>to separate standard <i>teruma</i>, so too, the homeowner has permission to separate <i>teruma</i> of the tithe.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who sets aside produce</b> with the understanding that <b>he will separate <i>terumot</i> and tithes with it,</b> so that when he has untithed produce he can render it fit by declaring that the <i>teruma</i> and tithes that must be separated will be from the produce that he had set aside for this purpose, or one who sets aside <b>money</b> with the understanding that <b>he will separate</b> and to redeem <b>second tithe with it,</b> then he may later <b>separate</b> the <i>teruma</i> or tithe <b>with them, based on the presumption that</b> the produce or the money <b>are extant.</b> He need not be concerned that perhaps the produce or money was lost in the meantime. <b>If</b> he discovers that <b>they were lost,</b> then <b>he must be concerned</b> that the produce or money that he set aside was lost, <b>from the time until the</b> same <b>time,</b> as will be explained in the Gemara, and he must separate <i>teruma</i> and tithes from the produce a second time; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Elazar.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One checks the wine</b> that is set aside to be used for separating <i>terumot</i> and tithes for other wine to see if it has turned to vinegar, which would render it unfit for this purpose, <b>at three times</b> during the year: <b>When the east wind</b> blows <b>at the conclusion of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>and when the</b> blossoms fall and the <b>grape buds emerge</b> and appear as small clusters, <b>and at the time</b> when <b>water enters</b> and fills <b>the unripe grape.</b> Since there is a change in the weather at these times, one should check to ensure that the wine has not turned to vinegar.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna taught that if the produce or money was lost, then one must be concerned that it occurred from the time until the same time. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is meant by: <b>From the time until the</b> same <b>time? Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It means <b>from the time</b> it was <b>checked</b> and found to be lost, <b>until the</b> same <b>time</b> of day on the previous day. If one had used that produce to render fit other produce within the twenty-four hours before noticing that it had been lost, one must separate <i>teruma</i> and tithes for that produce again. <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Antigonus says in the name of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yannai:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC