
### Part 1
<b>It is</b> also <b>not possible</b> for him to marry <b>a free woman, as he is still a half-slave.</b> If you say <b>he should be idle</b> and not marry, <b>but isn’t it</b> true that <b>the world was created only for procreation, as it is stated: “He did not create it to be a waste; He formed it to be inhabited”</b> (Isaiah 45:18)? <b>Rather, for the betterment of the world his master is forced to make him a freeman, and</b> the slave <b>writes</b> a promissory <b>note</b> accepting his responsibility to pay <b>half his value</b> to his master. <b>And Beit Hillel</b> ultimately <b>retracted</b> their opinion, <b>to rule in accordance with the statement of Beit Shammai,</b> that a half-slave must be set free.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to a master <b>who emancipates</b> only <b>half of his slave, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: He</b> has <b>acquired</b> himself, i.e., the transaction is complete and half of the slave is emancipated, <b>and the Rabbis say: He</b> has <b>not acquired</b> himself.

### Part 3
<b>Rabba said:</b> Their <b>dispute</b> pertains only to a case where the master emancipated him <b>with a bill</b> of manumission, <b>as Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds:</b> In the context of a Jewish man who engages in sexual intercourse with a maidservant who had been designated to cohabit with a Hebrew slave, the Torah writes that neither the Jewish man nor the maidservant is liable to receive the death penalty, though the man is liable to bring a guilt-offering. If the woman had been emancipated, she would be a regular married woman, and they would incur the death penalty for their act of intercourse. In describing the woman in that case, the Torah writes: <b>“And not at all redeemed, nor was freedom given to her”</b> (Leviticus 19:20). This is referring to two methods of emancipating a slave: Redemption via money, in the phrase: “And not at all redeemed,” and emancipation via a bill of manumission, in the phrase: “Nor was freedom given her.”

### Part 4
The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the freeing of a slave via <b>a bill</b> of manumission <b>to</b> the freeing of a slave via payment of <b>money,</b> to teach that <b>just as</b> with <b>money</b> the slave can free <b>either all of him or half of him,</b> for if he were to pay half of his value to the master he would be half-redeemed, <b>so too,</b> by receiving <b>a bill</b> of manumission <b>either all of him or half of him</b> can be emancipated.

### Part 5
<b>And the Rabbis derive</b> their opinion, that a slave cannot acquire half of his freedom via a bill of manumission, <b>from</b> a verbal analogy of the word <b>“her [<i>lah</i>]”</b> written here: “Nor was freedom given to her [<i>lah</i>]” (Leviticus 19:20), and the word <b>“her [<i>lah</i>]”</b> written with regard to a man who divorces <b>a woman:</b> “And he writes her [<i>lah</i>] a scroll of severance” (Deuteronomy 24:1). <b>Just as</b> in the case of <b>a woman,</b> one is <b>not</b> able to divorce <b>half of her</b> with a bill of divorce, <b>so too,</b> in the case of <b>a slave,</b> one is <b>not</b> able to emancipate <b>half of him</b> with a bill of manumission. <b>However, with regard to</b> a slave who frees himself by giving <b>money, everyone agrees that</b> the slave <b>acquires</b> half of himself, and a female slave would also be partially <b>redeemed but not</b> fully <b>redeemed.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that they disagree about this: As</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that a derivation from <b>a juxtaposition is preferable,</b> and consequently he derives the <i>halakha</i> of emancipation via a bill of manumission from the <i>halakha</i> stated in the same verse concerning redemption via money. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>a verbal analogy is preferable</b> and therefore derives the <i>halakha</i> of emancipation via a bill of manumission from the <i>halakha</i> of the divorce of a woman, where the verse employs an analogous term.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, everyone agrees</b> that generally <b>a verbal analogy is preferable, but it is different here because</b> the verbal analogy <b>can be refuted</b> by stating the following: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a woman</b> is that she <b>cannot leave</b> a marriage <b>via money</b> at all, <b>shall you say</b> that one should compare her case <b>to</b> that of <b>a slave, who does leave</b> his servitude <b>via money?</b> Since there are differences between divorce and emancipation, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that it is preferable to derive the <i>halakha</i> from a juxtaposition.

### Part 8
<b>And Rav Yosef said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis pertains only to a case where the slave was freed <b>via money, for Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that a slave can be half-freed can be derived from the phrase: <b>“And not at all redeemed [<i>vehofde lo nifdata</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 19:20), indicating that she has been partially <b>redeemed but not</b> fully <b>redeemed. And the Rabbis hold: The Torah spoke in the language of people,</b> and the repetition of the verb in the verse is not to be used as a source for deriving a <i>halakha</i>. <b>However,</b> when the slave is half-emancipated <b>via a bill</b> of manumission, <b>everyone agrees that</b> the slave has <b>not acquired</b> himself and remains a full slave.

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> against Rav Yosef’s statement based on what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who emancipates half</b> of <b>his slave with a bill</b> of manumission, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: He</b> has <b>acquired</b> himself, <b>and the Rabbis say: He has not acquired</b> himself. The Gemara concludes: <b>The refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rav Yosef is a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara suggests: In this <i>baraita</i>, <b>they disagree</b> in a case where the slave is half-emancipated <b>via a bill</b> of manumission. <b>However, they do not</b> explicitly <b>disagree</b> in a case where the slave is half-redeemed <b>with money. Shall we say</b> that <b>this is a conclusive refutation</b> of the statement <b>of Rav Yosef with regard to two</b> aspects: First, as above, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that he is half-freed via a bill of manumission; second, according to his statement, the dispute pertains to redeeming with money, yet the <i>baraita</i> gives no indication that the Rabbis would hold that the slave can be half-redeemed with money?

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Rav Yosef</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> They <b>disagree with regard to</b> emancipation <b>via a bill</b> of manumission, <b>and the same is true,</b> that they would disagree, with regard to redeeming <b>with money. And this, that they</b> explicitly <b>disagree with regard to</b> emancipation <b>via a bill</b> of manumission, is <b>to convey to you the far-reaching</b> nature of the opinion <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, that a slave can be half-freed even by receiving a bill of manumission.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And let them disagree</b> with regard to redeeming <b>with money, and to convey to you the far-reaching nature of</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> that they hold he cannot be half-freed even through redeeming with money. The Gemara responds: It is <b>preferable to</b> the <i>tanna</i> to emphasize <b>the power of leniency,</b> and therefore the dispute is presented as it is.

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof with regard to this discussion based on a <i>baraita</i>: The verse in Leviticus employs the double expression “<i>vehofde lo nifdata</i>,” literally: And redeemed not redeemed, in discussing the designated maidservant. The <i>baraita</i> analyzes this wording. If the verse had stated only <b>“and redeemed,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the verse discusses a maidservant that is <b>entirely</b> redeemed. Therefore, <b>the verse states “not redeemed.” If</b> it had stated only <b>“not redeemed,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that it means <b>an entirely</b> unredeemed maidservant, i.e., a full maidservant. Therefore, <b>the verse states “and redeemed.” How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? The verse is discussing a case where she is partially <b>redeemed but not</b> fully <b>redeemed.</b> This was accomplished <b>via money or an equivalent</b> value of <b>money.</b>

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues. <b>And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that she can be partially redeemed <b>via money. From where</b> do I derive that she can also be emancipated <b>via a bill</b> of manumission? <b>The verse states: “And not at all redeemed, nor was freedom given to her”</b> (Leviticus 19:20), <b>and later on,</b> in the case of divorce, <b>it states: “And he writes her a scroll of severance”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:1). <b>Just as later on</b> freedom is granted <b>via a bill</b> of divorce, <b>so too here,</b> a maidservant is freed <b>via a bill</b> of manumission.

### Part 15
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>half of</b> a slave can be redeemed <b>via money,</b> as detailed above, <b>or</b> that <b>all of him</b> can be emancipated <b>via a bill</b> of manumission. <b>From where</b> do I derive that <b>half of him</b> can be emancipated <b>via a bill</b> of manumission? <b>The verse states: “And not at all redeemed nor was freedom given her,”</b> and thereby <b>juxtaposes a bill</b> of manumission <b>to money. Just as</b> a slave can be <b>either fully</b> redeemed <b>or</b> half-redeemed via <b>money, so too, he</b> can <b>be either fully</b> emancipated <b>or</b> half-emancipated via <b>a bill</b> of manumission. This marks the end of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 16
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i> in light of the earlier opinions. <b>Granted, according to Rav Yosef after he was conclusively refuted,</b> who now holds that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis disagree both with regard to money and a bill of manumission, in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, for half of the slave is freed, whether via money or a bill of manumission. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba,</b> that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis disagree only with regard to a bill of manumission, but everyone agrees that the slave can redeem half of himself with money, do <b>all agree</b> with the statement of <b>the first clause, but the last clause</b> is in accordance with the opinion of only <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi?

### Part 17
<b>Rabba</b> could have <b>said to you: Yes, all agree</b> with the statement of <b>the first clause, and the last clause</b> is in accordance with only <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> This <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> entirely in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> with regard to <b>the mishna that teaches:</b> In the case of <b>one who is a half-slave half-freeman, granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba, he establishes</b> the mishna as referring to a case where the slave was half-redeemed <b>with money, and everyone agrees</b> that this is effective. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yosef, shall we say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of only <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis?</b> According to the opinion of Rav Yosef, the Rabbis hold that a slave cannot be half-free, regardless of whether he is freed via money or a bill of manumission. <b>Ravina said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC