
### Part 1
<b>But they do not count from Shabbat,</b> as there is no significance to the day of the week on which the tree was planted, and consequently no one remembers that the tree was planted on Shabbat.

### Part 2
<b>Alternatively,</b> the difference between Shabbat and the Sabbatical Year can be explained as follows: <b>Jews are suspected of</b> desecrating <b>the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>but they are not suspected of</b> desecrating <b>Shabbat.</b> Therefore, Rabbi Meir imposes a penalty for the unintentional desecration of the Sabbatical Year, but he imposes no such penalty for the unintentional desecration of Shabbat.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the point of Rabbi Meir adding the second reason, introduced with the term <b>alternatively?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This is what</b> Rabbi Meir <b>is saying: And if you would say</b> to contest the first reason: Jews <b>also</b> count from <b>Shabbat,</b> and unless the tree is uprooted, people will remember that it was planted on Shabbat, as at <b>times the thirtieth day</b> before Rosh HaShana <b>falls on Shabbat. As, if he planted</b> the tree <b>on that day,</b> the time from when he planted it <b>counts for him as</b> a full <b>year</b> with regard to the prohibition of fruit that grows during the first three years after the tree was planted. <b>And if</b> he did <b>not</b> plant it on that Shabbat, but rather on the next day, the twenty-ninth day before Rosh HaShana, <b>it does not count for him as</b> a full <b>year.</b> In such a case people will remember that the tree was planted on Shabbat, and they might come to think that planting a tree on Shabbat is permitted.

### Part 4
Consequently, Rabbi Meir adds: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> that <b>alternatively,</b> the difference between Shabbat and the Sabbatical Year can be explained as follows: <b>Jews are suspected of</b> desecrating <b>the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>but they are not suspected of</b> desecrating <b>Shabbat.</b> Therefore, Rabbi Meir imposes a penalty for the unintentional desecration of the Sabbatical Year, but not for the unintentional desecration of Shabbat.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues: And there is also <b>no contradiction</b> between one statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda</b> with regard to the Sabbatical Year <b>and</b> the other statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda</b> with regard to Shabbat. This is because <b>in Rabbi Yehuda’s place</b> the prohibition against desecrating <b>the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>was</b> regarded <b>by them</b> as a most <b>serious</b> one, and therefore there was no need to impose a penalty for its unintentional desecration, although it is a Torah law.

### Part 6
The Gemara adduces proof that this is true: It once happened <b>that</b> there was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to another</b> to insult him: <b>Convert [<i>dayyar</i>], son of a convert.</b> In anger the second person <b>said to</b> the first in response: At least <b>I don’t eat produce of the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>as you</b> do. This indicates that the Sabbatical Year was treated in that place as a very serious prohibition; therefore, Rabbi Yehuda deemed it unnecessary to impose a penalty for its unintentional desecration.

### Part 7
The Gemara proceeds to discuss another apparent contradiction between rulings of Rabbi Meir with regard to penalties imposed for the unintentional transgression of a rabbinic law: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Terumot</i> 7:7): If <b>one partook of <i>teruma</i>,</b>which is the property of a priest, and it was ritually <b>impure, he pays</b> restitution with ritually <b>pure, non-sacred</b> produce. <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> if <b>he paid</b> restitution with ritually <b>impure, non-sacred</b> produce? <b>Sumakhos said in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> If he paid restitution with ritually impure, non-sacred produce <b>unintentionally, his payment is valid.</b> But if he did so <b>intentionally, his payment is not valid. And the Rabbis say:</b> Although <b>both</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>his payment is valid,</b> the Sages imposed a penalty and said that <b>he returns and pays</b> restitution a second time with ritually <b>pure, non-sacred</b> produce.

### Part 8
<b>And we discussed</b> the following question concerning the opinion of Rabbi Meir: In the case where he paid restitution with ritually impure, non-sacred produce <b>intentionally, why is his payment not valid?</b> On the contrary, <b>blessing should come upon him, as he partook of something that is not fit for</b> the priest to partake of even <b>during the days of his impurity,</b> since it is prohibited for a priest to partake of impure <i>teruma</i>, whether he himself is pure or impure, <b>and he pays</b> restitution <b>to him with something,</b> i.e., impure, non-sacred produce, <b>which is</b> at least <b>fit for him</b> to partake of <b>during the days of his impurity.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And Rava said, and some say it</b> is <b>unattributed:</b> The <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and this is what it is teaching:</b> If <b>one partook of</b> ritually <b>impure <i>teruma</i>, he can pay</b> restitution with <b>anything,</b> even impure, non-sacred produce. If <b>he partook of</b> ritually <b>pure <i>teruma</i>, he pays</b> restitution with ritually <b>pure, non-sacred</b> produce. The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> if <b>he paid</b> restitution for ritually pure <i>teruma</i> with ritually <b>impure, non-sacred</b> produce? There is a tannaitic dispute about this. <b>Sumakhos said in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> If he paid restitution with ritually impure, non-sacred produce <b>unintentionally, his payment is valid.</b> But if he did so <b>intentionally, his payment is not valid. And the Rabbis say: Both</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, <b>his payment is valid,</b> but the Sages imposed a penalty and said that <b>he returns and pays</b> restitution a second time with ritually <b>pure, non-sacred</b> produce.

### Part 10
<b>And Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, said: Here,</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> Rabbi Meir and the Rabbis relates to the question of whether or not the Sages <b>penalized an unintentional</b> offender <b>due to an intentional</b> offender. <b>Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>they did not penalize an unintentional</b> offender <b>due to an intentional</b> offender, <b>and the Rabbis say</b> that <b>they penalized him.</b> Consequently, Rabbi Meir does not impose a penalty for an unintentional transgression of a rabbinic law, as by Torah law one can pay restitution to a priest with anything if he partakes of <i>teruma</i>. This contradicts what was stated previously, that in the case of a violation of rabbinic law, Rabbi Meir imposes a penalty even for an unintentional offense.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There, the man intends to pay; should we arise and penalize him?</b> It is specifically with regard to this case that Rabbi Meir holds that no penalty is imposed, as his mistake was made in the course of performing a laudatory action. By contrast, in cases where one rendered another’s produce impure and the like, there is a penalty, as the mistake was made while performing an action he should not have been performing.

### Part 12
The Gemara tries to bring proof concerning the previously stated opinion of Rabbi Meir that a penalty is imposed in a case of an unintentional transgression of a rabbinical law: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>blood</b> of an offering <b>that became impure and</b> a priest <b>sprinkled it</b> on the altar, if he did so <b>unintentionally,</b> the offering is <b>accepted</b> and achieves atonement for the owner of the offering. If he sprinkled the blood <b>intentionally,</b> the offering <b>is not accepted.</b> In any event, the <i>tanna</i> of this <i>baraita</i> did not penalize the unintentional offender due to an intentional offender, and this sprinkling of blood is prohibited by rabbinic law.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Meir</b> could have <b>said to you: How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There, the person intends to</b> do a mitzva and <b>atone; should we arise and penalize him?</b> Here too, the mistake was made while performing a laudatory act. In such a case, even Rabbi Meir agrees that that an unintentional offender is not penalized due to an intentional offender.

### Part 14
The Gemara attempts to adduce further proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 2:3): With regard to <b>one who tithes</b> produce <b>on Shabbat,</b> which is prohibited by rabbinic law because it appears as though he were repairing an article that requires repair, if he did this <b>unintentionally, he may consume</b> the produce, as it has been tithed and rendered fit for consumption. But if he did this <b>intentionally, he may not consume</b> it. Apparently, the Sages did not penalize the unintentional offender due to an intentional offender, although tithing produce on Shabbat is prohibited by rabbinic law. The Gemara answers: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There, the man intends to</b> do a worthy deed and <b>repair</b> the produce by tithing it; <b>should we arise and penalize him?</b> As above, Rabbi Meir would agree that in such a case the unintentional offender is not penalized.

### Part 15
The Gemara brings yet another proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in that same mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 2:3): With regard to <b>one who immerses utensils</b> in a ritual bath <b>on Shabbat,</b> which is also prohibited by the Sages because it appears as if he were repairing an article that requires repair, if he immerses them <b>unintentionally, he may use them.</b> But if he immerses them <b>intentionally, he may not use them.</b> Here too the Sages did not penalize the unintentional offender due to an intentional offender. The Gemara answers as before: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There, the man intends to</b> do a praiseworthy act and <b>purify the utensils; should we arise and penalize him?</b> The same distinction stated previously applies in this mishna as well.

### Part 16
The Gemara discusses the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda: <b>And they raised a contradiction between</b> one statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda and</b> another statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda</b> with regard to matters that are prohibited only <b>by rabbinic law. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC