
### Part 1
<b>when the husband admits</b> that he wrote it, <b>in any event</b> he should <b>return</b> it <b>to the woman, and</b> by omission this appears to be the <i>halakha</i> <b>even if a long time</b> has passed since the bill of divorce was lost. <b>And</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>answers: Here,</b> in the mishna where it states that he should not return it, it is stated <b>with regard to a place where caravans are</b> frequently <b>found; there,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> where it states that he should return it, it is stated <b>with regard to a place where caravans are not</b> frequently <b>found.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara compares the rulings of Rabba and Rabbi Zeira. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> with regard to Rabbi Zeira’s statement that he should not return it in a place where caravans are frequently found: <b>And this is</b> the case <b>when it is established</b> that there are two people in the town with the identical name. In <b>that</b> case, Rabbi Zeira holds <b>that it should not be returned, and this is</b> the same ruling as that <b>of Rabba. And there are</b> those <b>who say:</b> In a place where caravans are frequently found, <b>even though it is not established</b> that there are two people with identical names, <b>it should not be returned, and</b> he <b>disagrees with</b> the ruling <b>of Rabba.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted that Rabba did not say</b> a discourse <b>like</b> that of <b>Rabbi Zeira</b> and raise a contradiction from the <i>baraita</i>, as <b>he</b> holds that it is <b>a stronger</b> challenge <b>to raise a difficulty</b> from <b>the mishna</b> in tractate <i>Bava Metzia</i> because the Mishna, redacted by Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, employs more precise language than <i>baraitot</i>. <b>But what is the reason</b> that <b>Rabbi Zeira did not say</b> a discourse <b>like</b> that of <b>Rabba</b> and raise a contradiction from the mishna in tractate <i>Bava Metzia</i>?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: Rabbi Zeira could have <b>said to you: Does</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> that <b>if he said: Give</b> the found document to the intended recipient, <b>one gives</b> it, <b>and</b> this is so <b>even</b> if <b>a long time</b> passed? This was only an inference from the mishna. <b>Perhaps</b> the mishna should be interpreted differently, so as to teach: <b>If he said: Give</b> it, then <b>one gives</b> it, but this is only <b>as we maintain</b> in the mishna, when it is found <b>immediately,</b> not if a long time has passed.

### Part 5
The Gemara offers an alternative resolution to the contradiction between the mishna here, on the one hand, and the mishna in tractate <i>Bava Metzia</i> and the <i>baraita</i>, on the other hand. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> It is possible to resolve the contradiction in a different way: The latter permit one to return a lost bill of divorce only in a case <b>where</b> the <b>witnesses</b> who signed the bill of divorce <b>say: We have never signed a bill of divorce of Yosef ben Shimon other than</b> this <b>one,</b> in which case there is no concern that the bill of divorce belongs to someone else.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so, what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> that one returns the bill of divorce? Since it clearly belongs to her, there is no question that it must be returned to her. The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that <b>one should be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps it happened</b> that another bill of divorce was written in which <b>the names</b> of the husband and the wife <b>are identical to the names</b> of the husband and wife of the second bill of divorce, <b>and</b> the names of the <b>witnesses</b> on that bill of divorce <b>are identical to</b> the names of the <b>witnesses</b> on this bill of divorce, when in fact they are different witnesses. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that this is not a concern.

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests an alternative resolution to the contradiction. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> When do the mishna in tractate <i>Bava Metzia</i> and the <i>baraita</i> rule that one should return the bill of divorce? It is in a case <b>where</b> the one who lost it <b>says: There is a hole in</b> the bill of divorce, <b>next to such and such a letter, as this is a clear-cut distinguishing mark for him.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> Rav Ashi permits the returning of such a bill of divorce <b>specifically</b> when one says that the hole is <b>next to such and such a letter, as that is a clear-cut distinguishing mark for him. But</b> if he said <b>only</b> that it had <b>a hole</b> without mentioning its precise location, then one should <b>not</b> return the bill of divorce, as that is not considered a clear-cut distinguishing mark.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: Rav Ashi <b>is uncertain</b> with regard to <b>whether</b> the obligation to return a lost item to its owner on the basis of <b>distinguishing marks</b> is <b>by Torah law</b> or <b>if</b> it is <b>by rabbinic law.</b> Therefore, in the case of a bill of divorce, he holds that one may rely only on a clear-cut distinguishing mark, as everyone agrees that the requirement to return a lost item to its owner on the basis of a clear-cut distinguishing mark is by Torah law.

### Part 9
Apropos this discussion the Gemara relates an incident: <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana lost the bill of divorce</b> that he was transmitting, when he was <b>in the study hall. He said: If</b> they request <b>a distinguishing mark, I have</b> one <b>for it. If</b> it depends on <b>visual recognition, I have</b> methods of recognition <b>for it. They returned</b> the bill of divorce <b>to him. He said</b> afterward: <b>I do not know if they returned it due to the distinguishing mark</b> that I supplied, <b>and they hold that distinguishing marks</b> are used to return lost items <b>by Torah law,</b> or <b>if it was due to</b> my <b>visual recognition, and</b> it is <b>specifically Torah scholars [<i>tzurva miderabbanan</i>]</b> like me who are relied upon when they say that they recognize an item, <b>but an ordinary man</b> would <b>not</b> be relied upon to recognize the item and have it returned to him.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that if one found the bill of divorce immediately, it is valid, <b>but if not,</b> then it is <b>invalid. The Sages taught: What is</b> considered <b>not immediately? Rabbi Natan says:</b> It is <b>when</b> there was <b>a delay equivalent</b> to the amount of time it would take <b>for a caravan to pass</b> by <b>and camp</b> there. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> There is no fixed amount of time; rather, it is within the category of immediately <b>as</b> long as <b>there will be a person</b> that <b>stands and sees that no</b> other <b>person passed there. And some say</b> that he said: It is as long <b>as no person stopped there. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> It is within the category of immediately if there was not a delay <b>equivalent</b> to the amount of time it would take <b>to write the bill of divorce. Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> It is equivalent not to the amount of time needed write the bill of divorce, but <b>equivalent</b> to the amount of time it would take <b>to read it. Others say:</b> It is <b>equivalent</b> to the amount of time it would take <b>to write it and to read it.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara adds: <b>And even</b> if there was <b>a delay and</b> the bill of divorce <b>has distinguishing marks on it,</b> the marks <b>attest to it</b> and it is considered a valid bill of divorce. This is the <i>halakha</i> where the distinguishing marks are clear-cut, e.g., <b>when they say: It has a hole next to such and such a letter. And one may not testify with regard to distinguishing marks of the</b> physical description of the bill of divorce <b>itself,</b> e.g., <b>where they say:</b> This bill of divorce is <b>long or short,</b> as these are not considered distinguishing marks.

### Part 12
In a case where one found a bill of divorce <b>tied</b> up <b>in a pouch</b> or <b>in a purse [<i>arnaki</i>], or</b> encircled <b>in a ring,</b> and he recognizes the document,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC