
### Part 1
<b>And the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Naḥmani,</b> i.e., Abaye, that disclosure of intent with regard to bills of divorce is disregarded.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Initially,</b> the husband <b>would change his name and her name,</b> from the names by which they were known where they formerly lived to the names by which they were known where the bill of divorce was written, and write <b>the name of his city and the name of her city.</b> One was not required to list all of the names by which the husband and the wife were known, but only the names in the place where the bill of divorce was being written. <b>Rabban Gamliel the Elder instituted that</b> the scribe <b>should write</b> in the bill of divorce: The <b>man so-and-so, and any</b> other <b>name that he has,</b> and: The <b>woman so-and-so, and any</b> other <b>name that she has.</b> The reason for this ordinance was <b>for the betterment of the world,</b> as perhaps the people of a different city would not recognize the name written in the bill of divorce, and would claim that this bill of divorce does not belong to her.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: The residents of a country overseas sent</b> an inquiry <b>to Rabban Gamliel:</b> With regard to <b>people who come from there,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>to here,</b> for example, someone <b>whose name is Yosef but</b> here <b>they call him Yoḥanan,</b> or someone whose name is <b>Yoḥanan, but</b> here <b>they call him Yosef, how do they</b> write bills of divorce to effectively <b>divorce their wives? Rabban Gamliel arose and instituted that they should write:</b> The <b>man so-and-so, and any</b> other <b>name that he has,</b> the <b>woman so-and-so, and any</b> other <b>name that she has, for the betterment of the world. Rav Ashi said: And this</b> applies only <b>when he is known by two names. Rabbi Abba said to Rav Ashi: Rabbi Mari and Rabbi Elazar hold in accordance with your</b> opinion.

### Part 4
The Gemara adds: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ashi:</b> If a husband <b>has two wives, one in Judea and one in the Galilee; and he has two names, one</b> that he is known by <b>in Judea and one</b> that he is known by <b>in the Galilee; and he divorces his wife who is in Judea with</b> a bill of divorce listing the <b>name that</b> he is known by <b>in Judea, and</b> he divorces <b>his</b> other <b>wife who is in the Galilee with</b> a bill of divorce listing the <b>name that</b> he is known by <b>in the Galilee,</b> then <b>neither</b> of his wives <b>is divorced until he divorces his wife who is in Judea with</b> a bill of divorce listing <b>the name that</b> he is known by <b>in Judea and</b> the <b>name</b> used by the people <b>of the Galilee</b> appended <b>to it, and</b> he also divorces <b>his wife who is in the Galilee with the name</b> that he is known by <b>in the Galilee and</b> the <b>name</b> used by the people <b>of Judea</b> appended <b>to it.</b> If <b>he leaves to a different place, and divorces</b> his wife <b>with</b> a bill of divorce listing <b>one of</b> these names, then <b>she is divorced.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say</b> that even in Judea his <b>name</b> used by people <b>of the Galilee</b> must be appended <b>to it?</b> Why then is he not required to list all of the names that he is known by? <b>Rather, learn from it</b> that there is a difference between the two cases: <b>This</b> former case is one <b>where he is known</b> to have several names, for example when those in Judea are aware that the husband is known by a different name in the Galilee. And <b>this</b> latter case is one <b>where he is not known</b> to have two names, as he traveled to a place where he was not known. Therefore, he is required to write only the name that he is known by in that place. The Gemara determines: <b>Conclude from it</b> that one must list all of the names that he is known by only if it is known that he has several names.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> woman <b>who</b> many people <b>called Miriam, and a few</b> people called her <b>Sara;</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a said:</b> In her bill of divorce, one must write: <b>Miriam, and any</b> other <b>name that she has, and</b> one should <b>not</b> write: <b>Sara, and any</b> other <b>name that she has,</b> as one must use the name that she is primarily known by.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A widow can collect</b> payment of her marriage contract <b>from the property of orphans only by</b> means of <b>an oath</b> that she did not receive any part of the payment of the marriage contract during her husband’s lifetime. The mishna relates: The courts <b>refrained from administering an oath to her,</b> leaving the widow unable to collect payment of her marriage contract. <b>Rabban Gamliel the Elder instituted that she should take, for</b> the benefit of <b>the orphans, any vow that</b> the orphans <b>wished</b> to administer to her, e.g., that all produce will become prohibited to her if she received any payment of her marriage contract, <b>and</b> after stating this vow, she <b>collects</b> payment of <b>her marriage contract.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna lists additional ordinances that were instituted for the betterment of the world: <b>The witnesses sign</b> their names <b>on the bill of divorce,</b> even though the bill of divorce is valid without their signatures, <b>for the betterment of the world,</b> as the Gemara will explain. <b>And Hillel instituted a document that prevents the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>from abrogating an outstanding debt [<i>prosbol</i>] for the betterment of the world,</b> as the Gemara will explain.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> discuss <b>specifically a widow?</b> This <i>halakha</i> should apply to <b>everyone, as we maintain</b> that anyone <b>who comes to collect</b> payment <b>from the property of orphans can collect only by</b> means of <b>an oath.</b> The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary for</b> the mishna to mention <b>a widow,</b> as it might <b>enter your mind to say:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC