
### Part 1
The host <b>said to him: No,</b> you must leave. Bar Kamtza <b>said to him: I will give you money for half of the feast;</b> just do not send me away. The host <b>said to him: No,</b> you must leave. Bar Kamtza then <b>said to him: I will give you money for the entire feast;</b> just let me stay. The host <b>said to him: No,</b> you must leave. Finally, the host <b>took</b> bar Kamtza <b>by his hand, stood him up, and took him out.</b>

### Part 2
After having been cast out from the feast, bar Kamtza <b>said</b> to himself: <b>Since the Sages were sitting</b> there <b>and did not protest</b> the actions of the host, although they saw how he humiliated me, <b>learn from it that they were content</b> with what he did. <b>I will</b> therefore <b>go and inform [<i>eikhul kurtza</i>] against them to the king. He went</b> and <b>said to the emperor: The Jews have rebelled against you.</b> The emperor <b>said to him: Who says</b> that this is the case? Bar Kamtza <b>said to him:</b> Go and test them; <b>send them an offering</b> to be brought in honor of the government, and <b>see whether they</b> will <b>sacrifice it.</b>

### Part 3
The emperor <b>went and sent with him</b> a choice <b>three-year-old calf. While</b> bar Kamtza <b>was coming</b> with the calf to the Temple, <b>he made a blemish on</b> the calf’s <b>upper lip. And some say</b> he made the blemish <b>on</b> its <b>eyelids, a place where according to us,</b> i.e., <i>halakha</i>, it <b>is a blemish, but according to them,</b> gentile rules for their offerings, it <b>is not a blemish.</b> Therefore, when bar Kamtza brought the animal to the Temple, the priests would not sacrifice it on the altar since it was blemished, but they also could not explain this satisfactorily to the gentile authorities, who did not consider it to be blemished.

### Part 4
The blemish notwithstanding, <b>the Sages thought to sacrifice</b> the animal as an offering <b>due to</b> the imperative to maintain <b>peace</b> with the <b>government. Rabbi Zekharya ben Avkolas said to them:</b> If the priests do that, people <b>will say</b> that <b>blemished</b> animals <b>may be sacrificed</b> as offerings <b>on the altar.</b> The Sages said: If we do not sacrifice it, then we must prevent bar Kamtza from reporting this to the emperor. The Sages <b>thought to kill him so that he would not go and speak</b> against them. <b>Rabbi Zekharya said to them:</b> If you kill him, people <b>will say</b> that <b>one who makes a blemish on sacrificial</b> animals <b>is to be killed.</b> As a result, they did nothing, bar Kamtza’s slander was accepted by the authorities, and consequently the war between the Jews and the Romans began.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The</b> excessive <b>humility of Rabbi Zekharya ben Avkolas destroyed our Temple, burned our Sanctuary, and exiled us from our land.</b>

### Part 6
The Roman authorities then <b>sent Nero Caesar against</b> the Jews. <b>When he came</b> to Jerusalem, he wished to test his fate. <b>He shot an arrow to the east</b> and the arrow <b>came</b> and <b>fell in Jerusalem.</b> He then shot another arrow <b>to the west</b> and <b>it</b> also <b>fell in Jerusalem.</b> He shot an arrow <b>in</b> all <b>four directions of the heavens,</b> and each time the arrow <b>fell in Jerusalem.</b>

### Part 7
Nero then conducted another test: <b>He said to a child: Tell me a verse</b> that you learned today. <b>He said to him</b> as follows: <b>“And I will lay My vengeance upon Edom by the hand of My people Israel”</b> (Ezekiel 25:14). Nero <b>said: The Holy One, Blessed be He, wishes to destroy His Temple, and He wishes to wipe his hands with that man,</b> i.e., with me. The Romans are associated with Edom, the descendants of Esau. If I continue on this mission, I will eventually be punished for having served as God’s agent to bring about the destruction. So <b>he fled</b> and <b>became a convert, and</b> ultimately <b>Rabbi Meir descended from him.</b>

### Part 8
The Roman authorities then <b>sent Vespasian Caesar against</b> the Jews. <b>He came</b> and <b>laid siege</b> to Jerusalem for <b>three years. There were</b> at that time <b>in</b> Jerusalem <b>these three wealthy people: Nakdimon ben Guryon, ben Kalba Savua, and ben Tzitzit HaKesat.</b> The Gemara explains their names: <b>Nakdimon ben Guryon</b> was called by that name <b>because the sun shined [<i>nakad</i>] on his behalf,</b> as it is related elsewhere (see <i>Ta’anit</i> 19b) that the sun once continued to shine in order to prevent him from suffering a substantial loss. <b>Ben Kalba Savua</b> was called this <b>because anyone who entered his house when he was hungry as a dog [<i>kelev</i>] would leave satiated [<i>save’a</i>]. Ben Tzitzit HaKesat</b> was referred to by that name because <b>his ritual fringes [<i>tzitzit</i>] dragged</b> along <b>on blankets [<i>keset</i>],</b> meaning that he would not walk in the street with his feet on the ground, but rather they would place blankets beneath him. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say that his seat [<i>kiseh</i>] was found among the nobles of Rome,</b> meaning that he would sit among them.

### Part 9
These three wealthy people offered their assistance. <b>One</b> of them <b>said to</b> the leaders of the city: <b>I will feed</b> the residents <b>with wheat and barley. And one</b> of them <b>said to</b> leaders of the city: I will provide the residents <b>with wine, salt, and oil. And one</b> of them <b>said to</b> the leaders of the city: I will supply the residents <b>with wood.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And the Sages gave</b> special <b>praise to he</b> who gave the <b>wood,</b> since this was an especially expensive gift. <b>As Rav Ḥisda would give all of the keys [<i>aklidei</i>] to his servant, except</b> for the key <b>to</b> his shed <b>for</b> storing <b>wood,</b> which he deemed the most important of them all. <b>As Rav Ḥisda said: One storehouse [<i>akhleva</i>] of wheat requires sixty storehouses of wood</b> for cooking and baking fuel. These three wealthy men <b>had</b> between them enough commodities <b>to sustain</b> the besieged <b>for twenty-one years.</b>

### Part 10
<b>There were certain zealots among</b> the people of Jerusalem. <b>The Sages said to them: Let us go out and make peace with</b> the Romans. But the zealots <b>did not allow them</b> to do this. The zealots <b>said to</b> the Sages: <b>Let us go out and engage in battle against</b> the Romans. But <b>the Sages said to them: You will not be successful.</b> It would be better for you to wait until the siege is broken. In order to force the residents of the city to engage in battle, the zealots <b>arose and burned</b> down <b>these storehouses [<i>ambarei</i>] of wheat and barley, and there was</b> a general <b>famine.</b>

### Part 11
With regard to this famine it is related that <b>Marta bat Baitos was</b> one of the <b>wealthy women of Jerusalem. She sent</b> out <b>her agent and said to him: Go bring me fine flour [<i>semida</i>]. By the time he went,</b> the fine flour <b>was</b> already <b>sold. He came</b> and <b>said to her: There is no fine flour,</b> but <b>there is</b> ordinary <b>flour. She said to him: Go</b> then and <b>bring me</b> ordinary flour. <b>By the time he went,</b> the ordinary flour <b>was</b> also <b>sold. He came and said to her: There is no</b> ordinary <b>flour,</b> but <b>there is coarse flour [<i>gushkera</i>]. She said to him: Go</b> then and <b>bring me</b> coarse flour. <b>By the time he went,</b> the coarse flour <b>was</b> already <b>sold. He came and said to her: There is no coarse flour,</b> but <b>there is barley flour. She said to him: Go</b> then and <b>bring me</b> barley flour. But once again, <b>by the time he went,</b> the barley flour <b>was</b> also <b>sold.</b>

### Part 12
<b>She had</b> just <b>removed her shoes,</b> but <b>she said: I will go out</b> myself <b>and see if I can find something to eat.</b> She stepped on some <b>dung,</b> which <b>stuck to her foot, and,</b> overcome by disgust, <b>she died.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai read concerning her</b> a verse found in the section of the Torah listing the curses that will befall Israel: <b>“The tender and delicate woman among you who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot</b> upon the ground” (Deuteronomy 28:56). <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that she did not step on dung, but rather <b>she ate a fig of Rabbi Tzadok, and became disgusted and died.</b> What are these figs? <b>Rabbi Tzadok observed fasts</b> for <b>forty years,</b> praying <b>that Jerusalem would not be destroyed.</b> He became so emaciated from fasting <b>that when he would eat something it was visible from the outside</b> of his body. <b>And when he would eat</b> after a fast <b>they would bring him figs</b> and <b>he would suck out their liquid and cast</b> the rest <b>away.</b> It was one such fig that Marta bat Baitos found and that caused her death.

### Part 14
It is further related that <b>as she was dying, she took out all of</b> her <b>gold and silver</b> and <b>threw it in the marketplace. She said: Why do I need this? And this is as it is written: “They shall cast their silver in the streets</b> and their gold shall be as an impure thing; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels” (Ezekiel 7:19).

### Part 15
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Abba Sikkara was the leader of the zealots [<i>biryonei</i>] of Jerusalem</b> and <b>the son of the sister of Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai.</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>sent</b> a message <b>to him: Come to me in secret. He came,</b> and Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>said to him: Until when will you do this and kill everyone through starvation?</b> Abba Sikkara <b>said to him: What can I do, for if I say something to them they will kill me.</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>said to him: Show me a method</b> so <b>that I will</b> be able to <b>leave</b> the city, and it is <b>possible that</b> through this <b>there will be</b> some <b>small salvation.</b>

### Part 16
Abba Sikkara <b>said to him:</b> This is what you should do: <b>Pretend to be sick, and have everyone come and ask</b> about your welfare, so that word will spread about your ailing condition. Afterward <b>bring something putrid and place it near you, so that</b> people <b>will say that you have died</b> and are decomposing. <b>And</b> then, <b>have your students enter</b> to bring you to burial, <b>and let no one else come in so that</b> the zealots <b>not notice that you are</b> still <b>light. As</b> the zealots <b>know that a living</b> person <b>is lighter than a dead</b> person.

### Part 17
Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>did this. Rabbi Eliezer entered from one side and Rabbi Yehoshua from the other side</b> to take him out. <b>When they arrived at the entrance</b> of the city on the inside, the guards, who were of the faction of the zealots, <b>wanted to pierce him</b> with their swords in order to ascertain that he was actually dead, as was the common practice. Abba Sikkara <b>said to them:</b> The Romans <b>will say</b> that <b>they pierce</b> even <b>their teacher.</b> The guards then <b>wanted</b> at least <b>to push him</b> to see whether he was still alive, in which case he would cry out on account of the pushing. Abba Sikkara <b>said to them: They will say</b> that <b>they push</b> even <b>their teacher.</b> The guards then <b>opened the gate</b> and <b>he was taken out.</b>

### Part 18
<b>When</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>reached there,</b> i.e., the Roman camp, <b>he said: Greetings to you, the king; greetings to you, the king.</b> Vespasian <b>said to him: You are liable for two death penalties, one</b> because <b>I am not a king and</b> yet <b>you call me king, and furthermore, if I am a king, why didn’t you come to me until now?</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>said to him:</b> As for <b>what you said</b> about yourself: <b>I am not a king,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC