
### michna 1
An important rule that they [the Sages] said regarding the Sabbatical year: anything that is human food or animal food or from a species [of plant] used for dying if it does not last [if left] in the field, [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to it and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to its money [exchanged for it], [the laws of] Bi'ur [requirement to destroy Sabbatical produce when it is no longer readily available] apply to it and [the laws of] Bi'ur apply to its money. And what [is considered human food]? The leaf of the wild black calla lily and the leaf of the rustyback fern and endive and leeks and purslane and Netz HeChalav [unknown plant]. And [what is considered] animal food? Thorns and thistles. And [what is considered] a species [of plant] used for dying? Woad [used to make blue dye] and madder [used to make red dye]. [The laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to their money, [the laws of] Bi'ur apply to them and [the laws of Bi'ur apply to their money.

### michna 2
And another rule that they said: anything that is not human food or animal food or from a species [of plant] used for dying, or that lasts [if left] in the field, [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to it and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to its money [exchanged for it], but [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to it and [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to its money. And what is it [i.e., human or animal food that lasts if left in the field]? The leaf of wild black calla lily and the root of rustyback fern and Scolopendrium and the root of Netz HeChalav and the Bukhriyah [unknown plant]. And [what is considered] a species [of plant] used for dying? Rubia Tinctorum and Reseda. [The laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to their money, but [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to them and [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to their money. Rabbi Meir says: Their money may be subject to Bi'ur until Rosh HaShana [New Year's festival]. They [the Sages] replied to him: [If the laws of] Bi'ur don't apply to them, all the more so [do the laws not apply] to their money!

### michna 3
The skins of pomegranates and their blossoms, the husks of nuts and the [fruit] pits, [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to their money [exchanged for them]. The dyer may dye for himself, but may not dye for payment, since one may not do business with the fruits of the Sabbatical year, and not with firstborn animals, and not with Terumah [produce consecrated for priestly consumption], and not with Neveilot [improperly slaughtered animals of permitted species], and not with Tereifot [animals with a mortal condition such that they would die within one year], and not with Shekatzim U'Remasim [creeping creatures]. And he may not take the produce of the field and sell it in the market, but he may collect it and his son may sell it for him. If he took for himself and had left over, he may sell them.

### michna 4
[If one] bought a [blemished] firstborn animal for his son's [wedding] feast or for a pilgrimage festival but didn't need it, he is allowed to sell it. Trappers of wild animals, birds or fish that happen [to trap] impure species [of animals] are allowed to sell them. Rabbi Yehudah says: Even someone who came across [an impure species] may take and sell it as long as this is not his [primary] business. But the Sages forbade [this].

### michna 5
Shoots of hawthorn and carobs, [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to their money [exchanged for them], [the laws of] Bi'ur apply to them and [the laws of] Bi'ur apply to their money [exchanged for them]. Shoots of the terebinth tree or of the pistachio tree, or thorn bushes, [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical apply to their money, but [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to them and [the laws of] Bi'ur do not apply to their money. But to the leaves [of these trees], [the laws of] Bi'ur apply, since they fall from their parents.

### michna 6
The rose and the cypress flower [henna] and balsam and rockrose [cistus], [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to them and [the laws of] the Sabbatical year apply to their money [exchanged for them]. Rabbi Shimon says: The [laws of] the Sabbatical year do not apply to balsam, because it is not a fruit.

### michna 7
A new rose [i.e. grown during the Sabbatical year] that was pickled in old oil [i.e. grown before the Sabbatical year], one may take the rose [from the oil, and eat it]. But an old [rose] in new [oil] requires Bi'ur. New carobs that were pickled in old wine or old [carobs] in new [wine], require Bi'ur. This is the rule: anything [from the Sabbatical year] that is [of an amount that] transfers taste [to another food] requires Bi'ur [if] it is a species in a different species. But a species in its own species, for any amount [it requires Bi'ur ]. The Sabbatical prohibitions apply to any amount of a species in its own species, and [in a case of a species] not in its own species, [they only apply] when [the amount is enough to] transfer taste.

>Credit : Sefaria Community Translation
>License : CC0