
### Part 1
Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>decreed thirteen fasts, but he was not answered. He considered decreeing more</b> fasts until they would be answered. <b>Rabbi Ami said to him</b> that <b>they said: One does not trouble the community excessively,</b> and therefore you should not impose more than thirteen fasts.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abba, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, said: When Rabbi Ami acted</b> and issued this ruling, <b>he did</b> so <b>on his own</b> authority, as it went against the majority opinion. <b>Rather, Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said as follows: They taught only</b> that the community observes a maximum of thirteen fasts when they are praying <b>for rain. However,</b> with regard <b>to other types of calamities, they continue to fast until they are answered from Heaven.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>This</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When</b> the Sages <b>said three and when they said seven, they spoke only</b> concerning fasts <b>for rain. However,</b> with regard <b>to other types of calamities, they continue to fast until they are answered.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ami.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Ami</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that this <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One does not decree more than thirteen fasts on the community, as one does not trouble the community excessively.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: This</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is not for</b> that <b>reason.</b> Rather, it is <b>due to</b> the fact that after thirteen fasts the <b>time of the rainfall has</b> already <b>passed,</b> and there is no reason to fast for rain after the rainy season has ended.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates a story on a similar topic: <b>The inhabitants of Nineveh sent</b> a question <b>to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: People <b>such as us, who require rain even during the season of Tammuz,</b> and who live in areas where rain falls all year round, <b>what</b> should we <b>do</b> when there is a drought during the summer? Are we <b>likened to individuals or</b> are we <b>likened to a community?</b> The Gemara explains the practical difference between these two options: Are we <b>likened to individuals and</b> therefore we pray for rain <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer? Or</b> are we <b>likened to a community</b> and we pray for rain <b>in</b> the ninth blessing, <b>the blessing of the years? He sent</b> his answer <b>to them: You are likened to individuals and</b> therefore you pray for rain <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: When</b> do the <i>halakhot</i> concerning the times during which the prayer for rain is recited apply? <b>When the years,</b> i.e., the climate, <b>are as they ought to be and the Jewish people are living in their land. However, nowadays,</b> when the Jewish people are dispersed around the world, and the climate is not always as it ought to be, <b>all is in accordance with the year,</b> i.e., the local climate, <b>all is in accordance with the place</b> in question, and <b>all is in accordance with</b> the particular <b>time,</b> and therefore one prays for rain in the blessing of the years, as necessary for the local climate. <b>He said to him: You raise a contradiction from a <i>baraita</i> against Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi himself <b>is a <i>tanna</i>, and</b> consequently has the authority <b>to dispute</b> the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> halakhic conclusion <b>was</b> reached <b>about</b> this matter? <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> One prays for rain <b>in the blessing of the years,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> One prays <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer,</b> as stated by Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. The Gemara concludes: <b>And</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that if rain is required when it is not the rainy season in Eretz Yisrael, one prays for rain <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna taught: <b>On Monday</b> they open the stores <b>a little at nightfall, and on Thursday</b> they are permitted to open the stores <b>all day, in deference to Shabbat. A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>How is</b> this <b>taught,</b> i.e., what is the meaning of this ruling? Does it mean that <b>on Monday</b> the storeowners open their doors <b>a little at nightfall, and on Thursday</b> they likewise open their doors just a little, but do so <b>all day, in deference to Shabbat? Or perhaps,</b> the mishna means that <b>on Monday</b> they open their doors <b>a little,</b> but all day, <b>and on Thursday they open</b> their doors wide <b>the entire day?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of this dilemma, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>On Monday</b> they open their doors <b>a little until the evening, and on Thursday they open</b> them <b>the entire day, in deference to Shabbat.</b> If one’s shop <b>had two entrances,</b> he <b>opens one and locks one,</b> thereby demonstrating that his store is not open in the normal manner. If <b>he had a platform opposite his entrance</b> which conceals the door to his store, <b>he may open in his</b> usual <b>manner without concern,</b> as it is prohibited to open one’s store not due to work, but only so that it not appear as though people are eating and drinking on this day.

### Part 9
§ The mishna taught: <b>If these</b> fasts have passed <b>and they have not been answered, they decrease</b> their engagement <b>in</b> business <b>negotiations</b> and <b>in building and planting.</b> It was <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Megilla</i> 5:2): <b>Building</b> means <b>joyful building,</b> not building in general. Likewise, <b>planting</b> means <b>joyful planting,</b> not all planting. The <i>Tosefta</i> elaborates: <b>What is joyful building? This</b> is referring to <b>one who builds a wedding chamber for his son.</b> It was customary upon the marriage of a son to build him a small house where the marriage feast was held and where the newlywed couple would live for a certain period of time. <b>What is joyful planting? This</b> is referring to <b>one who</b> plants <b>a splendid, royal garden</b> that does not serve practical purposes, but is only for ornamentation.

### Part 10
§ <b>And</b> the mishna further taught that they decrease <b>greetings</b> between one another. <b>The Sages taught: <i>Ḥaverim</i>,</b> members of a group dedicated to the precise observance of mitzvot, <b>do not extend greetings between each other</b> at all. <b><i>Amei ha’aretz</i>,</b> common, uneducated people, <b>who extend greetings</b> to <i>ḥaverim</i>, do so while unaware that this is inappropriate. The <i>ḥaverim</i> <b>answer them in an undertone and in a solemn manner. And</b> <i>ḥaverim</i> <b>wrap themselves and sit as mourners and as ostracized ones, like people who have been rebuked by God, until they are shown mercy from Heaven.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: An important person is permitted to fall on his face</b> and humiliate himself in front of the community <b>only if he</b> is certain that he <b>will be answered like Joshua, son of Nun, as it is stated: “And the Lord said to Joshua, Get you up, why are you fallen upon your face?”</b> (Joshua 7:10). One who is not absolutely certain that he will be answered may not fall on his face in public, as if he is unanswered he will become an object of derision.

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Elazar said: An important person is permitted to gird</b> himself in <b>sackcloth</b> as a sign of mourning and to pray for mercy <b>only if he</b> is certain that he <b>will be answered like Jehoram, son of Ahab, as it is stated: “And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he rent his clothes, now he was passing by upon the wall, and the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth</b> within <b>upon his flesh”</b> (II Kings 6:30). Although he was wicked, Jehoram was later answered and the suffering of the Jews was alleviated.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Elazar</b> further <b>said: Not all</b> are worthy to petition God <b>by rending</b> their garments, <b>and not all</b> are worthy <b>of falling</b> on their faces in times of trouble. <b>Moses and Aaron</b> were worthy of petitioning God <b>by falling</b> on their faces, whereas their students <b>Joshua and Caleb</b> prayed <b>by</b> only <b>rending</b> their garments. The Gemara elaborates: <b>Moses and Aaron</b> petitioned God <b>by falling</b> on their faces, <b>as it is written: “Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces”</b> (Numbers 14:5). <b>Joshua and Caleb</b> prayed <b>by rending</b> their garments, <b>as it is written</b> in the next verse: <b>“And Joshua, son of Nun, and Caleb, son of Jephunneh,</b> who were of those who spied out the land, <b>rent their garments”</b> (Numbers 14:6).

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to this</b> interpretation, <b>and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani</b> who objected: <b>Had</b> the verse <b>written</b> only: <b>Joshua</b> and Caleb, the meaning would be <b>as you said,</b> that Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces whereas Joshua and Caleb only rent their garments. However, <b>now that it is written: “And Joshua,”</b> it is possible that the connecting word “and” indicates that Moses and Aaron merely fell upon their faces, while Joshua and Caleb <b>did</b> both <b>this and that,</b> i.e., they rent their clothing in addition to falling upon their faces.

### Part 15
<b>And Rabbi Elazar</b> further <b>said: Not all</b> dignitaries will worship God in the messianic age <b>by rising, and not all</b> will do so <b>by bowing.</b> Rather, <b>kings</b> will serve God <b>by rising, and ministers by bowing.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>Kings by rising, as it is written: “Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, his Holy One,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC