
### Part 1
derives <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“her Festival”</b> that acts of mirth and rejoicing are prohibited from the New Moon, which is considered like a Festival. <b>And the one who said</b> that these activities are <b>prohibited</b> during <b>the entire</b> month learns this <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“her New Moon.” And the one who said</b> that acts of rejoicing are <b>prohibited</b> during <b>the entire week</b> of the Ninth of Av, derives this <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“her Shabbat,”</b> which also means a week.

### Part 2
With regard to the <i>halakha</i> itself, <b>Rava said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. And Rava</b> also <b>said</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> The Gemara remarks: <b>And both of</b> these rulings are intended <b>as a leniency. And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for Rava to state both rulings, <b>for had he taught us</b> only that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, I would have said</b> that the mourning practices are obligatory <b>even from the New Moon,</b> as maintained by Rabbi Meir. Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel,</b> that the restrictions of mourning do not apply until the week of the Ninth of Av.

### Part 3
<b>And had he taught us</b> only that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, I would have said</b> that the prohibitions apply <b>even after</b> the fast, until the end of the week. Consequently, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> The prohibitions apply only until the Ninth of Av itself, not afterward.

### Part 4
§ The mishna taught: On <b>the eve of the Ninth of Av, a person may not eat two cooked dishes</b> in one meal. <b>Rav Yehuda said: They taught</b> that one may not partake of a meal with two dishes <b>only from six hours</b> of the day <b>and onward,</b> but <b>from six hours and earlier</b> it is <b>permitted. And Rav Yehuda</b> also <b>said: They taught</b> that it is prohibited to eat two dishes <b>only in the concluding meal</b> before beginning the fast. <b>However, in a non-concluding meal</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to eat two cooked dishes.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>And both of</b> these rulings are intended <b>as a leniency. And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for Rav Yehuda to state them both, <b>for had he taught us</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is referring only <b>to the concluding meal, I would have said</b> that this applies <b>even from six hours and earlier.</b> Rav Yehuda therefore <b>teaches us</b> that it applies only <b>from six hours and onward. And had he taught us</b> only that it is prohibited to eat two dishes <b>from six hours and onward, I would have said</b> that this applies <b>even to a meal by which he does not stop</b> eating. Rav Yehuda therefore <b>teaches us</b> that it applies only <b>to the concluding meal.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the first version,</b> and <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the second version.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the second version,</b> as follows: With regard to <b>one who dines on the eve of the Ninth of Av, if he will eat another meal, he is permitted to eat meat and to drink wine</b> during this first meal. <b>But if</b> he does <b>not</b> intend to eat another meal, he is <b>prohibited to eat meat and to drink wine.</b>

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the first version:</b> On <b>the eve of the Ninth of Av, a person may not eat two cooked dishes.</b> Furthermore, one may <b>neither eat meat nor drink wine. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One must <b>adjust</b> and decrease the amount he eats. Rabbi Yehuda said: How should <b>one adjust</b> his meal? <b>If he is accustomed to eat two cooked dishes</b> at each meal, he should <b>eat</b> only <b>one type</b> of food; <b>and if he is accustomed to dine</b> in the company <b>of ten people,</b> he should <b>dine with</b> only <b>five;</b> and if <b>he is accustomed to drinking ten cups</b> of wine, he should <b>drink</b> only <b>five cups. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? From six hours and onward; however, from six hours and earlier</b> all these practices are <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 8
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: On <b>the eve of the Ninth of Av, a person may not eat two cooked dishes,</b> and he <b>may neither eat meat nor drink wine;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> One must <b>adjust and reduce</b> his consumption <b>of meat and wine. How does one reduce</b> his meat and wine? <b>If he is accustomed to eating a liter of meat</b> in his meal, he should <b>eat half a liter;</b> if <b>he is accustomed to drinking a <i>log</i> of wine,</b> he should <b>drink half a <i>log</i> of wine; and if he is not accustomed</b> to eating meat or drinking wine <b>at all,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> for him to do so at all. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: If he is accustomed to eating a radish or a salted</b> dish <b>after</b> his meal, <b>he has permission</b> to do so on the eve of the Ninth of Av, as they are not considered an additional dish.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: In <b>any</b> meal that is eaten <b>due to</b> the fast of <b>the Ninth of Av,</b> it is <b>prohibited to eat meat; and</b> it is <b>prohibited to drink wine; and</b> it is likewise <b>prohibited to bathe</b> in anticipation of the fast. However, in <b>any</b> meal that is <b>not due to the Ninth of Av,</b> i.e., one is eating the meal in order that he shouldn’t be hungry on the Ninth of Av, it is <b>permitted to eat meat and to drink wine, but</b> it is nevertheless <b>prohibited to bathe</b> at that time. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said in the name of his father:</b> For the <b>entire time that one is permitted to eat meat,</b> he is likewise <b>permitted to bathe.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught: All mitzvot practiced by a mourner are</b> likewise <b>practiced on the Ninth of Av:</b> It is <b>prohibited</b> to engage <b>in eating, and in drinking, and in smearing</b> oil on one’s body, <b>and in wearing shoes, and in conjugal relations.</b> It is <b>prohibited</b> to read <b>from the Torah, from the Prophets, and from the Writings, or to study from the Mishna, from the Gemara, and from midrash, and from</b> collections of <b><i>halakhot</i>, and from</b> collections of <b><i>aggadot</i>.</b>

### Part 11
<b>However, one may read from a place</b> in the Bible <b>that he is unaccustomed to reading,</b> as it will be difficult for him and he will not derive pleasure from it, <b>and he</b> may likewise <b>study from a place</b> of the Talmud <b>that he is unaccustomed to studying. And one may read from</b> the book of <b>Lamentations; from</b> the book of <b>Job; and from the evil matters in Jeremiah,</b> i.e., his prophecies of doom. <b>And schoolchildren interrupt</b> their studies for the day <b>because it is stated: “The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart”</b> (Psalms 19:9).

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> One may <b>not even read from a place</b> in the Bible <b>that he is unaccustomed to reading, nor</b> may one <b>study from a place</b> of the Talmud <b>that he is unaccustomed to studying.</b> However, <b>one may read from Job, and from Lamentations, and from the evil matters of Jeremiah. And schoolchildren interrupt</b> their studies <b>on that</b> day <b>because it is stated: “The precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart”</b> (Psalms 19:9).

### Part 13
§ The mishna taught that one may <b>neither eat meat nor drink wine.</b> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>However, one may eat</b> heavily <b>salted meat and drink wine from his press,</b> i.e., wine that has not finished fermenting. The Gemara inquires: With regard to <b>salted meat, how long</b> must this meat remain in salt before it is permitted? <b>Rav Ḥinnana bar Kahana said in the name of Shmuel: As long as it is like peace-offerings,</b> which could be eaten for two days and one night after they were sacrificed. After this time has passed, it is no longer called meat. Therefore, if it was salted for longer than this, it may be eaten on the eve of the Ninth of Av.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>wine from his press, until when</b> is wine considered from his press? <b>As long as it is fermenting.</b> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Wine that is fermenting</b> does <b>not have</b> a problem <b>with regard to exposed</b> liquids, as there is no concern that a snake will leave its venom in that wine. <b>And how long</b> is <b>its fermenting</b> period? <b>Three days</b> from the time the grapes were pressed.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: This was the custom of Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ilai.</b> On <b>the eve of the Ninth of Av,</b> near the evening, <b>they</b> would <b>bring him stale bread with salt, and</b> he would <b>sit</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC