
### Part 1
<b>and divided them and established them as twenty-four</b> watches. They achieved this by writing the names of these new twenty-four watches on pieces of paper, <b>mixing them up, and putting them in a receptacle [<i>kalfei</i>]</b> from which lots were drawn. A representative from the family of <b>Jedaiah came and drew his portion and the lot of</b> five <b>other</b> watches, for a total of <b>six. Harim came and</b> also <b>drew his portion and the lot of</b> five <b>other</b> watches, a total of <b>six. And likewise Pashhur, and likewise Immer.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And likewise the prophets among them stipulated that even</b> if the descendants of <b>Jehoiarib, who</b> originally <b>headed the priestly watches, ascended</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>Jedaiah would not be demoted from its place</b> as the first of the watches. Rather, the watch of <b>Jedaiah</b> would retain <b>precedence, and Jehoiarib</b> would be <b>subordinate to it.</b>

### Part 3
§ The mishna taught: <b>And the Israelites of that priestly watch assembled in their towns and read the act of Creation.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter,</b> that they must read this specific portion, derived? <b>Rabbi Ya’akov bar Aḥa said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said: Were it not for</b> the <b>non-priestly watches</b> and the Temple service, <b>heaven and earth would not continue to exist, as it is stated: “And he said: Lord God, by what shall I know that I shall inherit it?”</b> (Genesis 15:8).

### Part 4
The Gemara explains this verse. <b>Abraham said: Master of the Universe, perhaps the Jews</b> will <b>sin before You.</b> Will <b>You treat them as</b> You did <b>the generation of the flood and the generation of the dispersion,</b> and destroy them? God <b>said to him: No.</b> Abraham <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, tell me, with what shall I inherit it?</b> How can my descendants ensure that You will maintain the world? God <b>said to</b> Abraham: <b>“Take for Me a three-year-old heifer, and a three-year-old goat,</b> and a three-year-old ram, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon” (Genesis 15:9). God was alluding to the offerings, in whose merit the Jewish people, and through them the entire world, will be spared divine punishment.

### Part 5
Abraham <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe,</b> this <b>works out well when the Temple is standing,</b> but <b>when the Temple is not standing, what will become of them?</b> God <b>said to him: I have already enacted for them the order of offerings. When they read them before Me, I will ascribe them</b> credit <b>as though they had sacrificed them before Me and I will pardon them for all their transgressions.</b> Since the offerings ensure the continued existence of the Jewish people and the rest of the world, the act of Creation is read in their honor.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught: The members of the priestly watch would pray for the offerings of their brothers,</b> the daily offering, <b>that it should be accepted with favor. And</b> meanwhile, <b>the members of</b> the <b>non-priestly watch</b> remained in their towns and would <b>assemble in the synagogue and observe four fasts: On Monday of</b> that <b>week, on Tuesday, on Wednesday, and on Thursday. On Monday</b> they would fast <b>for seafarers,</b> that they should be rescued from danger, as the sea was created on Monday. <b>On Tuesday</b> they would fast <b>for those who walk in the desert,</b> as the dry land was created on Tuesday.

### Part 7
<b>On Wednesday</b> they would fast <b>over croup, that it should not befall the children,</b> as on the fourth day the bodies of light [<i>me’orot</i>] were created, a textual allusion to curses [<i>me’erot</i>]. <b>On Thursday</b> they would fast <b>for pregnant women and nursing women,</b> as living beings were first created on this day. For <b>pregnant women</b> they would fast <b>that they should not miscarry,</b> while for <b>nursing women</b> they would fast <b>that they</b> should be able to <b>nurse their children</b> properly. <b>And on Shabbat eve they would not fast, in deference to Shabbat,</b> and <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> they would not fast <b>on Shabbat itself.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that they would <b>not</b> fast <b>on Sunday? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Due to the Christians,</b> as Sunday is their day of rest, and they would claim that even the Jews ascribe significance to their special day. <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: Because it is the third day after the creation</b> of man, who was created on Friday, and the third day of recovery from a wound or sickness, in this case one’s very creation, is considered the most painful.

### Part 9
<b>Reish Lakish said:</b> They would not fast on Sunday <b>due to the added soul, as Reish Lakish said: An added soul is given to man on Shabbat eve,</b> and <b>at the conclusion of Shabbat it is removed it from him, as it is stated: “He ceased from work and rested</b> [<b><i>vayinafash</i></b>]” (Exodus 31:17), which he expounds as follows: <b>Since one has rested</b> and Shabbat has passed, <b>woe for the soul [<i>vai nefesh</i>]</b> that is <b>lost,</b> the added soul that each individual relinquishes. Consequently, one is still weak from this loss on Sunday.

### Part 10
The mishna taught that <b>on Sunday</b> they would read the portions starting with: <b>“In the beginning”</b> (Genesis 1:1–5) <b>and “Let there be a firmament”</b> (Genesis 1:6–8). It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The section: <b>“In the beginning”</b> is read <b>by two</b> people, while <b>“Let there be a firmament”</b> is read <b>by one.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> the passage <b>“Let there be a firmament”</b> is read <b>by one</b> individual, as <b>it is three verses</b> long, and one who is called to the Torah reads at least three verses. <b>However, what is the reason</b> that the section <b>“In the beginning”</b> is read <b>by two</b> individuals? It is five verses long, <b>and it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Megilla</i> 22a): <b>One who reads from the Torah</b> may <b>not</b> read <b>fewer than three verses.</b> How, then, are five verses read by two individuals?

### Part 11
The Gemara cites two answers. <b>Rav said:</b> The first reader reads the first three verses, and the second reader <b>repeats</b> the last verse read by the first, and continues with the final two verses. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> They <b>split</b> the middle verse into two, so that each of the pair reads half of it. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>Rav, who said</b> that one <b>repeats, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> they should <b>split</b> a verse? The Gemara answers that Rav <b>maintains</b> that with regard to <b>any verse that was not divided by Moses, we do not divide it.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And Shmuel said</b> that one <b>splits</b> the middle verse into two. The Gemara asks: <b>And may one split</b> a single verse? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥanina Kara,</b> the Bible expert, who taught the Bible to schoolchildren, <b>say: I had great trouble with Rabbi Ḥanina the Great</b> when I asked him this question, <b>and he permitted me to split</b> long verses into two <b>only for</b> the benefit of <b>schoolchildren, since it is performed to</b> help them <b>learn. And Shmuel</b> can respond that <b>what is the reason there,</b> in the case of schoolchildren, that it is permitted to split verses? <b>Because it is not possible</b> to proceed in any other way. <b>Here too, it is not possible</b> for two people to read five verses other than by splitting one of them into two.

### Part 13
The Gemara questions this last conclusion. <b>And Shmuel said</b> that one <b>splits</b> the middle verse into two. <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> that he <b>repeats</b> one of the verses, in accordance with the opinion of Rav? The Gemara explains: It is a rabbinic <b>decree due to those who enter</b> the synagogue in the middle of the reading, and <b>a decree due to those who leave</b> in the middle. If someone entered or exited in the middle of the reading and heard three full verses, he might think that one of the readers had read fewer than three full verses, which might lead him to conclude that it is permitted to read fewer than three verses.

### Part 14
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A chapter</b> consisting <b>of six verses</b> may <b>be read by two</b> individuals, <b>and</b> a chapter <b>of five</b> verses must be read <b>by one. And if the first</b> individual <b>reads three</b> verses from the five-verse chapter, <b>the second</b> one reads the last <b>two</b> verses <b>of that chapter and one</b> more from <b>another chapter. And some say</b> that <b>three</b> verses are read from the next chapter, <b>as one may not begin to read a chapter</b> for <b>fewer than three verses.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara explains the objection: <b>According to the one who said</b> that they <b>repeat</b> the middle verse, <b>let</b> the second reader <b>repeat</b> a verse here as well. <b>And according to the one who said</b> that they <b>split</b> a verse, here too, <b>let</b> them <b>split</b> it. Apparently, the <i>baraita</i> contradicts the opinions of both Rav and Shmuel. The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC