
### Part 1
<b>A grown woman,</b> i.e., a girl over twelve and a half, who is old enough to be married, <b>is not permitted to render herself unattractive during the days of mourning for her father,</b> as this would adversely affect her chances of marriage. The Gemara infers that this <i>halakha</i> applies only to a grown woman, whereas <b>a young woman,</b> a girl between the ages of twelve and twelve and a half, who is not yet old enough to be married, <b>is permitted</b> to render herself unattractive.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes this <i>halakha</i>: <b>What, is it not</b> referring to the prohibition <b>against bathing? And in what</b> kind of water may a grown woman bathe? <b>If we say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>hot water,</b> is <b>a grown woman not permitted</b> to render herself unattractive by refraining from washing in hot water? <b>But didn’t Rav Ḥisda say:</b> It is <b>prohibited for a mourner to insert</b> even <b>his finger into hot water</b> for the purpose of washing. <b>Rather, is it not</b> the case that it is permitted for a grown woman to bathe <b>in cold water,</b> from which it may be inferred that it is not permitted for a young woman to bathe even in cold water. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is not speaking of bathing at all. Rather it is referring to <b>painting</b> the eyes <b>and dyeing [<i>pirkus</i>]</b> one’s hair, which it is permitted for a grown woman to do during mourning.

### Part 3
The Gemara proposes: <b>Let say that</b> the aforementioned <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> Rava’s ruling. <b>As Rabbi Abba the priest said in the name of Rabbi Yosei the priest: An incident</b> occurred in which <b>the sons of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, died, and he bathed in cold water all seven</b> days of mourning. This ruling apparently indicates that a mourner is permitted to bathe in cold water.

### Part 4
The Gemara responds: This is not a proof, as <b>they say: There</b> it is referring to a case where <b>his mourning periods</b> came immediately <b>one after the other, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one’s mourning periods</b> came immediately <b>one after the other</b> and <b>his hair grew heavy, he may lighten it with a razor, and he may wash his garment in water.</b> And <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> He may trim his hair <b>with a razor, but not with scissors.</b> Likewise, he may wash his garment <b>in water, but not with natron, nor with sand, and nor with iceplant.</b>

### Part 5
The foregoing is one version of Rava’s opinion and the ensuing discussion. <b>Some say</b> a different version of this debate. <b>Rava said:</b> It is <b>prohibited for a mourner</b> to bathe <b>in cold water all seven</b> days of mourning. The Gemara asks: In <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from</b> eating <b>meat and</b> drinking <b>wine,</b> which a mourner is permitted to do? The Gemara responds: <b>There, he acts to relieve his anxieties.</b> Since a mourner is typically distressed over the death of a close relative, the Sages permitted him to fortify himself with strong food and drink.

### Part 6
The Gemara proposes: <b>Let say that</b> the following <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> Rava’s ruling. <b>A grown woman is not permitted to render herself unattractive</b> during the days of mourning for her father. As above, the Gemara infers that this <i>halakha</i> applies only to a grown woman, but <b>a young woman is permitted</b> to render herself unattractive. <b>In what</b> kind of water may a grown woman bathe? <b>If we say</b> that this is referring to <b>hot water,</b> is <b>a grown woman not permitted</b> to refrain from washing in hot water? <b>But didn’t Rav Ḥisda say:</b> It is <b>prohibited for a mourner to insert his finger into hot water</b> for the purpose of washing. <b>Rather, is it not</b> the case that the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to</b> bathing <b>in cold water?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No;</b> the <i>baraita</i> is speaking <b>of painting</b> the eyes <b>and dyeing</b> the hair.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: That is to say,</b> i.e., as the <i>baraita</i> states that it is permitted for a grown woman who observes successive periods of mourning to paint and dye her hair, the same <i>halakha</i> evidently applies to laundry, from which it may be inferred that in an unexceptional case it is <b>prohibited for a mourner to</b> wash <b>laundry all seven</b> days of mourning. The Gemara concludes: <b>And</b> the practical <b><i>halakha</i></b> is: It is <b>prohibited for a mourner to bathe his entire body both in hot water and in cold water all seven</b> days of mourning. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>his face, his hands, and his feet,</b> although it is <b>prohibited</b> to bathe them <b>in hot water, in cold water</b> it is <b>permitted. However,</b> with regard <b>to smearing</b> with oil, even <b>any</b> minimal <b>amount</b> of smearing <b>is prohibited. But if</b> one does so <b>to remove the dirt,</b> it is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 8
§ The Gemara returns to the discussion of the <i>Aneinu</i> prayer, recited on fast days. The <b>prayer of a fast, how does one mention</b> it? <b>Rav Yehuda granted his son Rav Yitzḥak</b> general <b>permission</b> to expound publicly, while instructing him in the substance of what he should say, <b>and</b> Rav Yitzḥak <b>taught: An individual who took a fast upon himself prays</b> the prayer <b>of a fast. And where</b> in the <i>Amida</i> <b>does he recite</b> this additional prayer? <b>Between</b> the seventh blessing of the <i>Amida</i>: <b>Who redeems, and</b> the eighth blessing: <b>Who heals.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yitzḥak strongly objects to this: But may an individual establish a blessing for himself,</b> in addition to the fixed blessings of the <i>Amida</i>? <b>Rather, Rav Yitzḥak said:</b> One mentions his fast <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer,</b> in accordance with the general principle that an individual may insert private requests into this general plea for the acceptance of prayers, including matters outside the scope of the established blessings. <b>And similarly, Rav Sheshet said:</b> One recites the prayer for a fast day <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The only</b> halakhic <b>difference between an individual and a community is that this</b> one, an individual, <b>prays eighteen</b> blessings in his <i>Amida</i>, <b>and that</b> one, a community, <b>prays nineteen</b> blessings. The Gemara analyzes this statement: <b>What</b> is <b>an individual and what</b> is <b>a community</b> in this context? <b>If we say</b> that <b>an individual</b> means <b>an actual</b> individual, <b>and community</b> is referring to the communal <b>prayer leader,</b> are <b>there</b> really only <b>nineteen</b> blessings in the communal <i>Amida</i> of a fast? <b>There are twenty-four</b> blessings. As will be explained, six additional blessings are added on communal fast days.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, is it not</b> the case that <b>this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: The only</b> halakhic difference <b>between an individual who took an individual fast upon himself and an individual who took a communal fast upon himself, is only that this one prays eighteen</b> blessings, as he mentions his fast in the blessing: Who listens to prayer, <b>and that one prays nineteen</b> blessings. <b>Learn from</b> this statement that <b>an individual may establish an individual blessing for himself.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>No, actually</b> I could <b>say to you</b> that this mention of a community is referring to the <b>prayer leader. And</b> with regard to <b>what</b> poses <b>a difficultly for you,</b> that the <b>prayer leader prays twenty-four</b> blessings, the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to the first three fasts,</b> in <b>which there are not twenty-four blessings,</b> but only the usual eighteen blessings, plus one additional blessing for fast days.

### Part 13
The Gemara questions this resolution: <b>And</b> are the six additional blessings <b>not</b> recited on the first series of communal fasts? <b>But</b> with regard to this issue, a <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> the instructive phrase: <b>The only</b> difference between them, as follows: <b>The difference between</b> the <b>first three</b> fasts <b>and</b> the <b>middle three fasts is only that on these</b> first fasts it is <b>permitted</b> to perform <b>work, and on these</b> middle fasts it is <b>prohibited</b> to perform <b>work.</b> This indicates that with regard <b>to</b> reciting all <b>twenty-four</b> blessings, both <b>this and that are identical.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this argument: The <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> some of the differences between the fasts, <b>and omitted</b> some of them. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> else <b>did</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>omit</b> that you can justifiably claim <b>that he omitted this</b> case? In other words, it is possible for the <i>tanna</i> to have omitted a few examples, but he would not have omitted a single case. <b>And furthermore,</b> the <i>baraita</i> does not merely offer a list of differences, as it <b>teaches: The</b> difference <b>between them is only.</b> This phrase indicates that this is the only difference. <b>Rather,</b> the <b><i>tanna</i> is speaking of</b> the various <b>prohibitions</b> of fast days, but he is <b>not speaking of</b> other differences, such as those that involve the details of <b>prayers. And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>on</b> the <b>middle</b> three fasts <b>too,</b> the prayer leader <b>does not pray twenty-four</b> blessings, as the six additional blessings are recited only during the last series of fasts.

### Part 15
The Gemara expresses surprise at this: <b>And</b> does the prayer leader <b>not</b> recite all twenty-four blessings during the middle three fasts? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The difference between</b> the <b>second</b> set of <b>three</b> fasts <b>and</b> the <b>last seven fasts is only that in these they sound the alarm and lock the stores.</b> This indicates that <b>with regard to all their</b> other <b>matters,</b> both <b>this and that are identical. And if you say</b> that <b>here, too, he taught and omitted, but</b> it <b>teaches: The</b> difference <b>between them is only</b> indicating that there is no other difference.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it that way? Does the phrase: <b>The</b> difference <b>between them is only, specifically</b> mean that there is only a single difference between the cases?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC