
### Part 1
<b>was</b> connected to the order <b>of <i>Nezikin</i>,</b> while they were largely unfamiliar with the rest of the Mishna, <b>and we learn</b> all <b>six orders</b> of the Mishna. <b>And when Rav Yehuda reached</b> tractate <b><i>Uktzin</i>,</b> which discusses the extent to which various fruits and vegetables are considered an integral part of the produce in terms of becoming ritually impure, which is the basis for the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a woman who pickles a vegetable in a pot,</b> etc. (<i>Teharot</i> 2:1), <b>and some say</b> that when he reached the <i>halakha</i> that <b>olives that are pickled with their leaves are ritually pure,</b> etc., as they are no longer considered part of the fruit (<i>Uktzin</i> 2:1), <b>he would say:</b> Those are <b>the disputes between Rav and Shmuel that we see here.</b> He felt it was an extremely challenging passage, as difficult as the most complex arguments between Rav and Shmuel.

### Part 2
<b>And we,</b> in contrast, <b>learn</b> tractate <b><i>Uktzin</i> in thirteen <i>yeshivot</i>, while,</b> with regard to miracles, after declaring a fast to pray for a drought to end, <b>when Rav Yehuda would remove one of his shoes</b> as a sign of distress, <b>the rain would</b> immediately <b>come,</b> before he could remove his second shoe. <b>And</b> yet <b>we cry out all day and no one notices us.</b> Rabba continued: <b>If</b> the difference between the generations is <b>due to</b> inappropriate <b>deeds, if there is</b> anyone <b>who has seen me do anything</b> improper, <b>let him say</b> so. I am not at fault, <b>but what can the great</b> leaders <b>of the generation do when their generation is not worthy,</b> and rain is withheld on account of the people’s transgressions?

### Part 3
The Gemara explains the reference to Rav Yehuda’s shoe. <b>Rav Yehuda saw two people wasting bread,</b> throwing it back and forth. <b>He said: I</b> can <b>learn from</b> the fact that people are acting like <b>this</b> that <b>there is plenty in the world. He cast his eyes</b> angrily upon the world, <b>and there was a famine. The Sages said to Rav Kahana, son of Rav Neḥunya, the attendant of</b> Rav Yehuda: <b>The Master, who is frequently present</b> before Rav Yehuda, should <b>persuade him to leave by way of the door nearest the market,</b> so that he will see the terrible effects of the famine. Rav Kahana <b>persuaded</b> Rav Yehuda, <b>and he went out to the market,</b> where <b>he saw a crowd.</b>

### Part 4
<b>He said to them: What is this</b> gathering? <b>They said to him:</b> We are standing <b>by a container [<i>kuspa</i>] of dates that is for sale. He said:</b> If so many people are crowding around to purchase a single container of dates, <b>I</b> can <b>learn from this</b> that there is <b>a famine in the world. He said to his attendant:</b> I want to fast over this; <b>remove my shoes</b> as a sign of distress. <b>He removed one of his shoes and rain came. When he began to take off the other</b> shoe, <b>Elijah came and said to him: The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: If you remove</b> your <b>other</b> shoe, <b>I will destroy the</b> entire <b>world</b> so that you will not be further distressed.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Mari, son of Shmuel’s daughter, said:</b> At that moment, <b>I was standing on the bank of the Pappa River. I saw angels who appeared as sailors bringing sand and filling ships</b> with it, <b>and it became fine flour. Everyone came to buy</b> this flour, but <b>I said to them: Do not purchase this</b> flour, <b>as it is the product of miracles. Tomorrow, boats filled with wheat will come from Parzina,</b> and you may purchase that produce.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara relates another story. <b>Rava happened</b> to come <b>to</b> the city of <b>Hagrunya. He decreed a fast, but rain did not come. He said to</b> the local residents: <b>Everyone, continue your fast</b> and do not eat tonight. <b>The next morning he said to them: Whoever had a dream last night, let him say</b> it. <b>Rabbi Elazar of Hagronya said to them:</b> The following <b>was recited to me in my dream. Good greetings to a good master from a good Lord, Who in His goodness does good for His people.</b> Rava <b>said: I</b> can <b>learn from this</b> that <b>it is a favorable time to pray for mercy. He prayed for mercy and rain came.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara relates another story that deals with prayer for rain. There was <b>a certain man who was sentenced to be flogged by Rava’s court because he had relations with a gentile woman. Rava flogged</b> the man <b>and he died</b> as a result. When this <b>matter was heard</b> in <b>the house of</b> the Persian <b>King Shapur, he wanted to punish Rava</b> for imposing the death penalty, as he thought, without the king’s permission. <b>Ifra Hormiz, mother of King Shapur, said to her son: Do not interfere</b> and quarrel <b>with the Jews, as whatever they request from</b> God, <b>their Master, He gives them.</b>

### Part 8
<b>He said to her: What is this</b> that He grants them? She replied: <b>They pray for mercy and rain comes. He said to her:</b> This does not prove that God hears their prayers, <b>as that</b> occurs merely <b>because it is the time for rain,</b> and it just so happens that rain falls after they pray. <b>Rather,</b> if you want to prove that God answers the prayers of the Jews, <b>let them pray for mercy now, in</b> the summer <b>season of Tammuz, and let rain come.</b> Ifra Hormiz <b>sent</b> a message <b>to Rava: Direct your attention and pray for mercy that rain may come. He prayed for mercy, but rain did not come.</b>

### Part 9
<b>He said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe,</b> it is written: <b>“O God, we have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us, what work You did in their days, in days of old”</b> (Psalms 44:2), <b>but we have not seen it with our</b> own <b>eyes.</b> As soon as he said this, <b>rain came until the gutters of Meḥoza</b> overflowed and <b>poured into the Tigris</b> River. Rava’s <b>father came</b> and <b>appeared to him in a dream and said to him: Is there</b> anyone <b>who troubles Heaven so much</b> to ask for rain out of its season? In his dream, his father further <b>said to him: Change your place</b> of rest at night. <b>He changed his place, and the next day he found that his bed had been slashed by knives.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa decreed a fast, but rain did not come. His heart became weak</b> from hunger, so <b>he swallowed [<i>seraf</i> ] a bowl [<i>pinka</i>] of porridge, and prayed for mercy, but rain</b> still <b>did not come. Rav Naḥman bar Ushpazti said to him: If the Master swallows another bowl of porridge, rain will come.</b> He was mocking Rav Pappa for eating while everyone else was fasting. Rav Pappa was <b>embarrassed and grew upset, and rain came.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara tells another story about prayer for rain. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa was traveling along a road</b> when <b>it</b> began <b>to rain. He said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, the entire world is comfortable,</b> because they needed rain, <b>but Ḥanina is suffering,</b> as he is getting wet. <b>The rain ceased. When he arrived at his home, he said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, the entire world is suffering</b> that the rain stopped, <b>and Ḥanina is comfortable? The rain</b> began to <b>come</b> again.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yosef said,</b> in reaction to this story: <b>What effect does the prayer of the High Priest have against</b> that of <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa? As we learned</b> in a mishna: After leaving the Holy of Holies on Yom Kippur, the High Priest <b>would recite a brief prayer in the outer chamber.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> would <b>he pray? Ravin bar Adda and Rava bar Adda both say in the name of Rav Yehuda</b> that this was his prayer: <b>May it be Your will, Lord our God, that this year shall be rainy and hot.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise at this request: <b>Is heat a good</b> matter? <b>On the contrary, it is unfavorable.</b> Why should he request that the year be hot?

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> say that he recited the following: <b>If</b> the upcoming year is <b>hot, may it</b> also <b>be rainy and moist</b> with dew, lest the heat harm the crops. The High Priest would also pray: <b>And let not the prayer of travelers enter Your presence. Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, in the name of Rav Yehuda, concluded</b> the wording of this prayer: <b>May the rule of power not depart from the house of Judea. And may Your nation Israel not depend upon each other for sustenance, nor upon another nation.</b> Instead, they should be sustained from the produce of their own land. Evidently, the High Priest’s prayer that God should not listen to the prayer of individual travelers was disregarded in the case of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa.

### Part 14
§ The Gemara continues to discuss the righteous Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa and the wonders he performed. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: Each and every day a Divine Voice emerges</b> from Mount Horeb <b>and says: The entire world is sustained by</b> the merit of <b>My son Ḥanina</b> ben Dosa, <b>and</b> yet for <b>Ḥanina, My son, a <i>kav</i> of carobs,</b> a very small amount of inferior food, <b>is sufficient</b> to sustain him for an entire week, <b>from</b> one <b>Shabbat eve to</b> the next <b>Shabbat eve.</b> The Gemara relates: Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa’s <b>wife would heat the oven every Shabbat eve and create</b> a great amount of <b>smoke,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC