
### Part 1
<b>its shoots do not replenish</b> themselves when its stump is cut down, <b>so too, Heaven forbid,</b> with regard to <b>a righteous person, his shoots will not replenish</b> themselves, i.e., he will be unable to recover from misfortune. <b>Therefore, it is stated “cedar”</b> in the verse. Just as the cedar grows new shoots after its stump is cut down, so too, a righteous individual will thrive again. Conversely, <b>were it stated “cedar” and were it not stated “palm tree,” I would say</b> that <b>just as</b> in the case of <b>a cedar, it does not produce fruit, so too, a righteous man, God forbid, does not produce fruit,</b> i.e., he will have no reward in the World-to-Come. <b>Therefore, it is stated “palm tree” and it is</b> also <b>stated “cedar.”</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> do <b>a cedar’s shoots</b> really <b>replenish</b> themselves? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who bought a tree from another to chop</b> it down for wood, without acquiring total ownership of the tree, he must <b>lift</b> his ax <b>a handbreadth and chop</b> there, so as to allow the tree to grow back? However, <b>in</b> a case where he purchased <b>a large sycamore,</b> he must leave <b>two handbreadths. In</b> the case of <b>an untrimmed sycamore,</b> he must leave <b>three handbreadths. In</b> a situation where one <b>bought reeds or grapevines,</b> he may chop only <b>from the</b> first <b>knot and above. In</b> the case of <b>palms or cedars,</b> one may <b>dig down and uproot</b> it, <b>as its shoots</b> will <b>not replenish</b> themselves. This <i>baraita</i> indicates that cedars will not grow new shoots after they have been cut down.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here? With other species of cedars.</b> This is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba bar Huna, as Rabba bar Huna said: There are ten species of cedars, as it is stated: “I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia tree and myrtle</b> and the oil tree; I will set in the desert cypress, the plane tree and the larch together” (Isaiah 41:19). The seven species mentioned in this verse are all called cedars, as are three additional species.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving Rabbi Eliezer, who decreed</b> a complete cycle of <b>thirteen fasts upon the congregation, but rain did not fall. At</b> the end of <b>the last</b> fast, <b>the congregation began to exit</b> the synagogue. <b>He said to them: Have you prepared graves for yourselves?</b> If rain does not fall, we will all die of hunger. <b>All the people burst into tears, and rain fell.</b>

### Part 5
There was <b>another incident involving</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>who descended</b> to serve as prayer leader <b>before the ark</b> on a fast day. <b>And he recited twenty-four blessings, but he was not answered. Rabbi Akiva descended before the ark</b> after him <b>and said: Our Father, our King, we have no king other</b> than <b>You. Our Father, our King, for Your sake, have mercy on us. And rain</b> immediately <b>fell. The Sages were whispering</b> among themselves that Rabbi Akiva was answered while his teacher, Rabbi Eliezer, was not. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said:</b> It is <b>not because this</b> Sage, Rabbi Akiva, <b>is greater than that one,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>but that this one is forgiving, and that one is not forgiving.</b> God responded to Rabbi Akiva’s forgiving nature in kind by sending rain.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How much rain must fall for the community to cease their fast</b> for rain? If the rain penetrates the soil <b>by the full</b> depth of the blade of <b>a plow</b> until the spot where it <b>bends,</b> they may cease fasting; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say</b> a different measurement: If the earth is completely <b>dry,</b> the soil must become moist to the depth of a single <b>handbreadth.</b> For <b>average</b> soil, they must wait until the moisture reaches a depth of <b>two handbreadths.</b> If it is <b>worked</b> soil, i.e., soil that has been plowed, the moisture must reach to a depth of <b>three handbreadths.</b>

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: There is no handbreadth</b> of rain <b>from above toward which</b> the water of <b>the deep does not rise three handbreadths.</b> The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> that the water of the deep rises <b>two handbreadths?</b> The Gemara explains: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in first <i>baraita</i>, it is referring <b>to worked</b> land, which water penetrates faster, whereas <b>there,</b> in the second <i>baraita</i>, it is referring <b>to unworked</b> land, which water does not penetrate as easily, and therefore the water of the deep rises only two handbreadths.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: When the water</b> libation <b>was poured during the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>, these waters of the <b>deep say to the other</b> waters of the deep: <b>Let your water flow, as I hear the voices of two</b> of our <b>friends,</b> the wine libation and the water libation, which are both poured on the altar. <b>As it is stated: “Deep calls to deep at the sound of your channels,</b> all Your waves and Your billows are gone over me” (Psalms 42:8), i.e., the upper waters of the deep call to the lower waters of the deep when they hear the sound of the libations.

### Part 9
<b>Rabba said: I have seen this</b> angel in charge of water, <b>Ridya, in the form of a calf whose lips were parted, standing between the lower</b> waters of the <b>deep and the upper</b> waters of the <b>deep. To the upper</b> waters of the <b>deep, he said: Distill your water</b> and let it rain. <b>To the lower</b> waters of the <b>deep, he said: Let your water flow</b> from below, <b>as it is stated: “The flowers appear on the earth;</b> the time of the singing has come, and the voice of the turtledove [<i>tur</i>] is heard in our land” (Song of Songs 2:12). The appearance of flowers in this verse alludes to the libations, as both the blooming of flowers and pouring of these libations are annual events. The time of the singing is referring to the singing of the Festival. Finally, the term <i>tur</i> in Aramaic can also mean an ox; in this context, it is interpreted as a reference to the angel Ridya.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>they were fasting</b> for rain <b>and rain fell for them before sunrise,</b> they need not complete their fast until the evening. <b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>they were fasting</b> for rain <b>and rain fell for them before sunrise,</b> they need <b>not complete</b> their fast, as the obligation to fast does not come into effect until sunrise. However, if rain fell <b>after sunrise, they</b> must <b>complete</b> their fast. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If rain fell <b>before midday,</b> they need <b>not complete</b> their fast; however, if it rains <b>after midday, they</b> must <b>complete</b> their fast.

### Part 11
Rabbi Yosei says: If rain falls <b>before the ninth hour,</b> three hours into the afternoon, they need <b>not complete</b> their fast; if it rains <b>after the ninth hour</b> of the day, they must <b>complete</b> their fast, <b>as we found with regard to Ahab, king of Israel, who fasted from the ninth hour and onward,</b> as it <b>is stated:</b> “And it came to pass, when Ahab heard these words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. And the word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite saying: <b>Do you see how Ahab humbles himself before Me?”</b> (I Kings 21:27–29). According to tradition, this occurred in the ninth hour.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yehuda Nesia decreed a fast, and rain fell for them after sunrise. He thought to complete</b> the fast, but <b>Rabbi Ami said to him</b> that <b>we learned: Before noon and after noon,</b> i.e., the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>Shmuel HaKatan decreed a fast, and rain fell for them before sunrise. The people thought to say:</b> This <b>is</b> a sign of <b>the praiseworthiness of the community,</b> as we merited rainfall even before we prayed.

### Part 13
<b>He said to them: I will tell you a parable. To what is this matter comparable? To</b> a situation where there is <b>a slave who requests a reward from his master,</b> either food or livelihood, <b>and</b> the master <b>says to</b> his ministers: <b>Give him</b> what he asks for <b>and let me not hear his voice,</b> as I would rather not have to listen to him. Here, too, evidently God has no desire to hear our prayers.

### Part 14
<b>Again,</b> on another occasion, <b>Shmuel HaKatan decreed a fast, and rain fell for them after sunset.</b> Based on his previous response, <b>the people thought to say:</b> This <b>is</b> a sign of <b>the praiseworthiness of the community,</b> as God listened to our prayers all day. <b>Shmuel</b> HaKatan <b>said to them: It is not</b> a sign of <b>the praiseworthiness of the community. Rather, I will tell you a parable. To what is this matter comparable? To</b> a situation where there is <b>a slave who requests a reward from his master, and</b> the master <b>says to</b> his ministers: <b>Wait until he pines away and suffers, and afterward give</b> it <b>to him.</b> Here too, the delay is not to the congregation’s credit.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel HaKatan,</b> what is considered <b>the praiseworthiness of the community; what are the circumstances</b> in which approval is shown from Heaven? The Gemara explains: When the prayer leader <b>recites: He Who makes the wind blow, and the wind blows;</b> and when <b>he recites:</b> And <b>the rain fall, and rain falls.</b>

### Part 16
The mishna teaches: <b>An incident</b> occurred in <b>which</b> the court <b>decreed a fast in Lod,</b> and when rain fell they ate and drank, and afterward they recited <i>hallel</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>And let us recite <i>hallel</i> at the outset,</b> without delay. Why did they first go home and eat? <b>Abaye and Rava both said: Because one recites <i>hallel</i></b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC