
### Part 1
<b>One interrupts</b> his <b>Torah study to carry out the dead</b> for burial <b>and to escort a bride</b> to her wedding. <b>They said about Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Elai, that he would interrupt</b> his <b>Torah study to carry out the dead</b> for burial <b>and to escort a bride</b> to her wedding. The Gemara qualifies this ruling: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> Only <b>where there are not sufficient</b> numbers of other people available to perform these mitzvot and honor the deceased or the bride appropriately. <b>However,</b> when <b>there are sufficient</b> numbers, additional people <b>should not interrupt</b> their Torah study to participate.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And how many</b> people <b>are</b> considered <b>sufficient? Rav Shmuel bar Inya said in the name of Rav: Twelve thousand men and</b> another <b>six thousand</b> men to blow <b>horns</b> as a sign of mourning. <b>And some say</b> a different version: <b>Twelve thousand men, among whom are six thousand</b> men with <b>horns. Ulla said: For example,</b> enough <b>to make a procession of people</b> all the way <b>from the</b> town <b>gate [<i>abbula</i>] to the place of burial.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Sheshet said: As</b> the Torah <b>was given, so it</b> should be <b>taken away,</b> i.e., the same honor that was provided when the Torah was given at Mount Sinai should be provided when the Torah is taken through the passing away of a Torah scholar. <b>Just as</b> the Torah <b>was given in the presence of six hundred thousand</b> men, <b>so too its taking</b> should be done <b>in the presence of six hundred thousand</b> men. The Gemara comments: <b>This applies to someone who read</b> the Bible <b>and studied</b> <i>halakhot</i> for himself. <b>But for someone who taught</b> others, <b>there is no limit</b> to the honor that should be shown to him.

### Part 4
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Come and see how beloved the Jewish people are before the Holy One, Blessed be He. As every place they were exiled, the Divine Presence</b> went <b>with them. They were exiled to Egypt,</b> and <b>the Divine Presence</b> went <b>with them, as it is stated: “Did I reveal myself to the house of your father when they were in Egypt?”</b> (I Samuel 2:27). <b>They were exiled to Babylonia,</b> and <b>the Divine Presence</b> went <b>with them, as it is stated: “For your sake I have sent to Babylonia”</b> (Isaiah 43:14). <b>So too, when, in the future, they will be redeemed, the Divine Presence will be with them, as it is stated: “Then the Lord your God will return with your captivity”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:3). <b>It does not state: He will bring back,</b> i.e., He will cause the Jewish people to return, <b>but rather</b> it says: <b>“He will return,”</b> which <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, will return</b> together <b>with them from among the</b> various <b>exiles.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Where in Babylonia</b> does the Divine Presence reside? <b>Abaye said: In the</b> ancient <b>synagogue of Huzal and in the synagogue that was destroyed and rebuilt in Neharde’a. And do not say</b> that the Divine Presence resided <b>here and there,</b> i.e., in both places simultaneously. <b>Rather, at times</b> it resided <b>here</b> in Huzal <b>and at times there</b> in Neharde’a. <b>Abaye said: I have</b> a blessing <b>coming to me, for whenever I am</b> within <b>a distance of a parasang</b> from one of those synagogues, <b>I go in and pray there,</b> due to the special honor and sanctity attached to them. It was related that <b>the father of Shmuel and Levi were</b> once <b>sitting in the synagogue that was destroyed and rebuilt in Neharde’a. The Divine Presence came</b> and <b>they heard a loud sound,</b> so <b>they arose and left.</b>

### Part 6
It was further related that <b>Rav Sheshet was</b> once <b>sitting in the synagogue that was destroyed and rebuilt in Neharde’a,</b> and <b>the Divine Presence came but he did not go out. The ministering angels came and were frightening him</b> in order to force him to leave. Rav Sheshet turned to God and <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> if one is <b>wretched and</b> the other is <b>not wretched, who should defer to whom?</b> Shouldn’t the one who is not wretched give way to the one who is? Now I am blind and wretched; why then do you expect me to defer to the angels? God then turned to the angels and <b>said to them: Leave him.</b>

### Part 7
The verse states: <b>“Yet I have been to them as a little sanctuary</b> in the countries where they have come” (Ezekiel 11:16). <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: This</b> is referring to <b>the synagogues and study halls in Babylonia. And Rabbi Elazar said: This</b> is referring to <b>the house of our master,</b> i.e., Rav, <b>in Babylonia,</b> from which Torah issues forth to the entire world.

### Part 8
<b>Rava interpreted</b> a verse <b>homiletically: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Lord, You have been our dwelling place</b> in all generations” (Psalms 90:1)? <b>This</b> is referring to <b>the synagogues and study halls. Abaye said: Initially, I used to study</b> Torah <b>in</b> my <b>home and pray in the synagogue. Once I heard</b> and understood <b>that which</b> King <b>David says: “Lord, I love the habitation of Your house”</b> (Psalms 26:8), <b>I would</b> always <b>study</b> Torah <b>in the synagogue,</b> to express my love for the place in which the Divine Presence resides.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Elazar HaKappar says: In the future, the synagogues and the study halls in Babylonia will be</b> transported and <b>reestablished in Eretz Yisrael, as it is stated: “Surely, like Tabor among the mountains, and like Carmel by the sea, so shall he come”</b> (Jeremiah 46:18). There is a tradition that these mountains came to Sinai at the giving of the Torah and demanded that the Torah should be given upon them. <b>And are</b> these <b>matters not</b> inferred through an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> argument: <b>Just as Tabor and Carmel, which came only momentarily to study Torah, were</b> relocated and <b>established in Eretz Yisrael</b> in reward for their actions, <b>all the more so</b> should <b>the synagogues and study halls</b> in Babylonia, <b>in which the Torah is read and disseminated,</b> be relocated to Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 10
<b>Bar Kappara interpreted</b> a verse <b>homiletically: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Why do you look askance [<i>teratzdun</i>], O high-peaked mountains,</b> at the mountain that God has desired for His abode” (Psalms 68:17)? <b>A Divine Voice issued forth and said to</b> all the mountains that came and demanded that the Torah be given upon them: <b>Why do you seek [<i>tirtzu</i>]</b> to enter into <b>a legal dispute [<i>din</i>] with</b> Mount <b>Sinai? You are all blemished in comparison to</b> Mount <b>Sinai,</b> as <b>it is written here: “High-peaked [<i>gavnunnim</i>]” and it is written there,</b> with regard to the blemishes that disqualify a priest: <b>“Or crookbacked [<i>gibben</i>] or a dwarf”</b> (Leviticus 21:20). <b>Rav Ashi said: Learn from</b> this that <b>one who is arrogant is</b> considered <b>blemished.</b> The other mountains arrogantly insisted that the Torah should be given upon them, and they were therefore described as blemished.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that even if a synagogue fell into ruin, <b>it may not be made</b> into <b>a <i>kappendarya</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> meant by <b><i>kappendarya</i>? Rava said: A shortcut, as</b> implied by <b>its name.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>What</b> do you mean by adding: <b>As</b> implied by <b>its name?</b> It is <b>like one who said: Instead of going around the</b> entire row of <b>houses [<i>makkifna addari</i>]</b> to get to the other side, thereby lengthening my journey, <b>I will enter this</b> house and walk through it to the other side. The word <i>kappendarya</i> sounds like a contraction of <i>makkifna addari</i>. This is what Rava meant by saying: As implied by its name.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said: If</b> a public <b>path had initially</b> passed through that location, before the synagogue was built, <b>it is permitted</b> to continue to use it as a shortcut, for the honor due to a synagogue cannot annul the public’s right of access to the path.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> With regard to <b>one who enters</b> a synagogue <b>without intending to make it</b> into <b>a shortcut,</b> when he leaves <b>he is permitted to make it</b> into <b>a shortcut</b> for himself, by leaving through the exit on the other side of the building. <b>And Rabbi Ḥelbo said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said:</b> With regard to <b>one who enters a synagogue to pray, he is permitted to make it</b> into <b>a shortcut</b> for himself by leaving through a different exit, and it is fitting to do so, <b>as it is stated: “And when the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the appointed seasons, he that enters by way of the north gate to bow down shall go forth by the way of the south gate”</b> (Ezekiel 46:9). This indicates that it is a show of respect not to leave through the same entrance through which one came in; it is better to leave through the other side.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>grass sprang up in</b> a ruined synagogue, although it is not befitting its sanctity, <b>one should not pick</b> it, <b>due to</b> the <b>anguish</b> that it will cause to those who see it. It will remind them of the disrepair of the synagogue and the need to rebuild it. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not pick</b> the grass <b>and feed</b> it to one’s animals, <b>but he may pick</b> it <b>and leave</b> it there? The Gemara answers: <b>When we learned</b> the prohibition against picking the grass in <b>the mishna as well, we learned</b> only that it is prohibited to <b>pick</b> it and <b>feed</b> it to one’s animals, but it is permitted to leave it there.

### Part 15
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In <b>a cemetery, one may not act with frivolity; one may not graze an animal</b> on the grass growing <b>inside it; and one may not direct a water channel</b> to pass <b>through it; and one may not gather grass inside it</b> to use the grass as feed for one’s animals; <b>and if one gathered</b> grass for that purpose, <b>it should be burnt on the spot, out of respect for the dead.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara clarifies: With regard to the phrase: Out of respect for the dead, <b>to which</b> clause of the <i>baraita</i> does it refer? <b>If we say</b> it is referring <b>to the last clause,</b> that if one gathered grass that it should be burnt out of respect for the dead, then one could ask: <b>Since</b> the grass <b>is burnt on the spot,</b> and not publicly, <b>what respect for the dead is there</b> in this act? <b>Rather,</b> the phrase must be referring <b>to the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, and it explains why it is prohibited to act with frivolity.

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> On four <i>Shabbatot</i> during and surround-ing the month of Adar, a Torah portion of seasonal significance is read. When <b>the New Moon of Adar occurs on Shabbat,</b> the congregation <b>reads the portion of <i>Shekalim</i></b> on that Shabbat. If the New Moon <b>occurs during</b> the middle of <b>the week, they advance</b> the reading of that portion <b>to the previous</b> Shabbat, <b>and,</b> in such a case, <b>they interrupt</b> the reading of the four portions <b>on the following Shabbat,</b> which would be the first Shabbat of the month of Adar, and no additional portion is read on it.

### Part 18
<b>On the second</b> Shabbat, the Shabbat prior to Purim, they read the portion: <b>“Remember</b> what Amalek did” (Deuteronomy 25:17–19), which details the mitzva to remember and destroy the nation of Amalek. <b>On the third</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b>the Red Heifer [<i>Para</i>]</b> (Numbers 19:1–22), which details the purification process for one who became ritually impure through contact with a corpse. <b>On the fourth</b> Shabbat, they read the portion: <b>“This month [<i>haḥodesh</i>] shall be for you”</b> (Exodus 12:1–20), which describes the offering of the Paschal lamb. <b>On the fifth</b> Shabbat, <b>they resume the</b> regular weekly <b>order</b> of readings and no special portion is read.

### Part 19
<b>For all</b> special days, the congregation <b>interrupts</b> the regular weekly order of readings, and a special portion relating to the character of the day is read. This applies <b>on the New Moons, on Hanukkah, and on Purim, on fast days, and on the</b> non-priestly <b>watches, and on Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 20
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Shekalim</i> 1:1): <b>On the first of Adar they make</b> a public <b>announcement concerning</b> the forthcoming collection of half-<b>shekels.</b> The money is used for the communal offerings in the Temple in the coming year.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC