
### Part 1
<b>the rejoicing</b> that takes place on Purim <b>is practiced only in its</b> designated <b>time,</b> the fourteenth of Adar.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav said: One may read the Megilla in its</b> proper <b>time,</b> i.e., on the fourteenth of Adar, <b>even privately.</b> However, when it is read <b>not at its</b> proper <b>time,</b> e.g., when the villages advance their reading to the day of assembly, it must be read <b>with</b> a quorum of <b>ten,</b> because the enactment allowing the Megilla to be read before its proper time was only made for a community. <b>Rav Asi</b> disagreed and <b>said: Both at its</b> proper <b>time and not at its</b> proper <b>time,</b> the Megilla must be read <b>with</b> a quorum of <b>ten.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>there was an incident</b> where <b>Rav</b> had to read the Megilla on Purim, <b>and he was concerned for this</b> opinion of <b>Rav Asi</b> and gathered ten men even though he was reading the Megilla in its proper time, on the fourteenth of Adar.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And did Rav</b> actually <b>say this,</b> that when the Megilla is read not at its proper time, it can only be read with a quorum of ten? <b>Didn’t Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, say in the name of Rav:</b> If <b>Purim occurs on Shabbat, Shabbat eve is</b> the proper <b>time</b> for reading the Megilla? The Gemara expresses surprise with regard to the wording of Rav’s statement: Is <b>Shabbat eve</b> the proper <b>time</b> for reading the Megilla? <b>Isn’t Shabbat</b> itself <b>its</b> proper <b>time? Rather, is it not</b> true <b>that this is what</b> he <b>said,</b> i.e., that this is the way his statement should be understood: Reading the Megilla <b>not at its</b> proper <b>time is like</b> reading it <b>at its</b> proper <b>time; just as at its</b> proper <b>time,</b> it can be read <b>even privately, so too, not at its</b> proper <b>time,</b> it can be read <b>even privately.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this argument: Rav’s statement was <b>not</b> made <b>with regard to reading the Megilla with</b> a quorum of <b>ten. Rather, what</b> is the meaning of Rav’s statement that <b>Shabbat eve is</b> the proper <b>time?</b> It was meant <b>to exclude</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said: Since</b> the readings in <b>the</b> large <b>towns were</b> already <b>deferred from their</b> usual <b>date</b> and the Megilla was not read on the fourteenth, <b>they are deferred to the day of assembly. This</b> statement of Rav <b>teaches us that Shabbat eve is</b> the proper <b>time</b> for these towns to read the Megilla, as stated in the mishna.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>What is</b> considered <b>a large city,</b> where the Megilla is read on the fourteenth of Adar? <b>Any</b> city <b>in which there are ten idlers.</b> However, if there are <b>fewer than that, it is</b> considered <b>a village,</b> even if it has many inhabitants.

### Part 6
<b>It was with regard to these</b> times for reading the Megilla that the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one advances</b> the reading of the Megilla before the fourteenth of Adar <b>and one does not postpone</b> the reading to after its proper time. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>the time</b> when families of <b>priests</b> donate <b>wood</b> for the fire on the altar, which were times those families would treat as Festivals; as well as the fast of the <b>Ninth of Av;</b> the <b>Festival</b> peace-offering that was brought on the Festivals; <b>and the</b> commandment of <b>assembly</b> [<b><i>hakhel</i></b>] of the entire Jewish people in the Temple courtyard on <i>Sukkot</i> in the year following the Sabbatical year to hear the king read the book of Deuteronomy; <b>one postpones</b> their observance until after Shabbat <b>and does not advance</b> their observance to before Shabbat.

### Part 7
The mishna continues: <b>Even though</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one advances</b> the time for reading the Megilla <b>and one does not postpone</b> the reading, one is <b>permitted</b> to <b>eulogize and fast</b> on these days, as they are not actually Purim; nevertheless, <b>gifts for the poor</b> are distributed on this day. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: When</b> is the Megilla read on the day of assembly, before the fourteenth of Adar? In <b>a place where</b> the villagers generally <b>enter</b> town <b>on Monday and Thursday. However,</b> in <b>a place where they do not</b> generally <b>enter</b> town <b>on Monday and Thursday, one may read</b> the Megilla <b>only in its</b> designated <b>time,</b> the fourteenth of Adar.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> We learned in the mishna that a large city is one that has ten idlers. It was <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b>ten idlers</b> that are mentioned here are ten idlers <b>that are in the synagogue,</b> i.e., men who do not have professional responsibilities other than to sit in the synagogue and attend to communal religious needs. The presence of ten such men establishes a location as a prominent city.

### Part 9
We learned in the mishna: <b>It was with regard to these</b> times for reading the Megilla that the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one advances</b> the reading of the Megilla <b>and one does not postpone</b> it. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b>verse states:</b> “The Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all who joined themselves to them, <b>and it shall not pass,</b> that they should keep these two days” (Esther 9:27), which indicates that the designated time must not pass without the reading of the Megilla.

### Part 10
Having mentioned a teaching of Rabbi Abba in the name of Shmuel, the Gemara cites another of his statements: <b>And Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that one does not count days to</b> make up <b>years,</b> i.e., a year is considered to be comprised of either twelve or thirteen lunar months, and not 365 days? <b>As it is stated: “Of the months of the year”</b> (Exodus 12:2), which indicates that <b>you count months to</b> make up <b>years, but you do not count days</b> to make up <b>years.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara adds: <b>And the Sages of Caesarea said in the name of Rabbi Abba: From where</b> is it derived <b>that one does not calculate hours to</b> reckon the <b>months?</b> A lunar cycle takes approximately twenty-nine and a half days, but a calendar month is considered to be twenty-nine or thirty full days and not precisely a lunar cycle. <b>As it is stated: “Until a month of days”</b> (Numbers 11:20), which indicates that <b>you calculate days to</b> reckon the <b>months, but you do not calculate hours to</b> reckon the <b>months.</b>

### Part 12
§ We learned in the mishna: <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>the time</b> when families of <b>priests</b> donate <b>wood</b> for the fire on the altar, the fast of <b>the Ninth of Av, the Festival</b> peace-offering, <b>and the</b> commandment of <b>assembly [<i>hakhel</i> ], one postpones</b> their observance until after Shabbat <b>and does not advance</b> their observance to before Shabbat. The Gemara explains the reason for this <i>halakha</i> with respect to each item mentioned in the mishna. The fast of <b>the Ninth of Av</b> is not advanced because <b>one does not advance calamity;</b> since the Ninth of Av is a tragic time, its observance is postponed as long as possible. <b>The Festival</b> peace-offering <b>and the</b> commandment of <b>assembly [<i>hakhel</i> ]</b> are not advanced <b>because the time of their obligation has not yet arrived,</b> and it is impossible to fulfill mitzvot before the designated time has arrived.

### Part 13
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One postpones the Festival</b> peace-offering <b>and the entire time</b> period <b>of the Festival</b> peace-offering. The Gemara attempts to clarify this statement: <b>Granted</b> that when the <i>baraita</i> says that the <b>Festival</b> peace-offering is postponed, it means <b>that if</b> a Festival <b>occurs on Shabbat,</b> when the Festival peace-offering cannot be sacrificed, <b>one postpones it until after Shabbat</b> and sacrifices the offering on the intermediate days of the Festival. <b>However, what is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>The time</b> period <b>of the Festival</b> peace-offering?

### Part 14
<b>Rav Oshaya said: This is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> One postpones <b>the Festival</b> peace-offering if the Festival occurs <b>on Shabbat, and one postpones the</b> burnt-offering <b>of appearance even</b> due to <b>the Festival</b> itself. Despite the fact that a Festival day is <b>the time</b> for sacrificing a <b>Festival</b> peace-offering, the burnt-offering of appearance may not be sacrificed until after the Festival day.

### Part 15
The Gemara adds: <b>Whose</b> opinion is reflected in the mishna according to Rav Oshaya’s explanation? <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Beitza</i> 19a) that <b>Beit Shammai say: One may bring</b> peace-offerings <b>on a Festival</b> day to be sacrificed in the Temple. Most portions of a peace-offering are eaten by the priests and the individual who brought the offering. Consequently, its slaughter is considered food preparation, which is permitted on a Festival day. <b>And one may not place</b> his <b>hands</b> on the head of the offering, as that includes leaning with all one’s might upon the animal, which is prohibited on a Festival.

### Part 16
<b>However,</b> burnt-offerings <b>may not</b> be brought at all on the Festival. Since they are not eaten, their slaughter is not considered food preparation, and it therefore constitutes a prohibited labor on the Festival. <b>Beit Hillel</b> disagree and <b>say: One may bring</b> both peace-offerings <b>and</b> burnt-offerings on a Festival day, <b>and one may</b> even <b>place</b> his <b>hands on them.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rava said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be understood as follows: <b>One postpones the Festival</b> peace-offering <b>for the entire time</b> period <b>of the Festival</b> peace-offering, i.e., for the entire duration of the Festival. However, it may <b>not</b> be postponed for <b>longer</b> than this. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ḥagiga</i> 9a): <b>One who did not offer the Festival</b> peace-offering <b>on the first Festival day of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>may offer the Festival</b> peace-offering <b>for the</b> duration of the <b>entire pilgrimage Festival,</b> including the intermediate days <b>and the last day of the Festival.</b> If <b>the pilgrimage Festival has passed and he did not</b> yet <b>bring the Festival</b> peace-offering, <b>he is not obligated</b> to pay <b>restitution</b> for <b>it.</b> The obligation is no longer in force, and he therefore is not liable to bring another offering as compensation.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be understood as follows: <b>The Festival</b> peace-offering <b>may be postponed for the entire time</b> period <b>of a Festival</b> peace-offering. This indicates that <b>even</b> if <b><i>Shavuot</i>, which is one day,</b> occurs on Shabbat, <b>one postpones</b> the Festival peace-offering and offers it on one of the six days after <i>Shavuot</i>. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ḥagiga</i> 17a): Beit Hillel <b>concede that if <i>Shavuot</i> occurs on Shabbat, the day of slaughter is after Shabbat.</b> Since the Festival peace-offering and the burnt-offering of appearance cannot be sacrificed on Shabbat, they are slaughtered after Shabbat. This indicates that the Festival peace-offering may be slaughtered after the Festival day of <i>Shavuot</i>, as is the case on the other Festivals.

### Part 19
<b>Rabbi Elazar said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi did several unusual things: <b>He planted a sapling on Purim,</b> and was not concerned about performing labor and thereby possibly denigrating the day.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC