
### Part 1
<b>“Afterward the children of Israel shall return, and seek the Lord their God and David their king”</b> (Hosea 3:5), and consequently, the blessing of the kingdom of David follows the blessing of the building of Jerusalem. <b>And once</b> the scion of <b>David comes,</b> the time for <b>prayer will come, as it is stated: “I will bring them to My sacred mountain and make them joyful in My house of prayer”</b> (Isaiah 56:7). Therefore, the blessing of hearing prayer is recited after the blessing of the kingdom of David.

### Part 2
<b>And after prayer comes, the</b> Temple <b>service will arrive, as it is stated</b> in the continuation of that verse: <b>“Their burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted on My altar”</b> (Isaiah 56:7). The blessing of restoration of the Temple service follows the blessing of hearing prayer. <b>And when the</b> Temple <b>service comes,</b> with it will also <b>come thanksgiving, as it is stated: “Whoever sacrifices a thanks-offering honors Me”</b> (Psalms 50:23), which teaches that thanksgiving follows sacrifice. Therefore, the blessing of thanksgiving follows the blessing of restoration of the Temple service.

### Part 3
<b>And why did they see</b> fit to institute that one <b>says the Priestly Benediction after</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving? As it is written: “And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people and blessed them, and he came down from sacrificing the sin-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings”</b> (Leviticus 9:22), teaching that the Priestly Benediction follows the sacrificial service, which includes the thanks-offering.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: But the cited verse indicates that Aaron blessed the people and then sacrificed the offerings. Should we not then <b>say</b> the Priestly Benediction <b>before the</b> blessing of the Temple <b>service?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It should not enter your mind</b> to say this, <b>as it is written: “And he came down from sacrificing the sin-offering.” Is it written</b> that he came down <b>to sacrifice</b> the offerings, implying that after blessing the people Aaron came down and sacrificed the offerings? No, <b>it is written, “from sacrificing,”</b> indicating that the offerings had already been sacrificed.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: If, as derived from this verse, the Priestly Benediction follows the sacrificial service, the Priestly Benediction should be <b>said</b> immediately <b>after</b> the blessing of restoration of <b>the</b> Temple <b>service,</b> without the interruption of the blessing of thanksgiving. The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>It should not enter your mind</b> to say this, <b>as it is written: “Whoever sacrifices a thanks-offering</b> honors Me,” from which we learn that thanksgiving follows sacrifice, as already explained.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What did you see to rely on this</b> verse and juxtapose thanksgiving with sacrifice? <b>Rely</b> rather <b>on the other</b> verse, which indicates that it is the Priestly Benediction that should be juxtaposed with the sacrificial service. The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> to have the blessing of thanksgiving immediately following the blessing of the sacrificial service, since the sacrificial <b>service and thanksgiving,</b> which are closely related conceptually, <b>are one matter.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And why did they see</b> fit to institute that one <b>says</b> the blessing beginning with the words: <b>Grant peace, after the Priestly Benediction? As it is written</b> immediately following the Priestly Benediction: <b>“And they shall put My name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them”</b> (Numbers 6:27). The Priestly Benediction is followed by God’s blessing, and <b>the blessing of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is peace, as it is stated: “The Lord blesses His people with peace”</b> (Psalms 29:11).

### Part 8
The Gemara returns to the <i>baraita</i> cited at the beginning of the discussion: <b>Now, since</b> the <i>baraita</i> teaches that <b>a hundred and twenty Elders, including many prophets, established the</b> <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer in its</b> fixed <b>order, what</b> is it that <b>Shimon HaPakuli arranged</b> in a much later period of time, as related by Rabbi Yoḥanan? The Gemara answers: Indeed, the blessings of the <i>Amida</i> prayer were originally arranged by the hundred and twenty members of the Great Assembly, but over the course of time the people <b>forgot them, and</b> Shimon HaPakuli then <b>arranged them again.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: These nineteen blessings are a fixed number, and <b>beyond this it is prohibited</b> for one <b>to declare the praises of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> by adding additional blessings to the <i>Amida</i>. As <b>Rabbi Elazar said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can declare all His praise?”</b> (Psalms 106:2)? It means: <b>For whom is it fitting to utter the mighty acts of the Lord?</b> Only <b>for one who can declare all His praise.</b> And since no one is capable of declaring all of God’s praises, we must suffice with the set formula established by the Sages.

### Part 10
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>one who excessively declares the praises of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> his fate <b>is</b> to be <b>uprooted from the world,</b> as it appears as if he had exhausted all of God’s praises. <b>As it is stated: “Shall it be told to Him when I speak? If a man says</b> it, <b>he would be swallowed up”</b> (Job 37:20). The Gemara interprets the verse as saying: Can all of God’s praises be expressed when I speak? If a man would say such a thing, he would be “swallowed up” as punishment.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yehuda, a man of Kefar Gibboraya, and some say</b> he was <b>a man of Kefar Gibbor Ĥayil, taught: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For You silence is praise”</b> (Psalms 65:2)? <b>The</b> best <b>remedy of all is silence,</b> i.e., the optimum form of praising God is silence. The Gemara relates: <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Israel to Babylonia, <b>he said: In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say</b> an adage: If <b>a word is</b> worth one <b><i>sela</i>, silence is</b> worth <b>two.</b>

### Part 12
§ It is taught in the mishna: <b>If one read</b> the Megilla <b>by heart he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rava said:</b> This is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between one instance of the term <b>remembrance</b> and another instance of the term <b>remembrance. It is written here,</b> with regard to the Megilla: <b>“That these days should be remembered”</b> (Esther 9:28), <b>and it is written elsewhere: “And the Lord said to Moses: Write this for a memorial in the book,</b> and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: That I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens” (Exodus 17:14). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to Amalek, remembrance is referring specifically to something written <b>in a book,</b> as it is stated, “in the book,” <b>so too here,</b> the Megilla remembrance is through being written <b>in a book.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara raises a question: <b>But from where</b> do we know <b>that this remembrance</b> that is stated with regard to Amalek and to the Megilla involves <b>reading</b> it out loud from a book? <b>Perhaps</b> it requires <b>merely looking into</b> the book, reading it silently. The Gemara answers: <b>It should not enter your mind</b> to say this, as it was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“Remember</b> what Amalek did to you” (Deuteronomy 25:17). One <b>might</b> have thought that it suffices for one to remember this silently, <b>in his heart.</b> But this cannot be, since <b>when it says</b> subsequently: <b>“You shall not forget”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:19), <b>it is</b> already <b>referring to forgetting from the heart. How,</b> then, <b>do I uphold</b> the meaning of <b>“remember”?</b> What does this command to remember add to the command to not forget? Therefore, it means that the remembrance must be expressed out loud, <b>with the mouth.</b>

### Part 14
§ It was taught further in the mishna: <b>If one read</b> the Megilla <b>in</b> Aramaic <b>translation he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this case? <b>If we say that</b> the Megilla <b>was written in</b> the original <b>biblical text,</b> i.e., in Hebrew, <b>and he read it in</b> Aramaic <b>translation,</b> then <b>this is</b> the same as reading it <b>by heart,</b> as he is not reading the words written in the text, and the mishna has already stated that one does not fulfill his obligation by reading the Megilla by heart. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to teach this case as well, as it is referring to a case in which the Megilla <b>was written</b> not in the original Hebrew but <b>in</b> Aramaic <b>translation, and he read it</b> as written, <b>in</b> Aramaic <b>translation.</b>

### Part 15
§ The mishna continues: <b>However, for those who speak a foreign language, one may read</b> the Megilla <b>in</b> that <b>foreign language.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But didn’t you say</b> in the mishna: <b>If he read it in any</b> other <b>language he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation? The Gemara cites the answer of <b>Rav and Shmuel, who both say:</b> When the mishna says: A foreign language, it is referring specifically to <b>the Greek foreign language,</b> which has a unique status with regard to biblical translation.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the case? <b>If we say that</b> the Megilla <b>was written in <i>Ashurit</i>,</b> i.e., in Hebrew, <b>and he read it in Greek, this is</b> the same as reading it <b>by heart,</b> and the mishna teaches that one does not fulfill his obligation by reading by heart. The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Aḥa said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The mishna is dealing with a case in which the Megilla <b>was written in the Greek foreign language</b> and was also read in that language.

### Part 17
Apropos statements in this line of tradition, the Gemara adds: <b>And Rabbi Aḥa</b> further <b>said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the Holy One, Blessed be He, called Jacob El,</b> meaning God? <b>As it is stated:</b> “And he erected there an altar, <b>and he called it El, God of Israel”</b> (Genesis 33:20). It is also possible to translate this as: And He, i.e., the God of Israel, called him, Jacob, El. Indeed, it must be understood this way, <b>as if it enters your mind</b> to say that the verse should be understood as saying that <b>Jacob called the altar El, it should have</b> specified the subject of the verb and written: <b>And Jacob called it</b> El. <b>But</b> since the verse is not written this way, the verse must be understood as follows: <b>He called Jacob El; and who called him El? The God of Israel.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara returns to discussing languages for reading the Megilla and <b>raises an objection</b> against Rav and Shmuel, who said that one may read the Megilla in Greek but not in other foreign languages. It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one read</b> the Megilla <b>in Coptic [<i>Giptit</i>], <i>Ivrit</i>, Elamite, Median, or Greek, he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation, indicating that one cannot fulfill his obligation by reading the Megilla in Greek.

### Part 19
The Gemara answers: The clause in the mishna that teaches that the Megilla may be read in a foreign language to one who speaks that foreign language <b>is comparable only to that</b> which was taught in a different <i>baraita</i>: If one reads the Megilla <b>in Coptic to Copts,</b> in <b><i>Ivrit</i> to <i>Ivrim</i>, in Elamite to Elamites, or in Greek to Greeks, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Megilla may be read in any language, provided the listener understands that language.

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: But <b>if so,</b> that one who reads the Megilla in a foreign language that he speaks fulfills his obligation, <b>why did Rav and Shmuel establish the</b> ruling of the <b>mishna as</b> referring specifically <b>to Greek? Let them interpret it</b> as referring <b>to any foreign language</b> that one speaks. The Gemara explains: <b>Rather, the mishna</b> is to be understood <b>like the <i>baraita</i>,</b> that one who reads the Megilla in a language that he speaks fulfills his obligation; <b>and that which was stated</b> in the name of <b>Rav and Shmuel was said</b> as a <b>general</b> statement, not relating to the mishna but as an independent ruling, as follows: <b>Rav and Shmuel both say: The Greek language is acceptable for everyone,</b> i.e., anyone who reads the Megilla in Greek has fulfilled his obligation, even if he does not understand Greek.

### Part 21
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> cited above <b>teach</b> that if one reads the Megilla in <b>Greek to Greeks</b> he has fulfilled his obligation? This implies that reading in Greek, <b>yes,</b> this is acceptable for Greeks, but <b>for everyone</b> else, <b>no,</b> it is not. The Gemara answers: Rav and Shmuel disagree with this statement of the <i>baraita</i>, because they <b>agree with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Megilla</i> 8b): <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Even</b> for <b>books</b> of the Bible, the Sages <b>did not permit them to be written</b> in any foreign language <b>other than Greek,</b> indicating that Greek has a special status, and is treated like the original Hebrew.

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: But if this was the intention of Rav and Shmuel, <b>let them state</b> explicitly: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.</b> Why did Rav and Shmuel formulate their statement as if they were issuing a new ruling? The Gemara answers: <b>Had they said</b> simply <b>that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, I would have said</b> that <b>this applies</b> only <b>to the other books</b> of the Bible, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>the Megilla, of which it is written: “According to their writing,” I would say</b> that one does <b>not</b> fulfill his obligation if he reads it in Greek. Therefore they stated their own opinion to <b>teach us</b> that even in the case of the Megilla one fulfills his obligation if he reads it in Greek.

### Part 23
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>And one who speaks a foreign language who heard</b> the Megilla being read <b>in <i>Ashurit</i>,</b> i.e., in Hebrew, <b>has fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t</b> it so that <b>he does not understand what they are saying?</b> Since he does not understand Hebrew, how does he fulfill his obligation? The Gemara answers: <b>It is just as it is</b> with <b>women and uneducated people;</b> they too understand little Hebrew, but nevertheless they fulfill their obligation when they hear the Megilla read in that language.

### Part 24
<b>Ravina strongly objects to</b> the premise of the question raised above, i.e., that someone who does not understand the original, untranslated language of the Megilla cannot fulfill his obligation. <b>Is that to say</b> that even <b>we,</b> the Sages, who are very well acquainted with Hebrew, <b>know</b> for certain the meaning of the obscure words <b><i>ha’aḥashteranim benei haramakhim</i></b> (Esther 8:10), often translated as: “Used in the royal service, bred from the stud”? <b>But</b> nevertheless, we fulfill the <b>mitzva of reading</b> the Megilla <b>and publicizing the miracle</b> of Purim by reading these words as they appear in the original text. <b>Here too,</b> one who speaks a foreign language who hears the Megilla being read in Hebrew fulfills the <b>mitzva of reading</b> the Megilla <b>and publicizing the</b> Purim <b>miracle,</b> even if he does not understand the words themselves.

### Part 25
§ The mishna continues: <b>If one reads</b> the Megilla <b>at intervals</b> [<b><i>seirugin</i></b>] <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara relates that <b>the Sages did not know what is</b> meant by the word <b><i>seirugin</i>.</b> One day <b>they heard the maidservant in Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s <b>house saying to the Sages who were entering the house intermittently</b> rather than in a single group: <b>How long are you going to enter <i>seirugin seirugin</i>?</b> As she lived in Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s house and certainly heard the most proper Hebrew being spoken, they understood from this that the word <i>seirugin</i> means at intervals.

### Part 26
It is similarly related that <b>the Sages did not know what is</b> meant by the word <b><i>ḥalogelogot</i>,</b> which appears in various <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i>. One day <b>they heard the maidservant in Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s <b>house saying to a certain man who was scattering purslane: How long will you go on scattering your <i>ḥalogelogot</i>?</b> And from this they understood that <i>ḥalogelogot</i> is purslane.

### Part 27
Likewise, <b>the Sages did not know what is</b> meant by <i>salseleha</i> in the verse: “Get <b><i>wisdom…salseleha</i> and it will exalt you”</b> (Proverbs 4:7–8). One day <b>they heard the maidservant in Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s <b>house talking to a certain man who was twirling his hair, saying to him: How long will you go on twirling</b> [<b><i>mesalsel</i></b>] <b>your hair?</b> And from this they understood that the verse is saying: Turn wisdom around and around, and it will exalt you.

### Part 28
The Gemara relates additional examples: <b>The Sages did not know what is</b> meant by the word <i>yehav</i> in the verse: <b>“Cast upon the Lord your <i>yehav</i>”</b> (Psalms 55:23). <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: One time I was traveling with a certain Arab</b> [<b><i>Tayya’a</i></b>] <b>and I was carrying a load, and he said to me: Take your <i>yehav</i> and throw it on my camel,</b> and I understood that <i>yehav</i> means a load or burden.

### Part 29
And similarly, <b>the Sages did not know what is</b> meant by the word <i>matatei</i> in the verse: <b>“And I will <i>tatei</i> it with the <i>matatei</i> of destruction”</b> (Isaiah 14:23). One day <b>they heard the maidservant in Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s <b>house saying to her friend: Take a <i>tateita</i> and <i>tati</i> the house,</b> from which they understood that a <i>matatei</i> is a broom, and the verb <i>tati</i> means to sweep.

### Part 30
On the matter of reading the Megilla with interruptions, <b>the Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one reads the Megilla at intervals,</b> pausing and resuming at intervals, <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC