
### Part 1
and <b>counting</b> can only be done <b>during the day</b> and not at night, as it says: “And she shall count for herself seven days” (Leviticus 15:28), she cannot immerse herself until after sunrise, although here she has to count only one day.

### Part 2
§ The mishna concludes: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>all these</b> things, <b>if one did them after daybreak they are valid.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter</b> derived, that from daybreak it is already considered daytime? <b>Rava said: As the verse states: “And God called the light</b> [or] <b>day”</b> (Genesis 1:5), meaning: <b>To that which was becoming lighter and lighter he called day.</b> The Hebrew word <i>or</i> is not to be understood in its usual sense of light, but as a verbal noun: that which is becoming lighter and lighter. It teaches that as soon as light begins to appear in the sky it is called daytime.

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty with this interpretation: <b>However, if</b> it is <b>so</b> that Rava’s interpretation of this phrase is correct, the following phrase: <b>“And the darkness</b> [<b><i>ḥoshekh</i></b>] <b>He called night”</b> (Genesis 1:5), should be interpreted in a similar fashion: <b>That which was becoming darker and darker He called night,</b> so that immediately after sunset it would be considered nighttime. But don’t <b>we maintain</b> that <b>until the stars come out it is not nighttime?</b> We are forced to say that <i>ḥoshekh</i> literally means darkness, and similarly, <i>or</i> in the first part of the verse literally means light.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rabbi Zeira said:</b> We derive this <i>halakha</i> <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“So we labored in the work; and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared”</b> (Nehemiah 4:15), where “rising of the morning” means daybreak, <b>and</b> the next verse <b>states: “So that in the night they may be a guard to us;</b> and labor in the day” (Nehemiah 4:16). This demonstrates that the day begins with the dawn.

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies Rabbi Zeira’s statement: <b>What</b> need is there for the additional verse introduced by the words <b>“and it states”?</b> Why does the first proof-text not suffice? The Gemara explains: The second verse comes to deflect the following possible objection: <b>You might say that</b> even <b>after “the rising of the morning” it is not</b> yet considered <b>day, and that from</b> the time <b>when the sun sets it is</b> already considered <b>night, and</b> in this particular incident it happened that <b>they began</b> their work <b>early,</b> before the official beginning of daytime, <b>and remained</b> working <b>late,</b> after the official end of daytime. Therefore, Rabbi Zeira continued and said: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear that which</b> is stated in the next verse: <b>“So that in the night they may be a guard to us; and labor in the day.”</b> The entire time during which they worked is referred to as “day,” which proves that the day begins at daybreak.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Although it is preferable to fulfill a particular day’s mitzva at the earliest possible hour, <b>the entire day is a valid</b> time <b>for reading the Megilla; for reciting <i>hallel</i>; for sounding the <i>shofar</i></b> on Rosh HaShana; <b>for taking the <i>lulav</i></b> and the other species on Sukkot; <b>for the additional prayer</b> recited on Shabbat and other occasions; <b>and for the additional offerings</b> sacrificed in the Temple on these occasions.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> the entire day is also a valid time <b>for the confession over the bulls</b> brought by the Sanhedrin or by the High Priest to atone for mistakes they had made in their instruction to the people; <b>for the declaration</b> made on the last day of Passover in the fourth and seventh year of the Sabbatical cycle, stating that one’s obligations <b>with regard to tithes</b> have been properly fulfilled (see Deuteronomy 26:12–15); <b>and for the confession</b> of sins made by the High Priest <b>on Yom Kippur</b> over the special offerings brought on that day.

### Part 8
The entire day is also a valid time <b>for placing hands</b> on the head of an offering; <b>for slaughtering</b> an offering; <b>for waving</b> those offerings that require waving in the Temple; <b>for bringing</b> meal-offerings <b>near</b> to the altar; <b>for scooping out a fistful</b> of flour from a meal-offering in order to burn it on the altar; <b>and for burning</b> the fistful of flour on the altar; <b>for pinching</b> the necks of the turtledoves and young pigeons sacrificed as offerings in the Temple; <b>and for receiving</b> the blood of an offering in a vessel; <b>and for sprinkling</b> blood on the altar and on the curtain separating between the Holy and the Holy of Holies.

### Part 9
<b>And</b> the entire day is also a valid time <b>for giving a woman suspected by her husband of having been unfaithful [<i>sota</i>] to drink</b> from the bitter waters (see Numbers 5:11–31); <b>for breaking the neck</b> of the heifer as part of the procedure followed when a corpse is found outside a town and it is not known who caused his death (see Deuteronomy 21:1–9); <b>and for</b> all the steps in the <b>purification process of the leper</b> (see Leviticus 14:1–20).

### Part 10
Correspondingly, all the mitzvot that must be performed at night may be performed anytime during the night: <b>The entire night is</b> a valid time for <b>reaping the <i>omer</i></b> of barley on the night following the first day of Passover, <b>for burning the fats</b> of offerings that had been brought during the preceding day, <b>and</b> for burning <b>the limbs</b> of burnt-offerings. <b>This is the principle: Something that it is a mitzva</b> to perform <b>during the day is valid</b> if performed anytime during <b>the entire day; something that it is a mitzva</b> to perform <b>at night is valid</b> if performed anytime during <b>the entire night.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that these mitzvot were commanded to be performed specifically during the day? With regard to reading the Megilla, <b>the verse states: “That these days should be remembered and kept”</b> (Esther 9:28). <b>For reciting the <i>hallel</i>,</b> the proof is from <b>that which is written</b> in <i>hallel</i>: <b>“From the rising of the sun to its setting,</b> the Lord’s name is to be praised” (Psalms 113:3). <b>Rabbi Yosei said:</b> The proof is from another verse in <i>hallel</i>: <b>“This is the day that the Lord has made”</b> (Psalms 118:24), implying that it is to be recited during the day and not at night.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> daytime is the time <b>for taking the <i>lulav</i>, as it is written: “And you shall take for yourselves on the first day</b> the fruit of a beautiful tree, branches of a date palm, and boughs of a dense-leaved tree, and willows of the brook” (Leviticus 23:40). Daytime is also the time <b>for sounding the <i>shofar</i>, as it is written: “It is a day of sounding the <i>shofar</i> to you”</b> (Numbers 29:1). Likewise, the time <b>for</b> the <b>additional offerings</b> is day, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to these offerings: “To sacrifice an offering made by fire to the Lord, a burnt-offering, and a meal-offering, a sacrifice, and libations, <b>each on its own day”</b> (Leviticus 23:37). <b>And</b> this is also so <b>for the additional prayer,</b> because <b>the Sages made it equivalent to</b> those <b>additional offerings.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And</b> daytime is the time for <b>the confession over the bulls, as</b> this is <b>derived</b> by way of a verbal analogy between one instance of <b>atonement</b> in this context and another instance of <b>atonement</b> in the context of <b>Yom Kippur. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to Yom Kippur,</b> the verse states: “And Aaron shall present the bull of the sin-offering that is his, <b>and atone for himself and for his household”</b> (Leviticus 16:11). <b>The verse speaks of atonement</b> achieved through <b>words,</b> i.e., the atonement here is not referring to the sacrifice of offerings and the sprinkling of blood, but rather to atonement achieved through confession. <b>And the atonement</b> of Yom Kippur <b>is</b> only <b>during the day, as it is written:</b> “For <b>on that day will He atone for you”</b> (Leviticus 16:30). Just as the atonement on Yom Kippur must take place during the day, so must the other cases of atonement, over other bulls brought as sin-offerings, take place during the day.

### Part 14
<b>And</b> daytime is the time <b>for the declaration with regard to tithes, as it is written</b> in the formula of this declaration: <b>“And you shall say before the Lord your God, I have removed the sacred things out of my house”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:13–15); <b>and juxtaposed to</b> that passage it is written: <b>“This day the Lord your God has commanded you</b> to do” (Deuteronomy 26:16), implying during the day and not at night.

### Part 15
<b>For placing hands</b> on the head of an offering <b>and for slaughtering</b> an offering, it is derived <b>as it is written: “And he shall lay</b> his hand upon the head of his offering, <b>and slaughter it”</b> (Leviticus 3:8), comparing the laying of hands to slaughtering. <b>And it is written with regard to slaughtering: “On the day that you slaughter”</b> (Leviticus 19:6), meaning during the day and not at night. <b>And for waving</b> the offerings that require waving, it is derived <b>as it is written: “And on the day you wave the <i>omer</i>”</b> (Leviticus 23:12).

### Part 16
<b>And</b> with regard <b>to bringing</b> the meal-offerings <b>near</b> the altar, <b>it is likened to waving, as it is written: “And the priest shall take the meal-offering of jealousy from the woman’s hand, and shall wave</b> the offering before the Lord, <b>and sacrifice</b> it upon the altar” (Numbers 5:25). The words “sacrifice it” are referring to bringing the offering near the altar. <b>And for scooping out a fistful</b> of flour, <b>and for pinching</b> the necks of the bird-offerings, <b>and for burning</b> the fistful of flour on the altar, <b>and for sprinkling</b> the blood, these are derived <b>as it is written:</b> “This is the law of the burnt-offering, of the meal-offering, and of the sin-offering, and of the guilt-offering, and of the consecration-offering, and of the sacrifice of the peace-offering; which the Lord commanded Moses on Mount Sinai on <b>the day that he commanded the children of Israel</b> to present their offerings” (Leviticus 7:37–38).

### Part 17
<b>And</b> with regard <b>to giving the <i>sota</i> to drink</b> from the bitter waters, this <b>is derived</b> from a verbal analogy between one instance of the word <b>“Torah”</b> and another instance of the word <b>“Torah.” It is written here</b> with respect to a <i>sota</i>: <b>“And the priest shall execute upon her all this Torah”</b> (Numbers 5:30), <b>and it is written there</b> with regard to judgment: <b>“According to the Torah, which they shall teach you, and according to the judgment,</b> which they shall tell you” (Deuteronomy 17:11).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC