
### Part 1
<b>Why were the years of Ishmael mentioned</b> in the Torah? For what purpose were we told the life span of that wicked man? <b>In order to reckon through them the years of Jacob. As it is written: “And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty-seven years”</b> (Genesis 25:17). <b>How much older was Ishmael than Isaac? Fourteen years. As it is written: “And Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram”</b> (Genesis 16:16). <b>And it is written: “And Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born to him”</b> (Genesis 21:5). <b>And it is written</b> with regard to Jacob and Esau: <b>“And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them”</b> (Genesis 25:26). Based on these verses, <b>how old was Ishmael when Jacob was born? Seventy-four. How many of his years remained</b> then until his death? <b>Sixty-three,</b> as Ishmael died at the age of a hundred and thirty-seven.

### Part 2
<b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Jacob our father was sixty-three years old at the time he was blessed by his father, and at that same time Ishmael died.</b> How is it known that these two events occurred at the same time? <b>As it is written: “When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed</b> Jacob…<b>then Esau went to Ishmael and took for a wife Mahalath, the daughter of Ishmael,</b> Abraham’s son, <b>the sister of Nebaioth”</b> (Genesis 28:6–9). <b>From the fact that</b> it <b>is stated: “the daughter of Ishmael,” do I not know that she was the sister of Nebaioth?</b> For what purpose then does the verse say this explicitly? <b>This teaches that Ishmael betrothed her</b> to Esau <b>and</b> in the meantime he <b>died, and Nebaioth her brother married her off.</b> Therefore, special mention is made of Nebaioth. Consequently, it is understood that Jacob was sixty-three years old when he received his blessing and left his father’s house.

### Part 3
If we calculate these <b>sixty-three</b> years <b>and</b> the <b>fourteen until Joseph was born, this</b> means that Jacob should have been <b>seventy-seven</b> at the time of Joseph’s birth. <b>And it is written: “And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh”</b> (Genesis 41:46). <b>This</b> indicates that Jacob should have then been at least <b>a hundred and seven</b> years old when Joseph was thirty. Add the <b>seven</b> years <b>of plenty and</b> the <b>two of famine,</b> and <b>this</b> would then indicate that Jacob should have been <b>a hundred and sixteen</b> years old when he arrived in Egypt in the second year of the famine.

### Part 4
<b>But it is written: “And Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of the years of your life? And Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my sojournings are a hundred and thirty years”</b> (Genesis 47:8–9). Jacob indicated that he was a hundred and thirty-three when he arrived in Egypt, <b>which is</b> different from the <b>hundred and sixteen</b> years calculated previously. Where are the missing fourteen years from Jacob’s lifetime?

### Part 5
<b>Rather, learn from here</b> that the fourteen years that Jacob spent in the house of Eber are not counted here. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Jacob was</b> studying <b>in the house of Eber for fourteen years</b> while <b>in hiding</b> from his brother Esau. If we were to calculate the life spans recorded in the Torah, we would find that <b>Eber died</b> when Jacob was seventy-nine years old, <b>two years after Jacob our father went down to Aram-naharaim,</b> to the house of Laban. When Jacob <b>left</b> after completing his studying <b>there,</b> he <b>then went</b> immediately <b>to Aram-naharaim.</b> Therefore, <b>when</b> Jacob <b>stood at the well</b> upon his arrival in Aram-naharaim, <b>he was seventy-seven years old.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> Jacob <b>was not punished</b> for the fourteen years that he was in the house of Eber, during which time he failed to fulfill the mitzva of honoring one’s parents? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>It turns out that Joseph was away from his father for twenty-two years, just as Jacob our father was away from his</b> own <b>father</b> for that same period of time. According to the previous calculation, however, the <i>baraita</i> is difficult, as <b>Jacob</b> was absent for <b>thirty-six</b> years. Rather, conclude from here that <b>the fourteen</b> years <b>that he was in the house of Eber are not counted,</b> as he was not punished for them.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises an objection: But <b>ultimately,</b> Jacob was in <b>Laban’s house for</b> only <b>twenty years.</b> Why, then, is he faulted for being away from his father for twenty-two years? <b>Rather,</b> he was punished <b>because on his journey</b> back from Aram-naharaim <b>he tarried</b> another <b>two years</b> before returning home to his parents, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Jacob <b>left Aram-naharaim and came to Sukkot, and spent eighteen months there, as it is stated: “And Jacob journeyed to Sukkot, built himself a house, and made booths [<i>sukkot</i>] for his cattle”</b> (Genesis 33:17). The Gemara understands this verse to mean that first he made booths [<i>Sukkot</i>], to live in during the summer, and then he built a house in the winter, and afterward he again made booths [<i>sukkot</i>] during the next summer, indicating that he must have been there for eighteen months. <b>He then was in Bethel for six months, and he brought offerings,</b> totaling two years in all. In this way, all the various calculations of years are reconciled.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC