
### Part 1
Since <i>Shekalim</i> is read from the portion in the Torah immediately following the regular weekly Torah reading, people <b>will</b> mistakenly <b>say</b> that <b>they</b> merely extended the regular reading and then <b>halted there,</b> and they will not realize that the last reading was actually for the sake of <i>Shekalim</i>.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Abaye said: Six</b> people <b>read from “And you shall command” until</b> but not including <b>“And you shall make</b> a copper laver,” which concludes with the portion used for <i>Shekalim</i>. <b>And</b> then <b>one</b> person <b>repeats and reads</b> <i>Shekalim</i> <b>from “When you take the count” until</b> but not including <b>“And you shall make</b> a copper laver.” The repetition of this portion serves to highlight the fact it was read for the sake of <i>Shekalim</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: If the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is to be read <b>occurs on</b> the Shabbat on which <b>the portion</b> to be read for the regular weekly reading <b>is adjacent to</b> <i>Shekalim</i>, <b>whether</b> on the Shabbat <b>preceding</b> that Shabbat <b>or following it,</b> then <b>they read and repeat</b> <i>Shekalim</i>.

### Part 4
<b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye, it works out well,</b> for the conclusion of the <i>baraita</i>, that we repeat <i>Shekalim</i>, supports his opinion. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa,</b> it is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa</b> could have <b>said to you: And according to Abaye, does it</b> really <b>work out well?</b> The reference of the <i>baraita</i> to a case where the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is read <b>precedes</b> the Shabbat on which that portion will be read as part of the weekly reading <b>works out well,</b> since it can indeed occur. However, with regard to the reference to that Shabbat <b>following</b> the Shabbat on which that portion is read as part of the weekly reading, under <b>what circumstances</b> can this case <b>be found?</b> It never occurs like that.

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> perforce, <b>what have you to say?</b> That when the <i>baraita</i> refers to repeating <i>Shekalim</i> when the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is read follows the Shabbat on which it is read as the regular weekly reading, it means that <b>one repeats it</b> by reading it <b>on</b> two successive <b><i>Shabbatot</i>.</b> Similarly, <b>here too,</b> when the <i>baraita</i> refers to repeating <i>Shekalim</i> when the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is read precedes the Shabbat on which it is read as the regular weekly reading, it means that <b>one repeats it</b> by reading it <b>on</b> two successive <b><i>Shabbatot</i>.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara considers a similar case: If the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is to be read <b>occurs on</b> the Shabbat on which the regular portion <b>itself</b> begins with <b>“When you take the count,”</b> what should be done? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa said: Six</b> people <b>read from “And you shall make</b> a copper laver” <b>until</b> but not including the portion of <b>“And he assembled”</b> (Exodus 30:17–34:35). This is the entire regular weekly portion of “When you take the count” without the opening passage, which is also the portion of <i>Shekalim</i>. <b>And</b> then <b>one</b> person goes back and <b>reads</b> the portion of <i>Shekalim</i> <b>from “When you take the count” until</b> but not including <b>“And you shall make</b> a copper laver.”

### Part 8
<b>Abaye strongly objects to this: Now</b> people <b>will</b> mistakenly <b>say</b> that <b>they are reading</b> the regular weekly portion <b>out of sequence,</b> and they will not realize that the last reading was actually for the sake of the portion of <i>Shekalim</i>. <b>Rather, Abaye said: Six</b> people <b>read</b> the entire portion of “When you shall count” <b>until</b> but not including the portion of <b>“And he assembled”</b> (Exodus 30:11–34:35), <b>and</b> then <b>one</b> person <b>repeats and reads</b> the portion of <i>Shekalim</i> <b>from “When you take the count” until</b> but not including <b>“And you shall make</b> a copper laver.”

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Abaye:</b> If the Shabbat on which <i>Shekalim</i> is to be read <b>occurs on</b> the Shabbat on which the regular portion <b>itself</b> is <b>“When you take the count,”</b> the first part of that portion <b>is read</b> once as part of the weekly reading <b>and</b> then <b>repeated</b> as the portion of <i>Shekalim</i>.

### Part 10
§ The mishna states: If the New Moon of Adar <b>occurs during</b> the middle of <b>the week,</b> the congregation <b>advances</b> the reading of <i>Shekalim</i> <b>to the previous week.</b> With regard to this, an amoraic dispute <b>was stated:</b> With regard to when <b>the New Moon of Adar occurs on Friday, Rav said:</b> The congregation <b>advances</b> the reading of the portion to the previous week. <b>And Shmuel said: They defer</b> the reading of the portion to the following day, and it is read on the coming Shabbat.

### Part 11
The Gemara explains the two opinions: <b>Rav said: They advance</b> the reading to the previous week, <b>as, if</b> one would read the portion only on the following day, <b>there will be less than the</b> required number of <b>days,</b> i.e., two weeks, that the announcement needs to precede the setting up of <b>the</b> money-changing <b>tables</b> on the fifteenth. <b>And Shmuel said: They defer</b> the reading of the portion to the following day. As for Rav’s argument, Shmuel could have <b>said to you: Ultimately,</b> in such a year <b>the fifteenth</b> of Adar also <b>occurs on a Friday, and</b> therefore <b>the</b> money-changing <b>tables will not be brought out until Sunday.</b> Consequently, there will still be a full two weeks between the announcement and the setting of the tables. <b>Therefore, they</b> can <b>defer</b> the reading to the following day.

### Part 12
The Gemara offers various proofs for Rav’s opinion: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If the New Moon <b>occurs during</b> the middle of <b>the week, they advance</b> the reading of that portion <b>to the previous</b> Shabbat, <b>and</b> in such a case <b>they interrupt</b> the reading of the four portions <b>on the following Shabbat.</b> The Gemara explains the proof: <b>What; is it not</b> that this is referring <b>even</b> to a case when the New Moon occurs <b>on Friday?</b> This would prove Rav’s opinion. <b>No;</b> it is referring <b>specifically</b> to a case where it occurs <b>during</b> the middle <b>of the week.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Which is the first Shabbat</b> of the four <i>Shabbatot</i> on which the special portions are read? The Shabbat of <b>whichever</b> week <b>during which the New Moon of Adar occurs, and</b> this is the case <b>even</b> if it occurs <b>on Friday.</b> The Gemara explains the proof: <b>What, is it not</b> that the <i>baraita</i> teaches that the case when it occurs <b>even on Friday is similar to</b> the case where it occurs <b>during</b> the middle of the week, and <b>just as</b> when it occurs <b>during</b> the middle of the week, <b>they advance</b> the reading to the previous Shabbat, <b>so too,</b> when it occurs on <b>Friday, they advance</b> the reading to the previous Shabbat? This would therefore prove Rav’s opinion.

### Part 14
<b>Shmuel said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> should be emended, and instead of saying: During which the New Moon occurs, it should say: <b>On which</b> the New Moon occurs, i.e., on Shabbat itself. <b>And so the school of Shmuel taught: On which</b> the New Moon occurs.

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests: This dispute between the <i>amora’im</i> is <b>like</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the reading of the four special portions, <b>they interrupt the flow of <i>Shabbatot</i>,</b> i.e., there is a Shabbat in which no special portion is read; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: They do not interrupt the flow</b> of <i>Shabbatot</i>. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: When do I say that they do not interrupt the flow</b> of <i>Shabbatot</i>? <b>When</b> the New Moon of Adar <b>occurs on Friday,</b> since I hold that in that case <i>Shekalim</i> is read on the following day, and therefore the four portions are read on four consecutive weeks. <b>However, when</b> the New Moon of Adar <b>occurs during the week, one advances and reads</b> <i>Shekalim</i> <b>on the previous Shabbat, although it is</b> still the month of <b>Shevat,</b> and therefore on one of the <i>Shabbatot</i> in Adar there will be no reading. It would appear, then, that Shmuel holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar, whereas Rav holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 16
§ The mishna states: <b>On the second</b> Shabbat of Adar, the Shabbat prior to Purim, they read the portion of <b>“Remember [<i>zakhor</i>]</b> what Amalek did” (Deuteronomy 25:17–19). The portion of <i>Zakhor</i> is associated with Purim because according to tradition, Haman was a descendant of Amalek, and so the victory over him and his supporters was a victory against Amalek. With regard to this, an amoraic dispute <b>was stated:</b> With regard to when <b>Purim occurs on a Friday, Rav said:</b> The congregation <b>advances</b> the reading of <b>the portion of <i>Zakhor</i></b> to the previous Shabbat. <b>And Shmuel said: They defer</b> it to the Shabbat following Purim.

### Part 17
The Gemara explains the two opinions: <b>Rav said: They advance</b> it to the previous Shabbat, <b>in order that the observance</b> of Purim <b>should not precede the remembrance</b> of the destruction of Amalek, which is achieved through reading the portion of <i>Zakhor</i>. <b>And Shmuel said: They defer</b> its reading. And as for Rav’s argument, Shmuel could have <b>said to you: Since there are the walled</b> cities <b>that observe</b> Purim <b>on the fifteenth,</b> at least with regard to them, <b>the observance and the remembrance come together</b> on the same day, and that is sufficient.

### Part 18
The Gemara offers various proofs for Rav’s opinion: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>On the second</b> Shabbat they read the portion of <b><i>Zakhor</i>.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Is it not</b> the case that <b>when the New Moon</b> of Adar <b>occurs on Shabbat, Purim occurs on Friday, and</b> yet the mishna <b>teaches: On the second</b> Shabbat they read the portion of <b><i>Zakhor</i>?</b> This supports Rav’s opinion that in all cases the portion is read before Purim. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> There is no proof, because one could argue as follows: <b>What is</b> the intention of the mishna when it is referring to <b>the second</b> Shabbat? It could mean <b>the second</b> Shabbat on which a special portion is read, which, if Purim occurs on Friday, occurs only <b>after the interruption</b> of the previous Shabbat, during which no portion was read.

### Part 19
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Which is the second Shabbat</b> on which a special portion is read? The Shabbat of <b>whichever</b> week <b>during which Purim occurs, and</b> this is the case <b>even</b> if it occurs <b>on Friday.</b> The Gemara explains the proof: <b>What, is it not</b> that the <i>baraita</i> teaches that <b>even</b> if Purim occurs <b>on Friday,</b> the case <b>is similar to</b> the case when it occurs <b>during</b> the middle of the week, and therefore, <b>just as</b> when it occurs <b>during</b> the middle of the week <b>we advance</b> the reading to the previous Shabbat, <b>so too,</b> when it occurs on <b>Friday, we</b> should <b>advance</b> the reading to the previous Shabbat? This <i>baraita</i> would therefore prove Rav’s opinion.

### Part 20
<b>Shmuel said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> should be emended, and instead of saying: During which Purim occurs, it should say: <b>On which</b> Purim occurs, i.e., on Shabbat itself. <b>And so the school of Shmuel taught: On which</b> Purim occurs.

### Part 21
With regard to when Purim <b>occurs on Shabbat itself, Rav Huna said: Everyone agrees,</b> i.e., both Rav and Shmuel, that <b>they do not advance</b> the reading of the portion of <i>Zakhor</i> to the previous Shabbat, but it is read on that Shabbat. <b>And Rav Naḥman said:</b> Even in this case there <b>is still a dispute,</b> for Rav maintains that in all cases the remembrance of the destruction of Amalek, which is achieved through reading the portion of <i>Zakhor</i>, must always precede the observance of Purim. <b>It was also stated</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If <b>Purim occurs on Shabbat, one advances and reads</b> the portion of <b><i>Zakhor</i> on the previous Shabbat,</b> as Rav Naḥman understood Rav’s opinion.

### Part 22
§ The mishna states: <b>On the third</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b>the Red Heifer [<i>Para</i>]</b> (Numbers 19:1–22). <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Which is the third Shabbat? Whichever</b> Shabbat occurs <b>immediately after Purim.</b> It <b>was</b> also <b>stated: Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: The Shabbat that is immediately</b> after <b>the New Moon of Nisan.</b>

### Part 23
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> these two statements <b>do not disagree,</b> as they refer to different cases: <b>This</b> statement of Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, is referring to a case <b>where the New Moon of Nisan occurs on Shabbat</b> itself. In that case, the portion of <i>HaḤodesh</i> is read then, and therefore the reading of <i>Para</i> is deferred to the following Shabbat. <b>And that</b> statement of the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the New Moon of Nisan <b>occurs during the middle of the week.</b> Therefore, <i>HaḤodesh</i> is read on the Shabbat immediately preceding the New Moon, and <i>Para</i> is read on the Shabbat before that one, which is the Shabbat that is adjacent to Purim and after it.

### Part 24
§ The mishna states: <b>On the fourth</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b>“This month [<i>haḥodesh</i>] shall be for you”</b> (Exodus 12:1–20). <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When <b>the New Moon of Adar occurs on Shabbat, they read “When you take the count”</b> as the portion of <i>Shekalim</i>. <b>And they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> the story involving <b>Jehoiada</b> the priest (II Kings 12:1–27). <b>And which is the first Shabbat?</b> The Shabbat of <b>whichever</b> week <b>during which the New Moon of Adar occurs, and</b> this is the case <b>even</b> if it occurs <b>on Friday. On the second</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b><i>Zakhor</i>, and they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> of <b>“I remembered</b> that which Amalek did” (I Samuel 15:1–34). <b>And which is the second Shabbat?</b> The Shabbat of <b>whichever</b> week <b>during which Purim occurs, and</b> this is the case <b>even</b> if it occurs <b>on Friday.</b>

### Part 25
<b>On the third</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b>the Red Heifer [<i>Para</i>], and they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> the portion of <b>“Then will I sprinkle</b> clean water <b>upon you”</b> (Ezekiel 36:25–38). <b>And which is the third Shabbat? That which is adjacent to Purim and after it. On the fourth</b> Shabbat, they read the portion of <b>“This month [<i>haḥodesh</i>]</b> shall be for you,” <b>and they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> the portion of <b>“Thus says the Lord God: In the first month, on the first day of the month”</b> (Ezekiel 45:18–46:18).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC