
### Part 1
<b>“For we are bondmen; yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia”</b> (Ezra 9:9). <b>When</b> did this occur? <b>In the time of Haman.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa introduced this passage with an introduction from here:</b> The verse states: <b>“You have caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and through water;</b> but You brought us out into abundance” (Psalms 66:12). <b>“Through fire”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the wicked Nebuchadnezzar,</b> who cast the righteous into the furnace. <b>“And through water”;</b> this was <b>in the days of Pharaoh,</b> who decreed that all newborn males be cast into the water. <b>“But You brought us out into abundance”;</b> this was <b>in the days of Haman,</b> where abundant feasts played a pivotal role in their peril and salvation.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan introduced this passage with an introduction from here:</b> The verse states: <b>“He has remembered His mercy and His faithfulness toward the house of Israel: All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God”</b> (Psalms 98:3). <b>When did all the ends of the earth see the salvation of our God? In the days of Mordecai and Esther,</b> for their peril and salvation became known through the letters sent throughout the empire.

### Part 4
<b>Reish Lakish introduced this passage with an introduction from here: “As a roaring lion, and a ravenous bear, so is a wicked ruler over a poor people”</b> (Proverbs 28:15). <b>“A roaring lion”; this is the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, as it is written about him: “The lion has come up from his thicket”</b> (Jeremiah 4:7). <b>“A hungry bear”; this is Ahasuerus, as it is written about him: “And behold, another beast, a second one, like a bear”</b> (Daniel 7:5). <b>And Rav Yosef taught</b> that <b>these</b> who are referred to as a bear in the verse <b>are the Persians.</b> They are compared to a bear, <b>as they eat and drink</b> in large quantities <b>like a bear; and they are coated with flesh like a bear; and they grow their hair</b> long <b>like a bear; and they never rest like a bear,</b> whose manner it is to move about from place to place.

### Part 5
<b>“A wicked ruler”; this is Haman. “Over a poor people”; this is the Jewish people,</b> who are referred to in this manner <b>because they are poor in</b> their observance of <b>the mitzvot.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Elazar introduced this passage with an introduction from here: “Through laziness the rafters [<i>hamekare</i>] sink in [<i>yimakh</i>]; and through idleness of the hands the house leaks”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:18). Rabbi Elazar interprets the verse homiletically: <b>Through the laziness of the Jewish people, who did not occupy themselves with Torah</b> study, <b>the enemy of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> a euphemism for God Himself, <b>became poor [<i>makh</i>],</b> so that, as it were, He was unable to help them, <b>as <i>makh</i></b> is <b>nothing other than poor, as it is stated: “But if he be too poor [<i>makh</i>] for the valuation”</b> (Leviticus 27:8). <b>And</b> the word <b><i>mekare</i></b> in the verse <b>is referring</b> to <b>no</b> one <b>other than the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it is stated: “Who lays the beams [<i>hamekare</i>] of His chambers in the waters”</b> (Psalms 104:3).

### Part 7
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak introduced this passage with an introduction from here: “A song of ascents of David. If not for the Lord Who was with us, let Israel now say; if not for the Lord who was with us, when a man rose up against us”</b> (Psalms 124:1–2). The verse speaks of <b>“a man”</b> who rose up against us <b>and not a king.</b> This occurred in the days of Haman, as he, and not King Ahasuerus, was the chief enemy of the Jewish people.

### Part 8
<b>Rava introduced this passage with an introduction from here: “When the righteous are on the increase, the people rejoice; but when the wicked man rules, the people mourn”</b> (Proverbs 29:2). <b>“When the righteous are on the increase, the people rejoice”; this is Mordecai and Esther, as it is written: “And the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad”</b> (Esther 8:15). <b>“But when the wicked man rules, the people mourn”; this is Haman, as it is written: “But the city of Shushan was perplexed”</b> (Esther 3:15).

### Part 9
<b>Rav Mattana said</b> his introduction <b>from here: “For what nation is there so great, that has God so near to them”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:7), as to witness the great miracles in the days of Mordecai and Esther? <b>Rav Ashi said</b> his introduction <b>from here:</b> The verse states: <b>“Or has God ventured</b> to go and take Him a nation from the midst of another nation?” (Deuteronomy 4:34), as in the times of Esther, God saved the Jewish people who were scattered throughout the Persian Empire.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara returns to its interpretation of the book of Esther. The verse states: <b>“And it came to pass [<i>vayhi</i>] in the days of Ahasuerus”</b> (Esther 1:1). <b>Rav said:</b> The word <i>vayhi</i> may be understood as if it said <b><i>vai</i> and <i>hi</i>,</b> meaning <b>woe and mourning. This is as it is written: “And there you shall sell yourselves to your enemies for bondsmen and bondswomen,</b> and no man shall buy you” (Deuteronomy 28:68). The repetitive nature of the verse, indicating that no one will be willing to buy you for servitude, but they will purchase you in order to murder you, indicates a doubly horrific situation, which is symbolized by the dual term <i>vayhi</i>, meaning woe and mourning.

### Part 11
<b>And Shmuel said</b> his introduction from here: “And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, <b>I will not reject them, nor will I abhor them,</b> to destroy them utterly, and to break My covenant with them; for I am the Lord their God” (Leviticus 26:44). Shmuel explains: <b>“I will not reject them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the Greeks. “Nor will I abhor them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of</b> Vespasian. <b>“To destroy them utterly”;</b> this was <b>in the days of Haman. “To break My covenant with them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the Persians. “For I am the Lord their God”;</b> this is <b>in the days of Gog and Magog.</b>

### Part 12
An alternative understanding <b>was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: “I will not reject them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the Chaldeans, when I appointed for them Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah</b> to pray on their behalf. <b>“Nor will I abhor them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the Greeks, when I appointed Shimon HaTzaddik for them, and</b> the <b>Hasmonean and his sons, and Mattithiah the High Priest. “To destroy them utterly”;</b> this was <b>in the days of Haman, when I appointed for them</b> the righteous leaders <b>Mordecai and Esther. “To break My covenant with them”;</b> this was <b>in the days of the Romans, when I appointed for them</b> the Sages of <b>the house of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and the Sages of</b> other <b>generations. “For I am the Lord their God”;</b> this will be <b>in the future, when no nation or</b> people of a foreign <b>tongue will be able</b> to <b>subjugate them</b> further.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Levi said</b> his introduction <b>from here: “But if you will not drive out the inhabitants of the land</b> from before you, then it shall come to pass, that those whom you allow to remain of them shall be as thorns in your eyes” (Numbers 33:55). King Saul’s failure to completely annihilate Amalek allowed for the existence of his descendant Haman, who acted as a thorn in the eyes of Israel during the Purim episode.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya said</b> his introduction <b>from here,</b> the continuation of the previously cited verse: <b>“And it shall come to pass, that as I thought to do unto them, so I shall do unto you”</b> (Numbers 33:56). Prior to the miracle of Purim, the Jewish people were subject to the punishment that the Torah designated for its enemies, because they did not fulfill God’s commandments.

### Part 15
The Gemara continues with its explanation of the book of Esther, beginning with a discussion of the name <b>Ahasuerus. Rav said:</b> The name should be viewed as a contraction: <b>The brother of the head [<i>aḥiv shel rosh</i>] and of the same character as the head [<i>ben gilo shel rosh</i>].</b> Rav explains: <b>The brother of the head,</b> i.e., <b>the brother of the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, who is called “head,” as it is stated: “You are the head of gold”</b> (Daniel 2:38). <b>Of the same character as the head, for he,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, <b>killed</b> the Jews, and <b>he,</b> Ahasuerus, <b>sought to kill</b> them. <b>He destroyed</b> the Temple, and <b>he sought to destroy</b> the foundations for the Temple laid by Zerubbabel, <b>as it is stated: “And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they wrote to him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem”</b> (Ezra 4:6), and he ordered that the construction of the Temple cease.

### Part 16
<b>And Shmuel said:</b> The name Ahasuerus should be understood in the sense of black [<i>shaḥor</i>], as <b>the face of the Jewish people was blackened in his days like the bottom of a pot. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> a different explanation: <b>Everyone who recalled him said: “Woe upon his head” [<i>aḥ lerosho</i>]. And Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> The name alludes to the fact <b>that everyone became poor</b> [<b><i>rash</i>] in his days, as it is stated: “And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute</b> upon the land” (Esther 10:1).

### Part 17
The Gemara continues: <b>“This is [<i>hu</i>] Ahasuerus”</b> (Esther 1:1); the term <i>hu</i>, this is, comes to teach that <b>he</b> remained as he was <b>in his wickedness from beginning to end.</b> Similarly, wherever the words “this is” appear in this manner, the verse indicates that the individual under discussion remained the same from beginning to end, for example: <b>“This is [<i>hu</i>] Esau”</b> (Genesis 36:43); <b>he</b> remained <b>in his wickedness from beginning to end. “This is [<i>hu</i>] Dathan and Abiram”</b> (Numbers 26:9); <b>they</b> remained <b>in their wickedness from beginning to end. “This is [<i>hu</i>] the king Ahaz”</b> (II Chronicles 28:22); <b>he</b> remained <b>in his wickedness from beginning to end.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara continues: The word <i>hu</i> is also used to recognize sustained righteousness. <b>“Abram, this is [<i>hu</i>] Abraham”</b> (I Chronicles 1:27); this indicates that Abraham didn’t change, as <b>he</b> remained <b>in his righteousness from beginning to end.</b> Similarly, <b>“This is [<i>hu</i>] Aaron and Moses”</b> (Exodus 6:26); <b>they remained in their righteousness from</b> the <b>beginning</b> of their life <b>to</b> the <b>end</b> of their life. Similarly, with respect to David: <b>“And David, this was [<i>hu</i>] the youngest”</b> (I Samuel 17:14), indicates that <b>he remained in his humility from beginning to end. Just as in his youth,</b> when he was still an ordinary individual, <b>he humbled himself before anyone who was greater than him in Torah, so too, in his kingship, he humbled himself before anyone who was greater than him in wisdom.</b>

### Part 19
The next term in the opening verse: <b>“Who reigned”</b> (Esther 1:1), is now interpreted. <b>Rav said:</b> This comes to teach <b>that he reigned on his own,</b> without having inherited the throne. <b>Some say</b> this <b>to</b> his <b>credit, and some say it to</b> his <b>disgrace.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Some say</b> this <b>to</b> his <b>credit, that there was no</b> other <b>man as fit as him to be king. And some say it to</b> his <b>disgrace, that he was not fit to be king, but he distributed large amounts of money, and</b> in that way <b>rose</b> to the throne.

### Part 20
The opening verse continues that Ahasuerus reigned <b>“from Hodu to Cush.” Rav and Shmuel</b> disagreed about its meaning. <b>One said: Hodu</b> is a country <b>at one end of the world, and Cush</b> is a country <b>at the</b> other <b>end of the world. And one said: Hodu and Cush are situated next to each other,</b> and the verse means to say as follows: <b>Just as</b> Ahasuerus <b>reigned</b> with ease <b>over</b> the adjacent countries of <b>Hodu and Cush, so too, he reigned</b> with ease <b>from one end of the world to the other.</b>

### Part 21
<b>On a similar</b> note, <b>you say</b> with regard to Solomon: <b>“For he had dominion over all the region on this side of the river, from Tiphsah even to Gaza”</b> (I Kings 5:4), and also with regard to this <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagreed. <b>One said: Tiphsah is at one end of the world, whereas Gaza is at the other end of the world. And one said: Tiphsah and Gaza are situated next to each other,</b> and the verse means to say as follows: <b>Just as</b> Solomon <b>reigned</b> with ease <b>over</b> the adjacent <b>Tiphsah and Gaza, so too, he reigned</b> with ease <b>over the entire world.</b>

### Part 22
The opening verse continues, stating that Ahasuerus reigned “over <b>seven and twenty and a hundred provinces”</b> (Esther 1:1). <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This verse should be understood as follows: <b>At first he reigned over seven</b> provinces; <b>and then he reigned over twenty</b> more; <b>and finally he reigned over</b> another <b>hundred.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>However, if</b> that is <b>so,</b> with regard to the similarly worded verse: <b>“And the years of the life of Amram were seven and thirty and a hundred years”</b> (Exodus 6:20), <b>what would you expound</b> from <b>it?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is different here,</b> in the book of Esther, <b>as</b> this part of <b>the verse is</b> entirely <b>superfluous. Since it is</b> already <b>written: “From Hodu to Cush,” why</b> then <b>do I need “Seven and twenty and a hundred provinces”?</b> Rather, <b>learn from here</b> that these words come <b>for</b> this <b>exposition,</b> to teach that Ahasuerus did not begin to reign over all of them at the same time.

### Part 23
§ Apropos the discussion of the kingdoms of Ahasuerus and Solomon, the Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> in which <b>the Sages taught: Three</b> men <b>ruled over the</b> entire <b>world, and they were Ahab, and Ahasuerus, and Nebuchadnezzar.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Ahab, as it is written</b> in the words of Obadiah, servant of Ahab, to Elijah: <b>“As the Lord your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my master has not sent to seek you,</b> and they said: He is not there; and he made the kingdom and nation swear, that they had not found you” (I Kings 18:10). <b>And if he did not reign over them, how could he have made them swear?</b> Apparently, then, he reigned over the entire world.

### Part 24
<b>Nebuchadnezzar</b> also ruled over the whole world, <b>as it is written: “And it shall come to pass, that the nation and the kingdom</b> that not serve this same Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylonia, and that <b>will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylonia,</b> that nation will I visit, says the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand” (Jeremiah 27:8). <b>Ahasuerus</b> also ruled the world, <b>as we have said</b> above.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC