
### Part 1
<b>as</b> one with the heritage of <b>a poor man [<i>perozeboti</i>],</b> as Mordecai had been Haman’s slave master and was aware of Haman’s lowly lineage. <b>Rav Pappa said: And he was called: The slave who was sold for</b> a loaf of <b>bread.</b>

### Part 2
Haman’s previously quoted statement: <b>“Yet all this avails me nothing”</b> (Esther 5:13), <b>teaches that all the treasures of that wicked one were engraved on his heart, and when he saw Mordecai sitting at the king’s gate, he said:</b> As long as Mordecai is around, <b>all this</b> that I wear on my heart <b>avails me nothing.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Elazar</b> further <b>said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: In the future, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will be a crown on the head of each and every righteous man. As it is stated: “In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a crown of glory,</b> and for a diadem of beauty, to the residue of His people” (Isaiah 28:5). <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“for a crown of glory [<i>tzevi</i>], and for a diadem [<i>velitzefirat</i>] of beauty”?</b> A crown <b>for those that do His will [<i>tzivyono</i>] and</b> a diadem <b>for those that await [<i>velamtzapin</i>] His glory.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that this extends <b>to all</b> such individuals. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “To the residue of his people,” to whoever regards himself as a remainder,</b> i.e., small and unimportant like residue. But whoever holds himself in high esteem will not merit this.

### Part 4
Apropos the quotation from Isaiah, the Gemara explains the following verse, which states: “And for a spirit of justice to him that sits in judgment and for strength to them that turn back the battle to the gate” (Isaiah 28:6). <b>“And for a spirit of justice”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who brings his</b> evil <b>inclination to trial</b> and forces himself to repent. <b>“To him that sits in judgment”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who judges an absolutely true judgment. “And for strength”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who triumphs over his</b> evil <b>inclination. “Them that turn back the battle”;</b> this is referring to those <b>that give and take</b> in their discussion of <i>halakha</i> <b>in the battle of</b> understanding <b>the Torah. “To the gate”;</b> this is referring to <b>the Torah scholars who arrive early and stay late</b> at the darkened gates <b>of the synagogues and study halls.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara continues with an episode associated with a verse in Isaiah. <b>The Attribute of Justice said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, how are these,</b> referring to the Jewish people, <b>different from those,</b> the other nations of the world, such that God performs miracles only on behalf of the Jewish people? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to</b> it: <b>The Jewish people occupied themselves with Torah,</b> whereas <b>the</b> other <b>nations of the world did not occupy themselves with Torah.</b>

### Part 6
The Attribute of Justice <b>said to Him: “These also reel through wine, and stagger through strong drink;</b> the priest and the prophet reel through strong drink, they are confused because of wine, they stagger because of strong drink; they reel in vision, <b>they stumble [<i>paku</i>] in judgment [<i>peliliyya</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 28:7). The word <b><i>paku</i></b> in this context is referring <b>only to Gehenna, as it is stated: “That this shall not be a cause of stumbling [<i>puka</i>] to you”</b> (I Samuel 25:31), <b>and</b> the word <b><i>peliliyya</i></b> here is referring <b>only to judges, as it is stated: “And he shall pay as the judges determine [<i>bifelilim</i>]”</b> (Exodus 21:22). The response of the Attribute of Justice was essentially that the Jewish people have also sinned and are consequently liable to receive punishment.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara returns to its explanation of the verses of the Megilla. The verse states with regard to Esther: <b>“And she stood in the inner court of the king’s house”</b> (Esther 5:1). <b>Rabbi Levi said: Once she reached the chamber of the idols,</b> which was in the inner court, <b>the Divine Presence left her. She</b> immediately <b>said: “My God, my God, why have You forsaken me?”</b> (Psalms 22:2). <b>Perhaps</b> it is because <b>You judge an unintentional sin as one</b> performed <b>intentionally, and</b> an action <b>done due to</b> circumstances <b>beyond one’s control as</b> one done <b>willingly.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Or perhaps</b> You have left me <b>because</b> in my prayers <b>I called</b> Haman <b>a dog, as it is stated: “Deliver my soul from the sword; my only one from the hand of the dog”</b> (Psalms 22:21). <b>She</b> at once <b>retracted and called him</b> in her prayers <b>a lion, as it is stated</b> in the following verse: <b>“Save me from the lion’s mouth”</b> (Psalms 22:22).

### Part 9
The verse states: <b>“And so it was, that when the king saw Esther the queen</b> standing in the court, that she obtained favor in his sight; and the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand” (Esther 5:2). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Three ministering angels happened to join her at that time: One that raised up her neck,</b> so that she could stand erect, free of shame; <b>one that strung a cord</b> of divine <b>grace around her,</b> endowing her with charm and beauty; <b>and one that stretched the</b> king’s <b>scepter.</b>

### Part 10
<b>How much</b> was it stretched? <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> The scepter <b>was two cubits, and he made it twelve</b> cubits. <b>And some say</b> that he made it <b>sixteen</b> cubits, <b>and</b> yet <b>others say twenty-four</b> cubits. <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> He made it <b>sixty</b> cubits. <b>And similarly you find with the arm of Pharaoh’s daughter,</b> which she stretched out to take Moshe. <b>And so too, you find with the teeth of the wicked, as it is written: “You have broken the teeth of the wicked”</b> (Psalms 3:8), with regard to which <b>Reish Lakish said: Do not read</b> it as <b>“You have broken [<i>shibbarta</i>],” but</b> as: <b>You have enlarged [<i>sheribavta</i>]. Rabba bar Oferan said in the name of Rabbi Elazar, who heard it from his teacher, who</b> in turn heard it <b>from his teacher:</b> The scepter was stretched <b>two hundred</b> cubits.

### Part 11
The verse states: <b>“Then the king said to her” (Esther 5:3), to Esther the queen, “What is your wish, even to half the kingdom, it shall be performed”</b> (Esther 5:6). The Gemara comments that Ahasuerus intended only a limited offer: Only <b>half the kingdom, but not the whole kingdom, and not something that would serve as a barrier to the kingdom,</b> as there is one thing to which the kingdom will never agree. <b>And what is that? The building of the Temple;</b> if that shall be your wish, realize that it will not be fulfilled.

### Part 12
The verse states that Esther requested: “If it seem good unto the king, <b>let the king and Haman come this day to the banquet</b> that I have prepared for him” (Esther 5:4). <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What did Esther see to invite Haman</b> to the banquet? <b>Rabbi Elazar says: She hid a snare for him, as it is stated: “Let their table become a snare before them”</b> (Psalms 69:23), as she assumed that she would be able to trip up Haman during the banquet.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: She learned</b> to do <b>this from</b> the Jewish teachings of <b>her father’s house, as it is stated: “If your enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat”</b> (Proverbs 25:21). <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> She invited him <b>in order</b> that he be near her at all times, <b>so that he would not take counsel and rebel</b> against Ahasuerus when he discovered that the king was angry with him.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> She invited Haman <b>so that it not be found out that she was a Jew,</b> as had she distanced him, he would have become suspicious. <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says:</b> She did this <b>so that the Jewish people would not say: We have a sister in the king’s house, and</b> consequently <b>neglect their</b> prayers for divine <b>mercy. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> She acted in this manner, <b>so that</b> Haman would <b>always be on hand for her,</b> as that would enable her to find an opportunity to cause him to stumble before the king. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya said</b> that Esther said to herself: <b>Perhaps the Omnipresent will take notice</b> that all are supporting Haman and nobody is supporting the Jewish people, <b>and He will perform for us a miracle.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says:</b> She said to herself: <b>I will act kindly toward him</b> and thereby bring the king to suspect that we are having an affair; she did so <b>in order that</b> both <b>he and she would be killed.</b> Essentially, Esther was willing to be killed with Haman in order that the decree would be annulled. <b>Rabban Gamliel says:</b> Ahasuerus <b>was a fickle king,</b> and Esther hoped that if he saw Haman on multiple occasions, eventually he would change his opinion of him. <b>Rabban Gamliel said: We still need</b> the words of Rabbi Eliezer <b>HaModa’i</b> to understand why Esther invited Haman to her banquet. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i says: She made the king jealous of him and she made the</b> other <b>ministers jealous of him,</b> and in this way she brought about his downfall.

### Part 16
<b>Rabba says:</b> Esther invited Haman to her banquet in order to fulfill that which is stated: <b>“Pride goes before destruction”</b> (Proverbs 16:18), which indicates that in order to destroy the wicked, one must first bring them to pride. It can be understood according to <b>Abaye and Rava, who both say</b> that she invited Haman in order to fulfill the verse: <b>“When they are heated, I will make feasts for them,</b> and I will make them drunk, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep” (Jeremiah 51:39). The Gemara relates that <b>Rabba bar Avuh</b> once <b>happened upon Elijah</b> the Prophet and <b>said to him: In accordance with whose understanding did Esther see</b> fit to <b>act in this manner?</b> What was the true reason behind her invitation? <b>He,</b> Elijah, <b>said to him:</b> Esther was motivated by all the reasons previously mentioned and did so <b>for all</b> the reasons previously stated by <b>the <i>tanna’im</i> and all</b> the reasons stated by <b>the <i>amora’im</i>.</b>

### Part 17
The verse states: <b>“And Haman recounted to them the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his sons”</b> (Esther 5:11). The Gemara asks: <b>And how many</b> sons did he in fact have that are referred to as <b>“the multitude of his sons”? Rav said:</b> There were <b>thirty</b> sons; <b>ten</b> of them <b>died</b> in childhood, <b>ten of them were hanged</b> as recorded in the book of Esther, <b>and ten</b> survived and were forced to <b>beg at</b> other people’s <b>doors.</b>

### Part 18
<b>And the Rabbis say: Those that begged at</b> other people’s <b>doors</b> numbered <b>seventy, as it is written: “Those that were full, have hired themselves out for bread”</b> (I Samuel 2:5). <b>Do not read it as: “Those that were full” [<i>seve’im</i></b>]; <b>rather,</b> read it as <b>seventy [<i>shivim</i>],</b> indicating that there were seventy who “hired themselves out for bread.”

### Part 19
<b>And Rami bar Abba said: All of</b> Haman’s sons together numbered <b>two hundred and eight, as it is stated: “And the multitude [<i>verov</i>] of his sons.”</b> The numerical value of the word <i>verov</i> equals two hundred and eight, alluding to the number of his sons. The Gemara comments: <b>But</b> in fact, <b>the numerical value [<i>gimatriyya</i>] of</b> the word <b><i>verov</i> equals two hundred and fourteen,</b> not two hundred and eight. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The word <b><i>verov</i> is written</b> in the Bible without the second <i>vav</i>, and therefore its numerical value equals two hundred and eight.

### Part 20
The verse states: <b>“On that night the sleep of the king was disturbed”</b> (Esther 6:1). <b>Rabbi Tanḥum said:</b> The verse alludes to another king who could not sleep; <b>the sleep of the King of the universe,</b> the Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>was disturbed. And the Sages say:</b> The sleep of <b>the higher ones,</b> the angels, <b>was disturbed, and</b> the sleep of <b>the lower ones,</b> the Jewish people, <b>was disturbed. Rava said:</b> This should be understood <b>literally: The sleep of King Ahasuerus</b> was disturbed.

### Part 21
And this was the reason Ahasuerus could not sleep: <b>A thought occurred to him</b> and <b>he said</b> to himself: <b>What is this before us that Esther has invited Haman? Perhaps they are conspiring against that man,</b> i.e., against me, <b>to kill him. He</b> then <b>said again</b> to himself: <b>If this is so, is there no man who loves me and would inform me</b> of this conspiracy? <b>He</b> then <b>said again</b> to himself: <b>Perhaps there is some man who has done a favor for me and I have not</b> properly <b>rewarded him, and due to that</b> reason <b>people refrain from revealing to me</b> information regarding such plots, as they see no benefit for themselves. <b>Immediately</b> afterward, the verse states: <b>“And he commanded the book of remembrances of the chronicles to be brought”</b> (Esther 6:1).

### Part 22
The verse states: <b>“And they were read</b> before the king” (Esther 6:1). The Gemara explains that <b>this</b> passive form: “And they were read,” <b>teaches that they were read</b> miraculously <b>by themselves.</b> It further says: <b>“And it was found written [<i>katuv</i>]”</b> (Esther 6:2). The Gemara asks: Why does the Megilla use the word <i>katuv</i>, which indicates that it was newly written? <b>It should have said: A writing [<i>ketav</i>]</b> was found, which would indicate that it had been written in the past. The Gemara explains: This <b>teaches</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC