
### Part 1
When the <b>New Moon of Av occurs on Shabbat, they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> the portion that includes the verse <b>“Your New Moons and your Festivals, My soul hated; they were a burden to Me”</b> (Isaiah 1:14). The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>“They were a burden to Me”?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: It is not enough for the Jewish people that they sin before Me, but</b> in addition, <b>they burden Me to reconsider what harsh decree I shall bring upon them,</b> for they are petitioning Me to annul those decrees.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>On</b> the <b>Ninth of Av itself, what do we read as the <i>haftara</i>? Rav said:</b> The portion containing the verse <b>“How</b> did the faithful city <b>become a harlot?”</b> (Isaiah 1:21). The Gemara asks: <b>What Torah portion</b> do they read? <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>others say:</b> They read the portion containing the verse <b>“But if you will not hearken to me”</b> (Leviticus 26:14). <b>Rabbi Natan bar Yosef said:</b> They read the portion containing the verse: <b>“How long will this people provoke me?”</b> (Numbers 14:11). <b>And some say:</b> They read the portion containing the verse: <b>“How long shall I bear with this evil congregation?”</b> (Numbers 14:27). The Gemara comments that <b>Abaye said: Nowadays, everyone is accustomed to read</b> the portion of <b>“When you shall beget children”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:25–40), <b>and they read as the <i>haftara</i></b> the portion of <b>“I will utterly consume them”</b> (Jeremiah 8:13–9:23).

### Part 3
§ The mishna states: <b>In the</b> non-priestly <b>watches</b> they read <b>the act of Creation.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived, i.e., why do they read the account of Creation? <b>Rabbi Ami said:</b> To allude to the fact that <b>were it not for</b> the non-priestly <b>watches, heaven and earth would not endure, as it is stated: “Were it not for My covenant day and night, I would not have set the statutes of heaven and earth”</b> (Jeremiah 33:25). God’s covenant is referring to the offerings sacrificed in the Temple, which sustain the world.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> with regard to Abraham <b>it is written: “And he said, O Lord God, by what shall I know that I shall inherit it?”</b> (Genesis 15:8). <b>Abraham said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, perhaps, Heaven forbid, the Jewish people will sin before You, and You will do to them as</b> You did to the <b>generation of the Flood and as</b> You did to the <b>generation of the Dispersion,</b> i.e., You will completely destroy them? God <b>said to him: No,</b> I will not do that.

### Part 5
Abraham then <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe: “By what shall I know this?”</b> God <b>said to him: “Take Me a heifer of three years old”</b> (Genesis 15:9). With this, God intimated to Abraham that even if his descendants will sin, they will be able to achieve atonement through sacrificing offerings. Abraham <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> this <b>works out well when the Temple is standing</b> and offerings can be brought to achieve atonement, but <b>when the Temple will no</b> longer <b>be standing, what will become of them?</b> God <b>said to him: I have already established for them the order of offerings,</b> i.e., the verses of the Torah pertaining to the <i>halakhot</i> of the offerings. <b>Whenever they read those</b> portions, <b>I will deem it as if they sacrificed an offering before Me, and I will pardon them for all of their iniquities.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna states: <b>On fast days</b> the congregation reads the portion of <b>blessings and curses</b> (Leviticus, chapter 16), <b>and one may not interrupt</b> the reading of the <b>curses</b> by having two different people read them. Rather, one person reads all of them. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? Why does one not interrupt the reading of the curses? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Gamda said</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi said: For the verse states: “My son, do not despise the chastening of the Lord,</b> nor be weary of His correction” (Proverbs 3:11). If one makes a break in the middle of the curses, it appears as if he loathes rebuke.

### Part 7
<b>Reish Lakish said</b> a different answer: It is <b>because one does not say a blessing over a calamity.</b> If a second person were to begin to read in the middle of the portion of the curses, the blessing upon his reading would be considered a blessing over a calamity. <b>Rather,</b> what <b>does one do?</b> It is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When one begins</b> the reading, <b>one begins with the verse before</b> the curses, <b>and when one concludes</b> the reading, <b>one concludes with the verse after them.</b> In this way, neither the blessing before the reading nor after it relates directly to verses of calamity.

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said: They taught</b> this <b>only with regard to the curses that are</b> recorded <b>in Leviticus, but with regard to the curses that are</b> recorded <b>in Deuteronomy, one may interrupt</b> them by having two different people read them. <b>What is the reason</b> for this distinction? <b>These</b> curses in Leviticus <b>are stated in the plural, and Moses pronounced them from the mouth of the Almighty.</b> As such, they are more severe. However, <b>these</b> curses in Deuteronomy <b>are stated in the singular, and Moses said them on his own,</b> like the rest of the book of Deuteronomy. They are therefore less harsh and may be interrupted.

### Part 9
It was related that <b>Levi bar Buti was</b> once <b>reading the</b> portion of the <b>curses before Rav Huna, and he was stammering</b> in his reading, as it was difficult for him to utter such harsh pronouncements. Rav Huna <b>said to him: If you wish,</b> you may stop where you are and a different reader will continue, for <b>they taught</b> one may not have two people read the curses <b>only with regard to the curses that are</b> recorded <b>in Leviticus. But with regard to the curses that are</b> recorded <b>in Deuteronomy, one may interrupt</b> them by having two different people read them.

### Part 10
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: Ezra enacted for the Jewish people that they should read</b> the portion of <b>the curses that are</b> recorded <b>in Leviticus before <i>Shavuot</i> and</b> the portion of the curses <b>that are</b> recorded <b>in Deuteronomy before Rosh HaShana.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Abaye said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Reish Lakish</b> who said: <b>In order that the year may conclude</b> together with <b>its curses,</b> and the new year may begin without the ominous reading of the curses.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to the curses <b>that are</b> recorded <b>in Deuteronomy, there is</b> relevance to the reason: <b>In order that the year may conclude</b> together with <b>its curses,</b> for Rosh HaShana is clearly the beginning of a new year. <b>However,</b> with regard to the curses <b>that are</b> recorded <b>in Leviticus,</b> what relevance does that reason have? <b>Is that to say <i>Shavuot</i> is a new year?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> indeed, <b><i>Shavuot</i> is also a new year, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Rosh HaShana</i> 16a): <b>And on <i>Shavuot</i>,</b> divine judgment is made <b>concerning the fruit of the trees,</b> which indicates that <i>Shavuot</i> also has the status of a new year.

### Part 12
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: If old men say to you: Demolish, and children</b> say to you: <b>Build,</b> then <b>demolish and do not build, because the demolishing of old men is</b> ultimately as constructive as <b>building,</b> despite the fact that it appears destructive, <b>and the building of children is</b> as destructive as <b>demolishing. An indication of this matter</b> is <b>Rehoboam, son of Solomon.</b> He ignored the advice of the Elders and did not lower himself before his people, which ultimately led to the people rebelling against him.

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the place</b> in the Torah <b>where</b> the congregation <b>concludes</b> the reading <b>on Shabbat morning,</b> it is from <b>there</b> that <b>they</b> continue to <b>read in the afternoon</b> service on Shabbat. Where they conclude <b>in the afternoon</b> service on Shabbat, from <b>there they</b> continue to <b>read on Monday</b> morning. Where they conclude <b>on Monday,</b> from <b>there they</b> continue to <b>read on Thursday</b> morning. Where they conclude <b>on Thursday,</b> from <b>there they</b> continue to <b>read on the coming Shabbat.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>the place</b> in the Torah <b>where they conclude</b> the reading <b>on Shabbat morning,</b> it is from <b>there</b> that <b>they</b> continue to <b>read in the afternoon</b> service on Shabbat. <b>And</b> from that same place <b>they</b> continue to <b>read on Monday</b> morning, <b>and on Thursday</b> morning, <b>and on the coming Shabbat.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara notes that <b>Rabbi Zeira said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that with regard to <b>the place where they conclude</b> the reading <b>on Shabbat morning,</b> it is from <b>there</b> that <b>they</b> continue to <b>read in the afternoon</b> service on Shabbat. <b>And</b> from that same place <b>they</b> continue to <b>read on Monday</b> morning, <b>and on Thursday</b> morning, <b>and on the coming Shabbat.</b> The Gemara asks: If so, <b>let him</b> simply <b>say: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> Why did he have to explicitly state the whole <i>halakha</i>?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC