
### michna 1
What is the order of the [prayer service of the] fast-days? We take out the ark to the square of the city, and we place ashes of burnt [substances] on the heads of the Nasie and of the chief of the tribunal of justice, and other persons shall also put ashes on their heads; the eldest among them shall then address them in heart-moving terms: "My brethren, consider that it is not written in respect to [the repentance of] the Ninevites, that God regarded their having wrapped themselves in sackcloth, and considered their fast-days, but that 'God saw their acts, and that they had turned from their evil ways' (Jonah 3:10), and the tradition of the prophets also is, 'Tear your hearts, and not your garments' (Joel 2:13).

### michna 2
They stand to pray. We bring in front of the ark (meaning, to be the chazzan) an elderly man who is regular [to function as chazzan], who has children, and whose house is empty (meaning, he is poor), so that his heart may be entirely [devoted] to his prayer, and he says before them twenty-four blessings: the eighteen that are [said] every day, and he adds upon them another six.

### michna 3
These [extra blessings] are as follows: (1) [The blessing of] Remembrances, (2) [The blessing of] Shofars, (3) [Psalm 120,] "Hashem is my G-d in times of distress to me," (4) [Psalm 121,] "I lift my eyes up to the mountains," (5) [Psalm 130,] "From the depths I have called to you, O G-d," (6) [Psalm 102,] "A prayer of the impoverished, when he wraps himself [in a Tallit]. Rabbi Yehudah says, "It was not necessary to say [the blessings of] Remembrances and Shofars‎, but rather he says in their place, "When there is famine in the land, when there is pestilence in the land (I Kings 8:37)," and, "The word of the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the droughts (Jer. 14:1)." And he says their conclusions:

### michna 4
Upon the first blessing he shall say [in conclusion], "He who answered Abraham on Mount Moriah, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, Redeemer of Israel!" Upon the second he shall say, "He who answered our ancestors on the Red Sea, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who remembers the [things] forgotten [by man]!" Upon the third he shall say, "He who answered Yejoshua in Gilgal, may He answer you, and listen this day to your cry. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who deigns to listen to the sound of the shofar!" Upon the fourth he shall say, "He who answered Samuel in Mizpah, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkens to [our] cry!" Upon the fifth he shall say, "He who answered Elijah on Mount Carmel, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearkens to prayer!" Upon the sixth he shall say, "He who answered Jonah in the entrails of the fish, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who answers in the time of distress!" Upon the seventh he shall say, "He who answered David, and his son Solomon, in Jerusalem, may He answer you, and listen to your cry on this day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who has compassion on the earth!"

### michna 5
It happened in the times of Rabbi Halaphta and Rabbi Hanina ben Teradion, that a minister advanced to the reading-desk and finished the whole of the blessing without any [of the congregation] answering thereupon, "Amen:" [a minister called], "Sound, O priests! sound!" [the minister who said the prayers continued], "May he who answered our father Abraham on Mount Moriah answer you, and listen [favourably] to your prayer this day:" [a minister called] "Sound an alarm, sons of Aaron! sound an alarm!" [the minister who said the prayers continued], "May he who answered our ancestors on the Red Sea answer you, and listen [favourably] to your cry this day." When the sages were informed of this, they said, "This was not our custom, except at the eastern door [of the Temple], and on the Temple-mountain [Mount Moriah]."

### michna 6
On the three first fasts, the priests who had the weekly watch of the Temple fasted, but not the whole day; and the ministering priests did not fast at all. On the second three fasts, the priests on the weekly duty fasted the whole day; and the ministering priests fasted, but not the whole day. But on the last seven, both classes of priests fasted the whole day. Such is the opinion of R. Joshua; but the sages say, "The three first fasts were not kept by any of the said priests: on the second three, the priests who had the weekly duty used to fast, but not the whole day; and the officiating priests did not fast at all. On the last seven, the priests on the weekly duty fasted the whole day; and the officiating priests fasted, but not the whole day."

### michna 7
The priests on the weekly duty may drink wine at night, but not during the day; the officiating priests may not drink it either by day or night. The priests of the weekly watch, and the standing men are prohibited from shaving their beards, and washing their clothes; but, on Thursday, they are allowed to do so, in honour of the [approaching] Sabbath.

### michna 8
Wherever it is mentioned in "The Roll of Fasts," that "no lamentation and mourning is to be made" on certain days, it is also prohibited to do so on the day preceding, but allowed on the day following them; but Rabbi Yose says, "It is prohibited to do so on the day preceding, and on the day following; where it is said, that 'no fasts are to be kept thereon,' it is allowed to fast on the day preceding and following days." Rabbi Yose says, "It is prohibited on the preceding, but allowed on the following day."

### michna 9
Public fasts are not to be ordered to commence on a Thursday, in order not to raise the price of victuals in the markets; but the first fasts are to be on Monday, Thursday, and [the following] Monday; but the second three fasts may follow on Thursday, Monday, and [the following] Thursday. Rabbi Yose says, "Even as the first fasts are not to be commenced on Thursday, so also are the second and last fasts not to commence on that day."

### michna 10
Public fasts are not to be ordered to take place on the feast of new moon, nor on that of dedication and of lots [pureem]; but if the fast has been already commenced thereon, it need not be broken. Such is the opinion of Rabbon Gamaliel. Rabbi Meir says, "Although Rabbon Gamaliel has said that the fast need not be broken, he agrees that on these days they are not to fast the whole of the day; and thus is it with the [fast of the] ninth of Av, when it happens on a Friday."

>Credit : Sefaria Community Translation
>License : CC0