
### Part 1
<b>Say that they disagree</b> over the status of the Mediterranean Sea <b>with regard to impurity and purity,</b> but <b>with regard to Shabbat did you hear</b> that they disagree? <b>Rather, Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The contradiction between the two <i>baraitot</i> is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which prohibits bathing in the Mediterranean, is referring to a case <b>where one remained</b> in the water and thereby indicated that he bathed in the Mediterranean for its curative effects. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits bathing, is referring to a case where <b>one did not remain</b> in the water, and thereby indicated that he bathed in the Mediterranean for non-medical purposes.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And how did you establish</b> this <b>last</b> <i>baraita</i>? Do you say that it is referring to a case where <b>one did not remain</b> in the water? <b>If</b> it is referring to a case where <b>one did not remain</b> in the water, it would be permitted to bathe <b>even in water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may bathe</b> on Shabbat <b>in the waters of Tiberias, and in water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked, and in the Sodom Sea, and</b> this is <b>even though one has wounds on his head</b> that are healed by bathing in these waters. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case <b>where one did not remain</b> in the water, since it appears that he entered the water to cool himself. <b>However,</b> if <b>one remained</b> in the water it is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> the contradiction between the <i>baraita</i> that permits bathing in <b>the Great Sea</b> on Shabbat and the <i>baraita</i> that prohibits bathing in <b>the Great Sea</b> on Shabbat is <b>not difficult.</b> There is a distinction between the two. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits doing so, is referring <b>to</b> the <b>pure water in it,</b> i.e., the area in the Great Sea in which one bathes for pleasure during the week. <b>That</b> <i>baraita,</i> which prohibits bathing, is referring <b>to</b> the <b>polluted water in it,</b> which people enter only for medicinal purposes. <b>And</b> with regard to the contradiction between one statement with regard to the <b>water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked</b> and the other statement about <b>water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked,</b> it is <b>also not difficult.</b> There is a distinction between the two statements. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which prohibits bathing on Shabbat in water in which flax was soaked, is referring to a case <b>where one remained</b> in the water and thereby indicated that he was bathing for medicinal purposes. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits bathing on Shabbat in water in which flax was soaked, is referring to a case where <b>one did not remain</b> there. It is permitted to bathe in that water for non-medical purposes.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may not eat <i>eizoveyon</i> on Shabbat because healthy people do not eat it,</b> and therefore it is clear that anyone eating it is doing so for its medicinal value. <b>However, one may eat</b> a plant called <b><i>yo’ezer</i> and may drink <i>abuvro’e</i>.</b> Furthermore, <b>all</b> types of <b>food</b> that healthy people eat <b>may be eaten by a person</b> even <b>for medicinal</b> purposes. <b>And one may drink</b> all <b>drinks except for water from palm trees and a <i>kos ikarin</i> because they are</b> known as a remedy for <b>jaundice.</b> Therefore, it is prohibited to drink them on Shabbat for curative purposes. <b>However, one may drink palm tree water</b> on Shabbat <b>in order</b> to quench <b>his thirst, and one may smear <i>ikarin</i> oil</b> on himself <b>for non-medical purposes.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> Unspecified <b>hyssop</b> mentioned in the Torah is called <b><i>abarta bar hamag</i></b> in Babylonia, and <b><i>eizoveyon</i></b> is called <b><i>abarta bar hing</i>. Ulla said:</b> The hyssop mentioned in the Torah is <b>white sage.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Ulla happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda. They brought white sage before him. He said: This is the hyssop that is written in the Torah. Rav Pappi said:</b> Hyssop is the root called <b><i>shumeshuk</i>. Rav Yirmeya of Difti said: In accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Pappi it is reasonable, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>The mitzva of hyssop</b> is that one take <b>three branches each with three stems, and <i>shumeshuk</i> is</b> the species <b>that is found with that</b> configuration of three stems on each of its branches. The Gemara says: <b>For what purpose do</b> people <b>eat it?</b> It is eaten <b>for</b> curing <b>intestinal worms. And with what is it eaten?</b> It is eaten <b>with seven black dates. From what do</b> worms <b>come into being</b> in the intestines? They come into being <b>from</b> eating <b>barley flour from a vessel that held</b> the flour <b>for forty days</b> since it was ground.

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: <b>However, one may eat</b> the <b><i>yo’ezer</i></b> plant. The Gemara asks: <b>What is <i>yo’ezer</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: It is the vegetable known as <b><i>potnak</i></b>. <b>For what is it eaten?</b> It is eaten <b>to</b> cure <b>liver worms. With what is it eaten?</b> It is eaten with <b>seven white dates. From what do</b> worms <b>come into being</b> in the liver? <b>From</b> eating <b>raw meat with water on an empty</b> stomach, <b>and from</b> eating <b>fatty meat on an empty</b> stomach, <b>and from</b> eating <b>ox meat on an empty</b> stomach, <b>and from</b> eating <b>nuts on an empty</b> stomach, <b>and from eating fenugreek shoots on an empty</b> stomach <b>and drinking water thereafter.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And if</b> one has liver worms but does <b>not</b> have any <i>potnak</i> handy, or if one has taken <i>potnak</i> and it did not help, <b>he should swallow white cress. And if</b> he does <b>not</b> have that or if it did not help him, <b>he should sit in fast, and take fatty meat and place it on coals and suck</b> the <b>bone and swallow vinegar. And some say:</b> One should <b>not</b> drink <b>vinegar because it is harmful to the liver. And if</b> none of those options are available, <b>let</b> one <b>take the sawdust that was scraped</b> from the shell <b>of a thorn bush from top to bottom, and not from bottom to top,</b> as <b>perhaps</b> then the worms <b>will come out through his mouth. And let</b> one then <b>boil</b> the scrapings <b>in beer at twilight and the next day close his nostrils and drink</b> it. <b>And when he defecates, he should defecate on the trunk of a palm tree.</b>

### Part 8
We learned the mishna: <b>And one may drink <i>abuvro’e</i></b> on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>What is <i>abuvro’e</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: It is the plant known as <b><i>ḥumtareya.</i></b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is <i>ḥumtareya</i>?</b> It is that which is called <b>the lonely staff.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> purpose <b>is it used?</b> It is used <b>for</b> one who drank <b>exposed</b> water from which we suspect a snake drank and left behind its venom. <b>And if</b> one does <b>not</b> have the lonely staff, or if it was ineffective, <b>let</b> him <b>take five roses and five cups of beer and cook them together until there is a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> of liquid <b>and</b> then <b>drink</b> it.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Aḥadvoi bar Ami’s mother made</b> this remedy <b>for a certain man</b> who had drunk exposed water suspected of having venom in it. She took <b>one rose and one cup of beer</b> and <b>she boiled</b> them. <b>She gave it to him to drink, and lit the oven, and swept out the coals, and placed a brick inside it</b> on which he could sit and not get burned. <b>And something</b> that appeared <b>like a green leaf emerged,</b> i.e., he vomited the venom.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Avya said:</b> The remedy for one who has swallowed venom is to drink <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>of milk from a white goat. Rav Huna bar Yehuda said: Let</b> one <b>bring a sweet citron and make a hole in it, and fill it with honey, and place it among burning coals, and eat it. Rabbi Ḥanina said: Urine that is forty days old</b> is an effective remedy for several maladies: <b>A very small cupful</b> is beneficial in treating <b>a hornet</b> sting. <b>A quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> is beneficial in treating <b>a scorpion</b> bite. <b>Half a <i>log</i></b> is effective in treating one who drank <b>exposed</b> water. <b>A <i>log</i> is even effective</b> in counteracting <b>witchcraft. Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Water in which spinach was boiled <b>[<i>anigron</i>]</b>, <b>and</b> water in which <i>banagri</i> grass was boiled <b>[<i>avangar</i>]</b>, <b>and balsam are effective for both</b> one who drank <b>exposed</b> water <b>and</b> as an antidote <b>for witchcraft.</b>

### Part 11
<b>One who swallowed a snake should be fed hops in salt, and</b> then he should be made to <b>run</b> a distance of <b>three <i>mil</i>.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi saw a person who swallowed a snake,</b> and Rav Ashi <b>appeared</b> to that person <b>as a horseman.</b> Rav Shimi <b>fed him hops with salt and made him run in front of him for three <i>mil</i>, and</b> the snake <b>came out of him in pieces. Some say</b> that <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi</b> was the one who <b>swallowed a snake,</b> and <b>Elijah came</b> and <b>appeared to</b> Rav Ashi <b>as a horseman. He fed him hops with salt and made him run in front of him for three <i>mil</i>, and</b> the snake <b>came out of him in pieces. One who was bitten by a snake should have the fetus of a white donkey brought</b> to him<b>, and it should be torn open and placed on</b> the snakebite. The Gemara says: <b>And this applies</b> only when the mother does <b>not</b> have a <b>condition that will cause it to die within twelve months</b> [<b><i>tereifa</i>].</b> The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC