
### Part 1
<b>who eat and do nothing</b> to support themselves, and cause their husbands to commit the sin of theft. <b>And it is written: “I have smitten you with blight and mildew; the multitude of your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees has the palmerworm devoured”</b> (Amos 4:9). <b>And it is written: “That which the palmerworm has left the locust has eaten; and that which the locust has left the cankerworm has eaten; and that which the cankerworm has left the caterpillar has eaten”</b> (Joel 1:4). <b>And it is written: “And one snatches on the right hand, and is hungry; and he eats on the left hand, and is not satisfied; they eat every man the flesh of his own arm [<i>besar zero</i>’<i>o</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 9:19). <b>Do not read</b> it: <b>The flesh of his own arm [<i>besar zero</i>’<i>o</i>]; rather, the flesh of his own offspring [<i>besar zaro</i>].</b> All the punishments for theft listed above were explicitly mentioned in the verses.

### Part 2
Furthermore, the Sages said that <b>due to the sin of delay of justice,</b> i.e., judges delay issuing their rulings due to personal considerations, <b>and</b> for <b>distortion of justice,</b> i.e., judges intentionally distort their verdicts, <b>and</b> for <b>miscarriage of justice</b> that results from negligence, <b>and</b> for <b>dereliction in</b> the study of <b>Torah, violence and looting abound</b> in the world, <b>and pestilence and famine come, and people eat and are not sated, and they eat their bread</b> measured <b>by weight. As it is written: “And I will bring a sword upon you, that shall execute the vengeance of the covenant;</b> and you shall be gathered together within your cities; and I will send the pestilence among you; and you shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy” (Leviticus 26:25). <b>And covenant means nothing other than Torah, as it is stated: “If My covenant be not with day and night,</b> if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth” (Jeremiah 33:25). The study of Torah is the mitzva practiced both day and night. <b>And it is written</b> with regard to this punishment: <b>“When I break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake</b> your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight; and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied” (Leviticus 26:26). <b>And it is written: “Even because they rejected My ordinances,</b> and their soul abhorred My statutes” (Leviticus 26:43). All of these punishments result from breaching the covenant of the Torah and the perversion of justice.

### Part 3
<b>Due to the sin of an oath</b> taken <b>in vain and a false oath, and desecration of</b> God’s <b>name, and desecration of Shabbat, wild beasts abound</b> in the world, <b>and</b> domesticated <b>animals cease</b> to exist, <b>and human beings decrease</b> in number, <b>and the roads become desolate, as it is stated: “And if in spite of these [<i>be</i>’<i>eleh</i>] things you will not be corrected unto Me,</b> but will walk contrary unto Me casually” (Leviticus 26:23). <b>Do not read of these [<i>be</i>’<i>eleh</i>]; rather,</b> due to a vain <b>oath [<i>be</i>’<i>ala</i>]. And it is written</b> that the punishment for this is: <b>“And I will send the beast of the field among you,</b> which shall rob you of your children, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number; and your ways shall become desolate” (Leviticus 26:22). <b>And it is written with regard to a false oath: “And you shall not swear by My name falsely, so that you desecrate [<i>veḥillalta</i>] the name of your God:</b> I am the Lord” (Leviticus 19:12). <b>And it is written with regard to desecrating the name of God: “And you shall not desecrate [<i>teḥallelu</i>] My Holy Name”</b> (Leviticus 22:32). <b>And it is written with regard to desecrating Shabbat: “Every one that desecrates it [<i>meḥaleleha</i>] shall surely be put to death”</b> (Exodus 31:14). <b>And derive</b> by means of a verbal analogy [<i>gezera shava</i>] <b>desecration [<i>ḥillul</i>] of Shabbat from desecration [<i>ḥillul</i>] of a false oath.</b> Just as punishment for a false oath is desolation and wild beasts, one receives the same punishment for desecrating Shabbat and the name of God.

### Part 4
<b>Due to the sin of bloodshed, the Holy Temple is destroyed, and the Divine Presence leaves Israel, as it says: “So you shall not pollute</b> the land wherein you are; for blood, it pollutes the land; and no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. <b>And you shall not defile the land which you inhabit, in the midst of which I dwell;</b> for I the Lord dwell in the midst of the children of Israel” (Numbers 35:33–34). However, if <b>you defile</b> the land, <b>you will not inhabit it, and I will not dwell in it.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Due to the sin of prohibited sexual relations, and idol worship, and</b> failure to let the land <b>lie fallow</b> during <b>the Sabbatical and Jubilee Years, exile comes to the world and they exile</b> the Jewish people from their land, <b>and others come and settle in their place. As it is stated</b> with regard to illicit sexual relations: <b>“For all these abominations have the men of the land done,</b> that were before you, and the land is defiled; that the land expel not you also, when you defile it, as it expelled the nation that was before you” (Leviticus 18:27–28). <b>And it is written: “And the land was defiled, therefore I did visit the iniquity thereof upon it,</b> and the land expelled her inhabitants” (Leviticus 18:25). <b>And it is written: “That the land expel not you also, when you defile it,</b> as it expelled the nation that was before you.”

### Part 6
<b>And with regard to idol worship it is written: “And I will cast your carcasses</b> upon the carcasses of your idols” (Leviticus 26:30). <b>And it is written: “And I will bring your sanctuaries unto desolation,</b> and I will not smell the savor of your sweet odors” (Leviticus 26:31). <b>“And you will I scatter among the nations,</b> and I will draw out the sword after you; and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste” (Leviticus 26:33).

### Part 7
<b>With regard to</b> the sin of failure to observe <b>the Sabbatical and Jubilee Years it is written: “Then shall the land be paid her Sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate, and you are in your enemies’ land;</b> even then shall the land rest, and repay her Sabbaths” (Leviticus 26:34). <b>And it is written: “As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest;</b> even the rest which it had not in your Sabbaths, when you dwelt upon it” <b>(</b>Leviticus 26: 35).

### Part 8
<b>Due to the sin of vulgar speech, troubles abound, and harsh decrees are renewed, and the youth among the enemies of Israel,</b> a euphemistic reference to Israel, <b>die,</b> and <b>orphans and widows cry out</b> for help <b>and are not answered, as it is stated: “Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall He have compassion on their fatherless and widows; for everyone is ungodly and an evildoer, and every mouth speaks wantonness. For all this His anger is not turned away, but His hand is stretched out still”</b> (Isaiah 9:16).

### Part 9
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>But His hand is stretched out still? Rabbi Ḥanan bar Rava said: Everybody knows why the bride enters the wedding canopy.</b> There is no secret revealed. <b>Nevertheless, anyone who speaks vulgarly</b> about it, <b>even if they,</b> on High, <b>sealed for him a decree of seventy years of good</b> fortune<b>, they will reverse it to bad</b> fortune because of this sin. And <b>Rabba bar Sheila said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Anyone who speaks vulgarly, they deepen Gehenna for him, as it is stated: “The mouth that speaks perversity is a deep pit</b>: he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein<b>”</b> (Proverbs 22:14), i.e., Gehenna is deepened for one who speaks vulgarly. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Even</b> one <b>who hears</b> vulgar speech <b>and is silent</b> is punished, <b>as it is stated: “He that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein,”</b> even if he himself does not speak at all.

### Part 10
And in a similar vein, <b>Rav Oshaya said: Anyone who</b> prepares <b>himself to</b> commit <b>a sin, wounds and bruises emerge on him, as it is stated: “Sharp wounds for one devoted to evil</b>; so do stripes that reach the inward parts” (Proverbs 20:30). <b>And not only that, but</b> he <b>is sentenced to</b> suffer from the disease of <b>edema [<i>hidrokan</i>], as it is stated: So do stripes that reach the inward parts. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: A sign</b> indicating one who <b>committed</b> a sin is the disease <b><i>hidrokan</i>,</b> which afflicts the inner parts.

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There are three types of <i>hidrokan</i>:</b> The one that comes as punishment <b>for sin</b> is <b>thick; and</b> that which is the result <b>of hunger is swollen</b>, but not as thick; <b>and</b> the one caused <b>by witchcraft</b> is <b>thin,</b> and the flesh of the sick person becomes thin in other places.

### Part 12
The Gemara relates: <b>Shmuel HaKatan fell ill with</b> <i>hidrokan</i>. <b>He said: Master of the Universe, who will draw lots,</b> meaning, who will be able to determine that this <i>hidrokan</i> is not the consequence of sin? <b>He was cured. Abaye</b> also <b>fell ill with</b> <i>hidrokan</i>. <b>Rava</b> testified and <b>said</b> about him: <b>I know about Naḥmani,</b> Abaye, <b>that</b> he <b>starves himself</b> and that his <i>hidrokan</i> is the result of hunger. The Gemara relates that <b>Rava fell ill with</b> <i>hidrokan</i>, and they asked: <b>But Rava</b> did not starve himself, and there is no reason to suspect him of sin, and we cannot say that he contracted <i>hidrokan</i> because he did not relieve himself on time. Rava knew to relieve himself, as it is <b>he</b> who <b>said: More have been killed</b> due to the <b>chamber pot</b>, because they were not careful about relieving themselves in a timely manner, <b>than those swollen</b> due to <b>starvation.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rava is different because the Sages compel him</b> to remain in place <b>against his will while he</b> lectures. Since he could not relieve himself, he became sick with <i>hidrokan</i>.

### Part 13
On a related note, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>there are four signs: A sign of sin is <i>hidrokan</i>, a sign of gratuitous hatred is jaundice, a sign of arrogance is poverty,</b> and <b>a sign of slander is <i>askara</i>.</b>

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught: <i>Askara</i> comes to the world</b> as punishment

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC