
### Part 1
<b>On the third</b> day of the week, God <b>said to them the mitzva of setting boundaries</b> around Mount Sinai. <b>On the fourth</b> day of the week, the husbands and wives <b>separated</b> from one another. <b>And the Rabbis hold: On the second</b> day <b>of the week</b> the <b>New Moon was established,</b> and <b>on the second</b> day <b>of the week</b> God <b>did not say anything to them due to the weariness</b> caused by <b>their journey. On the third</b> day of the week, God <b>said to them: “And you shall be to Me</b> a kingdom of priests and a holy nation; these are the words that you shall speak to the children of Israel” (Exodus 19:6). <b>On the fourth</b> day of the week, God <b>said to them the mitzva of setting boundaries</b> around Mount Sinai. <b>On the fifth</b> day of the week, the husbands and wives <b>separated</b> from one another. <b>The Gemara raises an objection:</b> Doesn’t the verse state: “And the Lord said to Moses: Go to the people <b>and sanctify them today and tomorrow</b> and let them wash their garments” (Exodus 19:10), indicating that the husbands and wives were separated for only two days? This is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who said earlier that the separation was for three days.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> could have <b>said to you: Moses added one day</b> to the number of days that God commanded based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Moses did three things</b> based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception, and the Holy One, Blessed be He, agreed with him. He added one day</b> to the days of separation before the revelation at Sinai based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception. And he</b> totally <b>separated from</b> his <b>wife</b> after the revelation at Sinai. <b>And he broke the tablets</b> following the sin of the Golden Calf.

### Part 3
The Gemara discusses these cases: <b>He added one day</b> based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception. What</b> source <b>did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? He reasoned that since the Holy One, Blessed be He, said: “Sanctify them <b>today and tomorrow,”</b> the juxtaposition of the two days teaches that <b>today</b> is <b>like tomorrow; just as tomorrow</b> the men and women will separate for that day <b>and</b> the <b>night</b> preceding <b>it, so too, today</b> requires separation for the day <b>and</b> the <b>night</b> preceding <b>it.</b> Since God spoke to him in the morning, <b>and the night of that day</b> already <b>passed,</b> Moses concluded: <b>Derive from it</b> that separation must be in effect for <b>two days besides that day.</b> Therefore, he extended the mitzva of separation by one day. <b>And from where do we</b> derive that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, agreed with his</b> interpretation? It is derived from the fact that the <b>Divine Presence did not rest</b> upon Mount Sinai <b>until Shabbat morning,</b> as Moses had determined.

### Part 4
<b>And he</b> totally <b>separated from</b> his <b>wife</b> after the revelation at Sinai. <b>What</b> source <b>did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? <b>He reasoned an <i>a fortiori</i> inference by himself</b> and <b>said: If Israel, with whom the Divine Presence spoke only one time and</b> God <b>set a</b> specific <b>time for them</b> when the Divine Presence would be revealed, and yet <b>the Torah stated: “Prepare yourselves</b> for three days, <b>do not approach</b> a woman” (Exodus 19:15); <b>I, with whom the Divine Presence speaks all the time and</b> God <b>does not set a</b> specific <b>time for me, all the more so</b> that I must separate from my wife. <b>And from where do we</b> derive that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, agreed with him? As it is written</b> after the revelation at Sinai: <b>“Go say to them: Return to your tents”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:26), meaning to your homes and wives. <b>And afterward it is written</b> that God told Moses: <b>“And you, stand here with Me”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:27), indicating that Moses was not allowed to return home, as he must constantly be prepared to receive the word of God. <b>And some say</b> a different source indicating that God agreed with his reasoning. When Aaron and Miriam criticized Moses’ separation from his wife, God said: <b>“With him do I speak mouth to mouth,</b> even manifestly, and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord does he behold; why then were you not afraid to speak against My servant, against Moses?” (Numbers 12:8). This indicates that God agreed with his reasoning.

### Part 5
And <b>he broke the tablets</b> following the sin of the Golden Calf. <b>What</b> source <b>did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? Moses <b>said: With</b> regard to the <b>Paschal</b> lamb, <b>which is</b> only <b>one of six hundred and thirteen mitzvot, the Torah stated:</b> “And the Lord said unto Moses and Aaron: This is the ordinance of the Paschal offering; <b>no alien shall eat of it”</b> (Exodus 12:43), referring not only to gentiles, but to apostate Jews as well. Regarding the tablets, which represented <b>the entire Torah, and Israel</b> at that moment were <b>apostates,</b> as they were worshipping the calf, <b>all the more so</b> are they not worthy of receiving the Torah. <b>And from where do we</b> derive that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, agreed with his</b> reasoning? <b>As it is stated:</b> “The first tablets <b>which you broke [<i>asher shibarta</i>]”</b> (Exodus 34:1), <b>and Reish Lakish said:</b> The word <i>asher</i> is an allusion to the phrase: <b>May your strength be true [<i>yishar koḥakha</i></b>] <b>due to the fact that you broke</b> the tablets.

### Part 6
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an additional difficulty from the verse: <b>“And be prepared for the third day,</b> for on the third day God will descend onto Mount Sinai before the eyes of the entire nation” (Exodus 19:11). This indicates that God said that the Torah would be given on the third day after two days of separation. This is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Didn’t we say</b> that <b>Moses added one day</b> based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof against this from what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>. That which is stated in the Torah: “For on the <b>third</b> day,” means <b>the third</b> day <b>of the month and the third</b> day <b>of the week.</b> Apparently, the New Moon was on Sunday. This is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The Rabbis</b> could have <b>said to you: Whose</b> is the opinion in <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>? It is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> Therefore, this <i>baraita</i> poses no difficulty to the opinion of the Rabbis.

### Part 7
According to the opinion of the Rabbis, that day was the <b>third</b> day of <b>what</b> reckoning? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It is written: <b>“And Moses reported the words of the people to the Lord”</b> (Exodus 19:8). <b>And it is written</b> immediately thereafter: “And God said to Moses: Behold I will come to you in a thick cloud so that the people will hear when I speak with you, and they will also believe in you forever. <b>And Moses told the words of the people to the Lord”</b> (Exodus 19:9).

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What did the Holy One, Blessed be He, say to Moses, and what did Moses say to Israel, and what did Israel say to Moses, and what did Moses report to the Almighty?</b> The verses do not elaborate on the content of God’s command to Moses, which Moses then told the people and which they accepted. It must be that <b>this</b> refers to <b>the mitzva of setting boundaries,</b> which Moses told the people and which they accepted. He then went back and reported to God that the people accepted the mitzva; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: At first, he explained</b> the <b>punishment</b> and the hardship involved in receiving the Torah, <b>as it is written: “And Moses reported [</b><i>vayashev</i><b>],”</b> which is interpreted homiletically as: <b>Matters that shatter [</b><i>meshabbevin</i><b>]</b> (Rav Hai Gaon) <b>a person’s mind; and, ultimately, he explained its reward, as it is written: “And Moses told [</b><i>vayagged</i><b>],”</b> which is interpreted homiletically as: <b>Matters that draw a person’s heart like <i>aggada</i>. And some say</b> that <b>at first, he explained its reward, as it is written: “And Moses reported,”</b> which is interpreted homiletically as: <b>Matters that restore [<i>meshivin</i>]</b> and calm <b>a person’s mind; and ultimately, he explained its punishment, as it is written: “And Moses told,” matters that are as difficult for a person as wormwood [<i>gidin</i>].</b>

### Part 9
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b>sixth</b> was <b>the sixth</b> day <b>of the month</b> and <b>the sixth</b> day <b>of the week.</b> This is also <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> is <b>also</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> But if so, according to the opinion of the Rabbis, that day was the <b>sixth</b> day of <b>what</b> reckoning? <b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC