
### Part 1
<b>as people</b> who are not so precise in their formulation <b>say:</b> Four or five. <b>And if one</b> so <b>desires, he may clear even more. And what</b> then is the meaning of: <b>However,</b> one may <b>not</b> move these items to create space in <b>the storeroom?</b> It means <b>that one may not finish</b> moving the baskets out of the <b>entire</b> storeroom, <b>lest he come to level</b> the floor by filling the <b>holes. However, one may begin</b> removing baskets from the storeroom. <b>And whose</b> opinion is cited in this mishna? It is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who is not</b> of the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not</b> use <b>the storeroom</b> for the <b>first time.</b> If one has never taken supplies from this storeroom, he may not begin moving baskets from it. <b>However, he makes a path in it, so that he will</b> be able to <b>enter and exit.</b> The Gemara asks: He <b>makes a path in it? Did you not say: One may not</b> use <b>the storeroom</b> for the <b>first time?</b> The Gemara answers that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying as follows: He makes a path in it</b> by moving baskets <b>with his feet, as he enters</b> the storehouse <b>and as he exits.</b> He may not move the basket with his hand.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>piled grain, if one had started</b> to take grain from the pile <b>on Shabbat eve, it is permitted to satisfy his needs from it on Shabbat, and if not, it is prohibited to satisfy his needs from it on Shabbat;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon. Rabbi Aḥa permits</b> doing so in any case. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>On the contrary;</b> it is Rabbi Shimon who is lenient with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of set-aside. <b>Rather,</b> emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say:</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Aḥa. Rabbi Shimon permits</b> doing so in any case.

### Part 4
<b>It was taught: How much is</b> the <b>measure of piled grain</b> needed to confer the legal status of a storeroom? <b>A half-kor. Rav Naḥumi bar Zekharya raised a dilemma before Abaye:</b> The <b>measure of piled grain, how much</b> is it? Abaye said to him that <b>they said: The measure of piled grain is a half-<i>kor</i>.</b>

### Part 5
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>These four or five baskets, which</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>stated</b> in the mishna, is he saying the following: <b>Four or five baskets, yes,</b> one may move them, <b>more</b> baskets, <b>no,</b> one may not move them? This would indicate <b>that it is preferable to minimize</b> the <b>walking</b> distance because fewer baskets results in less walking in and out of the storeroom. <b>Or perhaps it is preferable to minimize</b> the size of the <b>burden</b> by carrying smaller baskets, as long as the total measure of all that one carries does not exceed the capacity of five large baskets?

### Part 6
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma, <b>as one</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>taught: One</b> may <b>move even four or five baskets</b> containing <b>jugs of oil and jugs of wine. And it was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: One may move them even <b>in ten and in fifteen</b> baskets. <b>What, is it not that</b> the two <i>baraitot</i> <b>disagree</b> concerning <b>the following</b> matter, <b>as this Sage</b> in the first <i>baraita</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>it is preferable to minimize</b> the <b>walking</b> distance by moving fewer, heavier baskets, <b>and this Sage</b> in the second <i>baraita</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>it is preferable to minimize</b> the size of the <b>burden</b> by moving lighter baskets over the course of several trips.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, everyone agrees that it is preferable to minimize</b> the <b>walking</b> distance. <b>And do you hold</b> that: <b>In ten and in fifteen, is referring to baskets? It is referring to jugs,</b> and there is no dispute between the <i>baraitot</i>. <b>And</b> this is <b>not difficult: This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which spoke of moving five, is referring to a case <b>in which</b> the jugs <b>are taken one by one in</b> each <b>basket. And that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which speaks of moving ten, is referring to a case <b>in which</b> the jugs <b>are taken two by two in</b> each basket. <b>And that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which speaks of moving fifteen, is referring to a case <b>in which</b> the jugs <b>are taken three by three,</b> e.g., in the case of <b>the small jugs of Harpanya.</b>

### Part 8
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>These four or five baskets, which</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>stated</b> in the mishna, is he saying that one may move only four or five baskets <b>even though he has many guests? Or perhaps, it is all according to</b> the number <b>of guests,</b> and if there are more guests one may move more baskets. <b>And if you say it is all according to the</b> number of <b>guests,</b> does <b>one man move</b> the baskets to make room <b>for all of them, or perhaps each and every man moves</b> a basket to make room <b>for himself?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from that which <b>Rabba said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya said: Once Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>went to a certain place and saw</b> that the <b>place was</b> too <b>crowded for the students. And he went to the field and found a field full of bundles</b> of grain, <b>and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>cleared the bundles</b> from <b>the whole field in its entirety. Conclude from it</b> that the quantity that can be moved <b>is all according to the</b> number of <b>guests.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Hoshaya said: Once Rabbi Ḥiyya went to a certain place and saw</b> that the <b>place was</b> too <b>crowded for the students. And he went to the field and found a field full of bundles</b> of grain, <b>and Rabbi Ḥiyya cleared the bundles</b> from <b>the whole field in its entirety. Conclude from it</b> that the quantity that can be moved <b>is all according to the</b> number of <b>guests.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara continues: <b>And still you have a dilemma.</b> Does <b>one man move</b> the baskets to make room <b>for all of them, or perhaps each and every man moves</b> baskets to make room <b>for himself?</b>

### Part 12
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this question. We learned: <b>And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>cleared the bundles.</b> Apparently, one person moved the bundles to make room for the others. The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> your opinion, do you think <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, the spiritual leader of his generation, <b>cleared the bundles himself? Rather, he ordered</b> others to do so, <b>and</b> he thereby <b>cleared the bundles. And actually, each and every one moves</b> a bundle to make room <b>for himself.</b>

### Part 13
We learned in the mishna: One may move baskets of produce <b>due to the guests</b> and in order to prevent the suspension of Torah study in the study hall. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Hospitality</b> toward <b>guests is as great as rising early</b> to go <b>to the study hall, as</b> the mishna equates them <b>and teaches: Due to the guests and due to suspension of</b> Torah study in <b>the study hall. And Rav Dimi from Neharde’a says:</b> Hospitality toward guests is <b>greater than rising early to the study hall, as it teaches: Due to the guests, and</b> only <b>afterward: And due to suspension of</b> Torah study in <b>the study hall. Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said</b> on a related note: <b>Hospitality</b> toward <b>guests is greater than receiving the Divine Presence, as</b> when Abraham invited his guests <b>it is written: “And he said: Lord, if now I have found favor in Your sight, please pass not</b> from Your servant” (Genesis 18:3). Abraham requested that God, the Divine Presence, wait for him while he tended to his guests appropriately. <b>Rabbi Elazar said: Come and see that the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is not like that of flesh and blood. The attribute of flesh and blood</b> people is such that <b>a less significant</b> person <b>is unable to say to a more significant</b> person: <b>Wait until I come to you, while with regard to the Holy One, Blessed be He, it is written: “And he said: Lord, if now I have found favor</b> in Your sight, please pass not from Your servant.” Abraham requested that God wait for him due to his guests.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Yehuda bar Sheila said</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> There are <b>six matters a person enjoys</b> the <b>profits of in this world, and</b> nevertheless <b>the principal exists for him for the World-to-Come, and they are: Hospitality</b> toward <b>guests, and visiting</b> the <b>sick, and consideration</b> during <b>prayer,</b> and <b>rising early to the study hall, and one who raises his sons to</b> engage <b>in Torah study, and one who judges another favorably,</b> giving him the benefit of the doubt.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? And did we not learn</b> in a mishna: <b>These</b> are the <b>matters that a person does them and enjoys their profits in this world, and</b> nevertheless <b>the principal exists for him for the World-to-Come, and they are: Honoring one’s father and mother, and acts of loving kindness, and bringing peace between a person and another, and Torah study is equal to all of them.</b> By inference: <b>These</b> matters, <b>yes,</b> one enjoys their profits in this world and the principal exists for him in the World-to-Come; <b>other matters, no.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC