
### Part 1
<b>who wagered with each other</b> and <b>said: Anyone who will go and aggravate Hillel</b> to the point that he reprimands him, <b>will take four-hundred</b> <i>zuz</i>. <b>One of them said: I will aggravate him. That day</b> that he chose to bother Hillel <b>was Shabbat eve, and Hillel was washing</b> the hair on <b>his head. He went and passed the entrance to</b> Hillel’s <b>house</b> and in a demeaning manner <b>said: Who here is Hillel, who here is Hillel?</b> Hillel <b>wrapped himself</b> in a dignified garment <b>and went out to greet him. He said to him: My son, what do you seek? He said to him: I have a question to ask.</b> Hillel <b>said to him: Ask, my son, ask.</b> The man asked him: <b>Why are the heads of Babylonians oval?</b> He was alluding to and attempting to insult Hillel, who was Babylonian. <b>He said to him: My son, you have asked a significant question.</b> The reason is <b>because they do not have clever midwives.</b> They do not know how to shape the child’s head at birth.

### Part 2
That man <b>went and waited one hour,</b> a short while, <b>returned</b> to look for Hillel, <b>and said: Who here is Hillel, who here is Hillel?</b> Again, Hillel <b>wrapped himself and went out to greet him.</b> Hillel <b>said to him: My son, what do you seek?</b> The man <b>said to him: I have a question to ask. He said to him: Ask, my son, ask.</b> The man asked: <b>Why are the eyes of the residents of Tadmor bleary [<i>terutot</i>]?</b> Hillel <b>said to him: My son, you have asked a significant question.</b> The reason is <b>because they live among the sands</b> and the sand gets into their eyes.

### Part 3
Once again the man <b>went, waited one hour, returned, and said: Who here is Hillel, who here is Hillel?</b> Again, <b>he,</b> Hillel, <b>wrapped himself and went out to greet him. He said to him: My son, what do you seek? He said to him: I have a question to ask. He said to him: Ask, my son, ask.</b> The man asked: <b>Why do Africans have wide feet?</b> Hillel <b>said to him: You have asked a significant question.</b> The reason is <b>because they live in marshlands</b> and their feet widened to enable them to walk through those swampy areas.

### Part 4
That man <b>said to him: I have many</b> more <b>questions to ask, but I am afraid lest you get angry.</b> Hillel <b>wrapped himself and sat before him,</b> and <b>he said to him: All of</b> the <b>questions that you have to ask, ask</b> them. The man got angry and <b>said to him: Are you Hillel whom they call</b> the <b><i>Nasi</i> of Israel? He said to him: Yes. He said to him: If</b> it <b>is you,</b> then <b>may there not be many like you in Israel.</b> Hillel <b>said to him: My son, for what</b> reason do you say this? The man <b>said to him: Because I lost four hundred <i>zuz</i> because of you.</b> Hillel <b>said to him: Be vigilant of your spirit</b> and avoid situations of this sort. <b>Hillel is worthy of having you lose four hundred <i>zuz</i> and</b> another <b>four hundred <i>zuz</i> on his account, and Hillel will not get upset.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving one gentile who came before Shammai.</b> The gentile <b>said to Shammai: How many Torahs do you have? He said to him: Two, the Written Torah and the Oral Torah.</b> The gentile <b>said to him:</b> With regard to <b>the Written</b> Torah, <b>I believe you, but</b> with regard to <b>the Oral</b> Torah, <b>I do not believe you. Convert me on condition that you will teach me</b> only the <b>Written Torah.</b> Shammai <b>scolded him and cast him out with reprimand.</b> The same gentile <b>came before Hillel,</b> who <b>converted him</b> and began teaching him Torah. <b>On the first day, he</b> showed him the letters of the alphabet and <b>said to him: <i>Alef</i>, <i>bet</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>dalet</i>. The next day he reversed</b> the order of the letters and told him that an <i>alef</i> is a <i>tav</i> and so on. The convert <b>said to him: But yesterday you did not tell me that.</b> Hillel <b>said to him:</b> You see that it is impossible to learn what is written without relying on an oral tradition. <b>Didn’t you rely on me?</b> Therefore, you should <b>also rely on me</b> with regard to the matter <b>of the Oral</b> Torah, and accept the interpretations that it contains.

### Part 6
There was <b>another incident involving one gentile who came before Shammai</b> and <b>said to</b> Shammai: <b>Convert me on condition that you teach me the entire Torah while I am standing on one foot.</b> Shammai <b>pushed him</b> away <b>with the builder’s cubit in his hand.</b> This was a common measuring stick and Shammai was a builder by trade. The same gentile <b>came before Hillel. He converted him</b> and <b>said to him:</b> That <b>which is hateful to you do not do to another; that is the entire Torah, and the rest is its interpretation. Go study.</b>

### Part 7
There was <b>another incident involving one gentile who was passing behind the study hall</b> and <b>heard the voice of a teacher who was</b> teaching Torah to his students and <b>saying</b> the verse: <b>“And these are the garments which they shall make: A breastplate, and an <i>efod,</i></b> and a robe, and a tunic of checkered work, a mitre, and a girdle” (Exodus 28:4). <b>The gentile said: These</b> garments, <b>for whom are they</b> designated? The students <b>said to him: For the High Priest. The gentile said to himself: I will go and convert so that they will install me as High Priest. He came before Shammai</b> and <b>said to him: Convert me on condition that you install me</b> as High Priest. Shammai <b>pushed him with the builder’s cubit in his hand. He came before Hillel; he converted him.</b>

### Part 8
Hillel <b>said to him,</b> to the convert: <b>Is it not</b> the way of the world that <b>only one who knows the protocols [<i>takhsisei</i>]</b> of royalty <b>is appointed king? Go</b> and <b>learn the royal protocols</b> by engaging in Torah study. <b>He went and read</b> the Bible. <b>When he reached</b> the verse which says: <b>“And the common man that draws near shall be put to death”</b> (Numbers 1:51), the convert <b>said to</b> Hillel: <b>With regard to whom is the verse speaking?</b> Hillel <b>said to him: Even with regard to David, king of Israel. The convert reasoned an <i>a fortiori</i> inference himself: If the Jewish people are called God’s children, and due to the love that God loved them he called them: “Israel is My son, My firstborn”</b> (Exodus 4:22), and nevertheless <b>it is written about them: And the common man that draws near shall be put to death; a mere convert who came</b> without merit, <b>with</b> nothing more than <b>his staff and traveling bag, all the more so</b> that this applies to him, as well.

### Part 9
The convert <b>came before Shammai</b> and <b>told him</b> that he retracts his demand to appoint him High Priest, saying: <b>Am I at all worthy to be High Priest? Is it not written in the Torah: And the common man that draws near shall be put to death? He came before Hillel</b> and <b>said to him: Hillel the patient, may blessings rest upon your head as you brought me under the wings of the Divine Presence.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Eventually, the three</b> converts <b>gathered together</b> in <b>one place,</b> and <b>they said: Shammai’s impatience sought to drive us from the world; Hillel’s patience brought us beneath the wings of the Divine Presence.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara continues discussing the conduct of the Sages, citing that <b>Reish Lakish said: What</b> is the meaning of <b>that which is written: “And the faith of your times shall be a strength of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge,</b> the fear of the Lord is his treasure” (Isaiah 33:6)? <b>Faith; that is the order of <i>Zera</i>’<i>im</i>, Seeds,</b> in the Mishna, because a person has faith in God and plants his seeds (Jerusalem Talmud). <b>Your times; that is the order of <i>Moed</i>, Festival,</b> which deals with the various occasions and Festivals that occur throughout the year. <b>Strength; that is the order of <i>Nashim</i>, Women. Salvations; that is the order of <i>Nezikin</i>, Damages,</b> as one who is being pursued is rescued from the hands of his pursuer. <b>Wisdom; that is the order of <i>Kodashim</i>, Consecrated Items. And knowledge; that is the order of <i>Teharot</i>, Purity,</b> which is particularly difficult to master. <b>And even</b> if a person studies and masters all of these, <b>“the fear of the Lord is his treasure,”</b> it is preeminent.

### Part 11
With regard to the same verse, <b>Rava said:</b> After departing from this world, <b>when a person is brought to judgment</b> for the life he lived in this world, <b>they say to him</b> in the order of that verse: Did <b>you conduct business faithfully?</b> Did <b>you designate times for Torah</b> study? Did <b>you engage in procreation? Did you await salvation? Did you engage</b> in the dialectics of <b>wisdom</b> or understand <b>one matter from another? And, nevertheless,</b> beyond all these, <b>if the fear of the Lord is his treasure, yes,</b> he is worthy, and <b>if not, no,</b> none of these accomplishments have any value. There is <b>a parable</b> that illustrates this. <b>A person who said to his emissary: Bring a <i>kor</i> of wheat up to the attic for me</b> to store there. The messenger <b>went and brought it up for him. He said to the emissary:</b> Did <b>you mix a <i>kav</i> of <i>ḥomton</i>,</b> a preservative to keep away worms, <b>into it for me? He said to him: No. He said to him:</b> If so, it would have been <b>preferable had you not brought it up.</b> Of what use is worm-infested wheat? Likewise, Torah and mitzvot without the fear of God are of no value.

### Part 12
On a related note, the Gemara cites a <i>halakha</i> that was <b>taught</b> in <b>the school</b> of <b>Rabbi Yishmael: A person</b> who sells wheat <b>may,</b> <i>ab initio</i>, <b>mix a <i>kav</i> of <i>ḥomton</i> into a <i>kor</i> of grain and need not be concerned</b> that by selling it all at the price of grain he will be guilty of theft, as the <i>kav</i> of <i>ḥomton</i> is essential for the preservation of the wheat.

### Part 13
<b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said: Any person who has Torah in him but does not have</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC