
### Part 1
Even an inanimate object can move a source of impurity in that way. And if the food and drink <b>tipped the scales, they</b> remain <b>ritually pure.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>is that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All impure items that move</b> other objects remain <b>pure,</b> meaning that an object does not become impure if moved by a source of impurity, <b>except for movement by a <i>zav</i>, which has no counterpart in the whole Torah in its entirety? Let us say</b> that this is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as if</b> it were <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, there is also</b> the case of <b>idolatry.</b> In his opinion, idolatry also transmits impurity to an object by moving it. The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, teach: <i>Zav</i> and everything similar to it.</b> According to Rabbi Akiva, just as a menstruating woman falls into that category, so too does an idol.

### Part 2
The dilemma that was cited incidental to an earlier discussion is examined here in depth. <b>Rav Ḥama bar Guria raised a dilemma: Does idolatry have</b> the capacity to transmit impurity through <b>limbs or does it not</b> have the capacity to transmit impurity <b>through limbs?</b> The Gemara narrows the parameters of the dilemma. In a situation <b>where a common</b> unskilled <b>person can restore it</b> to its original form, <b>do not raise the dilemma, as</b> in that case it is certainly <b>considered to be attached</b> and is not considered broken. The case <b>where you</b> could <b>raise the dilemma</b> is <b>where a common</b> unskilled <b>person cannot restore it</b> to its original form. <b>What</b> is the ruling in that case? The two sides of the dilemma are: Do we say that <b>since a common</b> unskilled <b>person cannot restore it,</b> it is <b>considered broken? Or perhaps</b> we say that <b>it is not lacking</b> anything? Idolatry can only be nullified by breaking it in a case where, as a result, it is incomplete. <b>And some raise this dilemma in</b> another <b>direction</b> based on a different assumption: In a situation <b>where a common</b> unskilled <b>person cannot restore it</b> to its original form, <b>do not raise the dilemma, as</b> in that case it is certainly <b>considered to be broken. When you</b> could <b>raise the dilemma</b> is in a situation <b>where a common</b> unskilled <b>person can restore it</b> to its original form. <b>What</b> is the ruling in that case? The two sides of the dilemma are: Do we say that <b>since a common</b> unskilled <b>person can restore it,</b> it is <b>considered attached? Or perhaps</b> we say that <b>at present, it is in pieces and permitted?</b> No resolution was found for either version of this dilemma. Therefore, <b>let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥadvoi bar Ami raised a dilemma: What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>idolatry</b> that is <b>less than an olive-bulk? Rav Yosef strongly objected to this:</b> With regard <b>to what</b> use was this dilemma raised? <b>If you say</b> it was raised with regard <b>to the matter of the prohibition</b> of idolatry, <b>let it only be</b> like <b>Zevuv, the Baal of Ekron,</b> which was the size and form of a fly, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: <b>“And they made Baal Berit into their god”</b> (Judges 8:33). The Sages said that <b>this is</b> referring to <b>Zevuv, the Baal of Ekron.</b> It <b>teaches that each and every</b> person <b>made an image of his god and placed it in his pocket. When he remembered it, he removed it from his pocket and embraced and kissed it.</b> Apparently, even idolatry the size of a fly falls under the rubric of the prohibition of idolatry. <b>Rather,</b> the dilemma is: <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to the matter of impurity?</b> The two sides of the dilemma are as follows: <b>Since</b> an idol <b>is juxtaposed to a creeping animal, just as a creeping animal</b> transmits impurity when it is <b>a lentil-bulk, so too, idolatry</b> transmits impurity when it is <b>a lentil-bulk. Or perhaps</b> idolatry <b>is juxtaposed to a corpse,</b> and <b>just as a corpse</b> transmits impurity only <b>when</b> it is at least <b>an olive-bulk, so too, idolatry</b> transmits impurity only <b>when</b> it is at least <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Avya said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabba bar Ulla</b> who said: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from <b>that</b> which <b>was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Idolatry</b> that is <b>less than an olive-bulk has no impurity at all, as it is stated:</b> “And he brought out the <i>ashera</i> from the house of the Lord, outside Jerusalem, to the brook of Kidron, and burned it at the brook of Kidron, and stamped it into powder, <b>and cast its powder upon the graves of the common people”</b> (II Kings 23:6). <b>Just as a corpse</b> transmits impurity when it is <b>an olive-bulk, so too, idolatry</b> transmits impurity when it is <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara now asks a general question: <b>And</b> according to <b>the Rabbis,</b> with regard <b>to what <i>halakha</i> was</b> idolatry <b>juxtaposed to a creeping animal?</b> The juxtaposition establishes that like a creeping animal, <b>it does not transmit impurity through carrying.</b> The juxtaposition <b>to a menstruating woman</b> establishes that like a menstruating woman, it has the capacity to transmit impurity through <b>limbs.</b> The juxtaposition <b>to a corpse</b> establishes that it <b>does not transmit impurity when</b> it is <b>a lentil-bulk.</b> The Gemara suggests: Let us <b>say</b> that all of these juxtapositions come <b>to</b> teach <b>a stringency.</b> With regard <b>to what <i>halakha</i> did the Torah juxtapose</b> idolatry <b>to a creeping animal?</b> It is <b>to</b> establish that it <b>transmits impurity when</b> it is <b>a lentil-bulk.</b> The juxtaposition of idolatry <b>to a menstruating woman</b> is <b>to</b> establish that it <b>transmits impurity via a very heavy stone;</b> and <b>the Torah juxtaposed</b> it <b>to a corpse to</b> establish that it <b>transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by a tent,</b> all of which are stringencies that exist with regard to those types of impurity. The Gemara answers: <b>The impurity of idolatry is by rabbinic law. And</b> whenever there are two possibilities with regard to a rabbinic decree, <b>a leniency and a stringency, we juxtapose</b> to establish the <b>lenient</b> possibility, and <b>we do not juxtapose to</b> establish <b>the stringent</b> possibility.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This is another mishna that digresses from the central topic of this tractate. It, too, is based on an allusion from the Bible. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that the ship is ritually pure,</b> in the sense that it cannot become impure? <b>As it is stated: “The way of a ship in the midst of the sea”</b> (Proverbs 30:19).

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The allusion in the mishna requires clarification. The verse appears to state the <b>obvious.</b> Of course <b>a ship is in the midst of the sea.</b> Rather, <b>this</b> verse <b>teaches us</b> an allusion that the legal status of a boat is <b>like</b> that of <b>the sea. Just as the sea is ritually pure</b> and cannot become impure, <b>so too, a boat is ritually pure</b> and cannot become impure. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Ḥananya says:</b> This <i>halakha</i> <b>is derived from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a sack,</b> as the impurity of wooden vessels is likened to the impurity of a sack. <b>Just as a sack,</b> which can become ritually impure, <b>is carried</b> both <b>full and empty, so too, any</b> object that <b>is carried</b> both <b>full and empty</b> can become ritually impure. This is <b>to exclude a ship,</b> which <b>is not carried</b> on land <b>full and empty,</b> as due to its weight it cannot be carried full.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> the two reasons? The halakhic ruling according to both is that a ship cannot become impure. The Gemara explains: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>a ship made from earthenware</b> or from any material other than wood. According to <b>the one who said</b> that it is derived from the verse: <b>“A ship in the midst of the sea,” this</b> boat is <b>also in the midst of the sea.</b> However, <b>according to the one who said</b> that it is derived from the <i>halakha</i> of a <b>sack,</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies only to <b>those</b> materials <b>that are written</b> in the same verse <b>together with sack</b> and are likened to it. <b>If it is carried</b> both <b>full and empty, yes,</b> it can become impure; and if it can <b>not</b> be carried both full and empty, <b>no,</b> it cannot become impure. <b>However, an earthenware ship</b> can become impure <b>even though it is not carried</b> both <b>full and empty.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is a difference between them regarding a <b>Jordan ship,</b> which is a small boat used on the Jordan River. <b>According to the one who said</b> that it is derived from the verse: <b>“A ship in the midst of the sea,” this is also a ship in the midst of the sea.</b> A river is pure like the sea and the boat will remain pure. <b>According to the one who said</b> that it is derived from the <i>halakha</i> of a sack, and in order to become impure it must be <b>carried full and empty, this is also carried</b> both <b>full and empty,</b> and can become ritually impure. <b>As Rabbi Ḥanina ben Akavya said: For what</b> reason did <b>they say that a Jordan ship can become impure? Because they load it on dry land</b> and carry it on land <b>and</b> then <b>lower it into the water.</b> It is carried on land when full. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: One should never prevent himself from</b> attending <b>the study hall for even one moment, as this mishna</b> which states that a Jordan ship can become ritually impure <b>was taught for several years in the study hall, but its reason was not revealed until Rabbi Ḥanina ben Akavya came and explained it.</b>

### Part 10
Following Rav’s statement, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: One should never prevent himself from</b> attending <b>the study hall or from</b> engaging in <b>matters of Torah, even at the moment of death, as it is stated: “This is the Torah: A person who dies in a tent”</b> (Numbers 19:14). That is an allusion to the fact that <b>even at the moment of death, one should engage in</b> the study of <b>Torah. Reish Lakish said: Matters of Torah only endure in a person who kills himself over</b> the Torah, one who is ready to devote all his efforts to it, <b>as it is stated: “This is the Torah: A person who dies in a tent,”</b> meaning that the Torah is only attained by one who kills himself in its tent. <b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC