
### Part 1
<b>learned</b> that in the mishna: <b>One who carries out</b> undiluted <b>wine</b> is only liable if he carries out a measure <b>equivalent to</b> the wine typically <b>diluted</b> for <b>a cup. And it was taught with regard to</b> the mishna: A measure <b>equivalent to</b> the wine <b>diluted</b> for <b>a significant cup</b> of wine. <b>And it was taught in the latter</b> clause of the mishna: <b>And</b> the measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>all other liquids</b> is <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. Since a quarter of a <i>log</i> is the significant measure for liquids, that is also the significant measure for diluted wine. <b>And Rava</b> is consistent with <b>his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> as <b>Rava said: Any wine that does not hold one</b> part wine diluted by <b>three</b> parts <b>water is not wine.</b> Wine must be sufficiently potent to be capable of being diluted with water three times its measure.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said:</b> There are <b>two</b> possible <b>responses with regard to</b> this <b>matter. One, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Diluted wine,</b> which is used to determine the exact color of red, is <b>two parts water and one</b> part <b>wine from the wine of the Sharon.</b> Apparently, wine constitutes one-third and not one-quarter of the diluted cup. <b>And furthermore:</b> Rava’s opinion is that the measure that determines liability for carrying out wine is a measure that, when diluted, would equal a quarter of a <i>log</i>, i.e., a quarter of a quarter of a <i>log</i> of undiluted wine. Is it possible that the <b>water is in the jug and</b> yet <b>joins together</b> with the wine? The wine that he is carrying out is less than the required measure and is not fit for drinking.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said to him: That which you said that</b> the dilution ratio that determines the color red is <b>two parts water and one</b> part <b>wine, from the wine of the Sharon,</b> is no proof. <b>Wine of the Sharon</b> is <b>unique</b> in that it <b>is weak,</b> and therefore two parts of water are sufficient to dilute it. <b>Alternatively, there</b> the dilution ratio mentioned is <b>for</b> determining the <b>appearance</b> of the color red; <b>however, for</b> the purpose <b>of taste, more</b> water <b>is necessary. And that which you said:</b> Is it possible that the <b>water is in the jug and</b> yet <b>joins together</b> with the wine? <b>With regard to</b> the liability of carrying out on <b>Shabbat, we require an object that is significant, and this</b> quarter of a quarter of a <i>log</i> of wine <b>is also significant.</b>

### Part 4
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>congealed</b> wine on Shabbat is <b>an olive-bulk;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Natan. Rav Yosef said: Rabbi Natan and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, said the same thing. Rabbi Natan’s</b> statement is <b>that which we</b> just <b>stated. And</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> is <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Six matters are among the leniencies of Beit Shammai and among the stringencies of Beit Hillel.</b> They include <b>the blood of a carcass. Beit Shammai deem</b> it <b>ritually pure,</b> as, in their opinion, only the flesh of a carcass imparts impurity; <b>and Beit Hillel deem</b> it <b>ritually impure. Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, said: Even when Beit Hillel deemed</b> it <b>impure, they deemed impure only</b> a measure of <b>blood that contains a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>, <b>since it can congeal and constitute an olive-bulk.</b> Rav Yosef draws a parallel between the two opinions. Both <i>tanna’im</i> agree that a quarter of a <i>log</i> of liquid congeals to the size of an olive-bulk.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said: Perhaps that is not</b> the case, as <b>Rabbi Natan said</b> that <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>is required only here, with regard to wine,</b> which <b>is liquid; however, with regard to blood, which is viscous,</b> in order to produce an <b>olive-bulk</b> when congealed, <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>is not required.</b> Less than a quarter of a <i>log</i> of blood congeals into an olive-bulk. <b>Alternatively, Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, said that</b> in order to create a congealed <b>olive-bulk, a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>is sufficient only there, with regard to blood,</b> which is <b>viscous; however, wine,</b> which <b>is liquid,</b> in order to create a congealed <b>olive-bulk, more</b> than a <b>quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> of wine is required. <b>And,</b> therefore, even <b>when he carries out less than an olive-bulk</b> on Shabbat, <b>let him be liable.</b> There is no proof that the two tannaitic opinions are parallel.

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>milk</b> is <b>equivalent to</b> that which is <b>swallowed [<i>kedei gemia</i>]</b> in one gulp. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is the correct version of the mishna: <b><i>Kedei gemia</i></b> with an <i>alef</i> <b>or <i>kedei gemia</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> It should be written with an <i>alef</i> as we find in the Torah: “And he said: <b>Give me to swallow [<i>hagmi’ini</i></b> with an <i>alef</i> ] <b>please, a little water from your jug”</b> (Genesis 24:17).

### Part 7
<b>A</b> similar <b>dilemma</b> with regard to spelling <b>was raised before</b> the Sages.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC