
### Part 1
<b>and every primary category of labor</b> that he performed. <b>One who performs numerous prohibited labors</b> subsumed under a <b>single</b> category <b>of labor is liable</b> to bring <b>only one sin-offering.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara attempts to clarify the language of the mishna and asks: <b>Why did</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> the phrase: <b>A significant principle? If you say</b> it is <b>because</b> of the following reason, it is problematic.<br>Here, because the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach</b> in a mishna later in the chapter with regard to a matter that includes two <i>halakhot</i> employing the term: <b>Furthermore,</b> they stated <b>another principle;</b> therefore, in this mishna, which relates to a greater number of <i>halakhot</i>, he <b>taught</b> employing the term: <b>A significant principle.</b> <br><b>And with regard to the Sabbatical Year as well, because</b> in a later mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 7:2) the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach: Furthermore, another principle,</b> at the beginning of the chapter he <b>taught</b> employing the phrase: <b>A significant principle.</b> There too, the choice of language is understood. <br><b>However, with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>tithes,</b> where the mishna (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 1:1) states two principles one after the other, the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> later in the same mishna: And furthermore, they stated <b>another principle, and</b> even so, at the beginning of the mishna the <i>tanna</i> <b>did not teach: A significant principle,</b> opting instead to say simply: They stated a principle.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yosei bar Avin said</b> that the term: A significant principle, is not dependent on the existence of another principle; rather, it is dependent on the significance of the principle. Therefore, with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>Shabbat and the Sabbatical Year, which include primary categories and subcategories,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the mishna: <b>A significant</b> principle. With regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>tithes, which do not include primary categories and subcategories</b> and all its <i>halakhot</i> are on equal footing, <b>he did not teach</b> employing the term: <b>A significant principle.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to</b> the variant reading of the mishna taught by <b>bar Kappara, who taught</b> the phrase: <b>A significant principle, with regard to tithes, what primary categories and subcategories are there</b> with regard to tithes?

### Part 4
<b>Rather, isn’t this the reason</b> the Mishna employs the term: A significant principle; because it is significant relative to other principles? The scope of the materials whose use warrants <b>punishment for</b> desecrating <b>Shabbat is greater than</b> the scope of the materials whose use warrants punishment for desecrating <b>the Sabbatical Year. As</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>Shabbat are</b> in effect <b>both with regard to</b> plants that are <b>detached</b> from the ground and <b>with regard to</b> those that are <b>attached, while</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>the Sabbatical Year with regard to detached</b> plants, they <b>are not</b> in effect, but <b>with regard to attached</b> plants they <b>are</b> in effect. <b>And</b> the scope of the materials whose use warrants <b>punishment</b> for desecration <b>of the Sabbatical Year are greater than</b> the scope of the materials whose use warrants punishment for violating the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of tithes. As,</b> by Torah law, the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>the Sabbatical Year are</b> in effect <b>both with regard to human food</b> and <b>with regard to animal food, while</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>tithes are</b> in effect <b>with regard to human food,</b> but <b>with regard to animal food</b> they <b>are not</b> in effect.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>bar Kappara, who taught</b> the phrase: <b>A significant principle, with regard to tithes</b> as well: <b>The</b> scope of the materials for which one warrants <b>punishment</b> for violating the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>tithes is greater than</b> the scope of the materials for which one warrants punishment for violating the <i>halakhot</i> of <b><i>pe’a</i>. As,</b> by rabbinic law, the obligation of <b>tithes is</b> in effect <b>with regard to</b> both <b>figs and vegetables, while</b> the obligation of <b><i>pe’a</i> is not</b> in effect <b>with regard to figs and vegetables. As we learned</b> in a mishna in tractate <i>Pe’a</i>: <b>They stated a principle with regard to <i>pe’a</i>: Anything that is food, and is protected, and grows from the ground, and is gathered as one, and one brings it in</b> to storage <b>to preserve is obligated in <i>pe’a</i>.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara explains that which is excluded by each criterion in the mishna. <b>Food, to exclude the aftergrowths of woad [<i>satis</i>] and madder.</b> As these plants are used for dyeing and not for food, the obligation of <i>pe’a</i> does not apply to them. <b>And protected, to exclude ownerless</b> crops, which by definition are not protected. <b>And grows from the ground, to exclude truffles and mushrooms,</b> which, unlike other plants, do not draw sustenance from the ground. <b>And is gathered as one, to exclude</b> the <b>fig</b> tree whose fruit is gathered throughout an extended period, as the figs do not all ripen together. <b>And one brings it in</b> to storage <b>to preserve; to exclude vegetables,</b> which cannot be stored for lengthy periods.

### Part 7
<b>While, with regard to tithes, we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>They stated a principle with regard to tithes: Anything that is food, and is protected, and grows from the ground is obligated in tithes; we did not learn</b> with regard to tithes, the following criteria: <b>Gathered as one, and which one brings in</b> to storage <b>to preserve.</b> Apparently, figs and vegetables are obligated in tithes, making the scope of the materials obligated in tithes greater than the scope of those obligated in <i>pe’a</i>.

### Part 8
The mishna discusses an individual who forgets the very essence of Shabbat. The Gemara seeks to understand how a Jew could forget the very existence of Shabbat. It was <b>Rav and Shmuel who both said: Our mishna</b> is referring <b>to</b> both <b>a child who was taken captive among the gentiles</b> and never educated <b>and a convert who converted among the gentiles</b> and never learned the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat. <b>However,</b> one who once <b>knew</b> of the essence of Shabbat <b>and ultimately forgot is liable for each and every Shabbat,</b> as we learned in the mishna with regard to one who knows the essence of Shabbat. The Gemara seeks to clarify this approach. <b>We learned</b> in our mishna: <b>One who forgets the essence of Shabbat. Doesn’t</b> this phrase indicate <b>by inference that he was aware</b> of Shabbat <b>originally?</b> In order to forget one must have previously been aware. This poses a difficulty to the opinion of Rav and Shmuel. The Gemara refutes this: <b>No, what is</b> the meaning of: <b>One who forgets the essence of Shabbat? That the essence of Shabbat</b> was always <b>forgotten from him,</b> i.e., he never knew it.

### Part 9
The Gemara further asks: <b>However,</b> based on that understanding, in the case of <b>one who knew</b> the essence of Shabbat <b>and ultimately forgot, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is he <b>liable for each and every Shabbat?</b> If so, <b>instead of</b> the mishna <b>teaching</b> the next <i>halakha</i>: <b>One who knows the essence of Shabbat and performs many labors on multiple <i>Shabbatot</i></b> is <b>liable to</b> bring a sin-offering <b>for each and every Shabbat, let it teach: One who knew</b> the essence of Shabbat <b>and ultimately forgot and, all the more so, one</b> who knows the essence of Shabbat would be liable for each Shabbat. The Gemara answers: According to the opinion of Rav and Shmuel, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>One who knows the essence of Shabbat? One who</b> once <b>knew the essence of Shabbat and</b> has now <b>forgotten it.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC