
### Part 1
that <b>one of</b> the knots <b>one voids,</b> because he can enable the animal to go out, albeit with difficulty, after untying one knot, therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> that both are considered temporary knots, and it is permitted to tie them. <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov. Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: If you rule the <b><i>halakha</i></b> in accordance with his opinion, does that mean, <b>by inference,</b> that the Rabbis <b>disagree,</b> or perhaps is there no dispute and everyone accepts the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What difference is there to you</b> whether or not the Rabbis disagree? In either case, the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov. Abaye answered Rav Yosef using a folk expression: Is it simply <b>learn the lesson,</b> let <b>it be</b> like <b>a song?</b> In other words, is it sufficient to simply parrot the halakhic ruling? Rather, it is necessary to examine the issue to understand it, even if it does not yield a practical halakhic difference.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may tie a bucket with a belt</b> on Shabbat, as he will certainly not leave it tied to the bucket, and therefore it is not a permanent knot. <b>But</b> one may <b>not</b> tie a bucket <b>with a rope. Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> doing so. <b>Rabbi Yehuda stated a principle:</b> With regard to <b>any knot that is not permanent, one is not liable</b> for tying <b>it.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> We learned in the mishna that according to the first <i>tanna</i>, it is prohibited to tie a rope to a bucket on Shabbat, and Rabbi Yehuda permits doing so. The Gemara asks: <b>A rope of what</b> kind? <b>If you say</b> it is referring to <b>a standard rope,</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehuda permit</b> doing so? <b>It is a permanent knot. Rather,</b> it is referring to <b>a weaver’s rope;</b> since the weaver needs it for his work, he will untie it after Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>we issue a decree</b> prohibiting <b>a weaver’s rope due to a standard rope, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>we do not issue a decree?</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the rope of a bucket that was severed</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may not tie it</b> with a regular knot; <b>rather, he</b> may <b>tie a bow. And Rabbi Yehuda says: One may wrap a hollow belt around it or a sash as long as he does not tie it into a bow.</b>

### Part 5
This is <b>difficult,</b> as there is a contradiction between one statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> and another statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as in the <i>baraita</i> he issued a decree prohibiting tying a bow due to tying a knot, and in the mishna he issued no decree. And this is also <b>difficult,</b> as there is a contradiction between one statement of the <b>Rabbis</b> and another statement of the <b>Rabbis,</b> as in the <i>baraita</i> they do not issue a decree and in the mishna they do issue a decree.

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: The contradiction between one statement <b>of the Rabbis</b> and the other statement <b>of the Rabbis</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as they are of the opinion that <b>a rope may be confused with</b> another <b>rope.</b> Therefore, the Rabbis issued a decree prohibiting a weaver’s rope, because if it were permitted one might mistakenly come to tie a standard rope. However, <b>a bow is not confused with a knot,</b> and therefore they did not issue a decree prohibiting a bow. The contradiction between one statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda</b> and the other statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>there,</b> where he prohibited tying a bow, it is <b>not because a bow may be confused with a knot,</b> but <b>because,</b> in his opinion, <b>a bow itself is a</b> full-fledged <b>knot</b> and is not prohibited due to a decree.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: A person may bring a rope from inside his house</b> on Shabbat <b>and tie</b> one end of <b>it to a cow and</b> the other end <b>to a trough.</b> That is not considered a permanent knot, because he will certainly untie the rope. <b>Rabbi Aḥa Arikha,</b> who was nicknamed Rabbi Aḥa the Long, due to his height, <b>who is</b> also called <b>Rabbi Aḥa bar Pappa, raised an objection to Rabbi Abba</b> from the <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a rope that is</b> tied <b>to the trough, one may tie it to a cow, and</b> a rope that is tied <b>to the cow one may tie it to a trough, provided that one does not bring a rope from inside his house and tie it to the cow and to the trough.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> where they permitted it, it is referring to <b>a weaver’s rope,</b> which will certainly be untied.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: A weaver’s tools may be moved on Shabbat. They raised a dilemma before Rav Yehuda: What</b> is the ruling with regard to <b>the upper beam and the lower beam</b> of the weaver’s loom? Does this leniency apply to them? Rav Yehuda did not provide a clear answer. He said: <b>Yes and no, and</b> the matter was <b>uncertain to him. It was stated: Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: A weaver’s tools may be moved on Shabbat, even</b> the <b>upper beam and the lower beam, but not the posts.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: What is different</b> about the <b>posts that</b> one may <b>not</b> carry them? <b>If we say</b> it is because <b>one makes holes</b> when removing the post from the ground, <b>holes</b> come into <b>being on their own</b> and that is not prohibited, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>one who stores a turnip or radish</b> in the ground <b>beneath a vine</b> for safekeeping, <b>if some of its leaves were exposed,</b> making it possible to grab the turnip or the radish and pull it out of the ground, <b>he need not be concerned, neither due to diverse kinds,</b> i.e., that he violated the prohibition of planting food crops in a vineyard, as there was no intent to plant them, <b>nor due to</b> concern that he violated the prohibition against working the land during <b>the Sabbatical Year, nor due to tithes,</b> i.e., that it would be considered as if he picked it from the ground and would be obligated to tithe it, <b>and they may be taken</b> from the ground <b>on Shabbat.</b> Apparently, the Rabbis do not prohibit doing so due to concern that one will thereby create a hole.

### Part 10
Rav Naḥman answered him: The cases are not comparable. <b>In a field one will not come to fill holes;</b> however, <b>here,</b> where the holes are created <b>in the house,</b> the concern is that one may <b>come to smooth out</b> the <b>holes.</b> Therefore, the Rabbis prohibited it. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised a dilemma before Rabbi Yehuda bar Liva’ei:</b> With regard to <b>weaver’s tools, such as the upper beam and the lower beam</b> of the loom, <b>what</b> is the ruling in terms of <b>carrying them on Shabbat?</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to him: One may not carry them.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan asked him: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? Rabbi Yehuda bar Liva’ei answered: <b>Because they are not</b> usually <b>carried</b> even during the week, as they are extremely heavy and are considered fixed in place. Therefore, the Sages prohibited carrying them on Shabbat.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may fold the garments</b> after removing them <b>even four or five times, and one may make the beds from Shabbat evening</b> in preparation <b>for Shabbat</b> day, <b>but not from Shabbat</b> in preparation <b>for the conclusion of Shabbat,</b> since one may not perform an action on Shabbat that is preparation for a weekday. <b>Rabbi Yishmael says: One may fold the garments and make the beds from Yom Kippur</b> in preparation <b>for Shabbat</b> if Yom Kippur occurs on Friday. <b>And the fats</b> of the offerings that were sacrificed on <b>Shabbat are offered on Yom Kippur, but not those of Yom Kippur on Shabbat,</b> because the sanctity of Shabbat is greater than the sanctity of Yom Kippur. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Neither are</b> the fats <b>of</b> the offerings sacrificed on <b>Shabbat offered on Yom Kippur, nor are those of Yom Kippur offered on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Sages in <b>the school of Rabbi Yanai said: They only taught</b> that it is permitted <b>when one person</b> is folding the garments alone on Shabbat; <b>however, when two people</b> are folding the garments together, <b>no,</b> they may not do so, because when two people fold garments it is tantamount to repairing the garment. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>when a single person</b> is folding the garments, <b>we only said</b> it is permitted <b>when</b> he is folding a <b>new</b> garment, which is suitable to be worn even if it were not folded; <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>old</b> garments, <b>no,</b> he may not do so. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>new</b> garments, <b>we only said</b> that one may fold the garments <b>when</b> they are <b>white; however, when</b> they are <b>colored, no,</b> one may not do so. <b>And</b> with regard to white garments, <b>we only said</b> it is permitted to fold them on Shabbat when <b>one does not have</b> garments <b>into</b> which <b>one</b> could <b>change; however,</b> if <b>one has</b> other garments <b>into</b> which he could <b>change,</b> he may <b>not</b> fold them.

### Part 13
And <b>it was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: The members <b>of Rabban Gamliel’s household did not</b> even <b>fold their white garments because they had</b> others <b>into</b> which they could <b>change. Rav Huna said: If one has</b> new garments <b>into</b> which he could <b>change</b> on Shabbat, <b>he will change</b> into those garments; <b>and if one does not have</b> garments <b>into</b> which he could <b>change, he</b> lets <b>his garments hang down</b> before Shabbat to beautify himself in deference to Shabbat as it used to be the custom of wealthy people to wear their clothes loosely. <b>Rav Safra strongly objects to this: Doesn’t this appear as haughtiness?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since every day</b> he <b>does not do</b> so, <b>and now</b> in honor of Shabbat <b>he is doing so, it does not appear as haughtiness.</b> Rather it is apparent that he is acting in deference to Shabbat.

### Part 14
On a related note, the Gemara cites what we learned with regard to the following passage: “If you keep your feet from breaking, from pursuing your affairs on My holy day, and you call Shabbat a delight, the Lord’s holy day honorable, <b>and you honor it by not going your own way,</b> from attending to your affairs and speaking idle words” (Isaiah 58:13). The Rabbis derived from the words <b>“and you honor it” that your dress on Shabbat should not be like your dress during the week, as Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> would <b>refer to his clothing as my honor,</b> indicating that appropriate clothing is a form of deference. The words <b>“going your own way”</b> mean <b>that your walking on Shabbat should not be like your walking during the week. “From attending to your affairs”</b> means it <b>is prohibited</b> to deal with <b>your</b> weekday <b>affairs</b> and to speak about them on Shabbat. However, <b>affairs of Heaven,</b> i.e., those pertaining to mitzvot, <b>are permitted. “And speaking idle words”</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC