
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Akiva reconsider</b> and adopt <b>Rabbi Yehoshua’s</b> opinion? In the dispute over the laws of bathing as well, the ruling should have been in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda because his is the compromise opinion. Therefore, Rav Yosef asked whether the ruling was based on that principle alone. The Gemara asks: <b>And if</b> the <i>halakha</i> was derived <b>by inference, what</b> of it? <b>It</b> is legitimate to draw conclusions by inference. The Gemara responds: <b>Perhaps this</b> principle, that the <i>halakha</i> is established in accordance with the compromise opinion, <b>applies only in a mishna; but in a <i>baraita</i>, no,</b> it does not apply. Perhaps the <i>baraita</i> is not a sufficiently reliable source to establish the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with the compromise opinion based on its formulation. Rabba bar bar Ḥana <b>said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>I heard it explicitly.</b>

### Part 2
An amoraic dispute <b>was stated:</b> With regard to <b>hot water that was heated on Shabbat eve</b> before Shabbat, <b>Rav said: The next day,</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may wash his entire body with it;</b> however, not all at once. Rather, he washes <b>one limb</b> at a time, in a departure from the standard practice, to remind him that it is Shabbat. <b>And Shmuel said: They only permitted washing one’s face, his hands, and his feet</b> with hot water, even if it was heated on Shabbat eve; however, they did not permit washing his entire body, even in increments. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Hot water that was heated on Shabbat eve, the next day one may wash his face, his hands, and his feet with it but not his entire body.</b> This is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of <b>Rav’s</b> opinion. <b>Rav</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> When the <i>baraita</i> says: <b>Not one’s entire body,</b> it means not his entire body <b>at once, but one limb</b> and then another <b>limb</b> until he washes his entire body is permitted. The Gemara asks: <b>Doesn’t it say one’s face, his hands, and his feet,</b> and no more? Rav answers: It means that one washes his body in a manner <b>similar to</b> the manner that one washes <b>his face, his hands, and his feet,</b> i.e., each limb separately, and they were cited as examples of washing one limb at a time.

### Part 3
The Gemara cites an additional proof. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They only permitted to wash one’s face, his hands, and his feet with hot water that was heated before Shabbat.</b> This poses a difficulty to Rav. Rav answers: <b>Here too,</b> this refers to washing one limb at a time, in a manner <b>similar to</b> the way one washes <b>his face, his hands, and his feet.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara remarks: A <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel: Hot water that was heated on Shabbat eve, the next day one may wash his face, his hands, and his feet with it but not his entire body,</b> even <b>one limb</b> at a time. <b>And, needless to say,</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>hot water that was heated on a Festival. Rabba would teach this <i>halakha</i> of Rav in this language: Hot water that was heated on Shabbat eve, the next day, Rav said: One may bathe his entire body in it and exclude one limb</b> to remind himself that today is Shabbat. <b>They raised all of these conclusive refutations,</b> with which they objected to the previous version of Rav’s statement, against him and the Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yosef said to Abaye: Does Rabba act in accordance with</b> this <b><i>halakha</i> of Rav? He said to him: I do not know.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is his dilemma? It is obvious</b> that Rabba <b>did not</b> act in accordance with Rav’s statement, <b>as</b> Rav’s statement <b>was conclusively refuted.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Perhaps he did not hear,</b> i.e., he did not know of the challenges or he did not consider them substantial. Perhaps, in his opinion, it is still reasonable to act in accordance with Rav’s statement.

### Part 6
The Gemara says: If so, there is still no room for the dilemma. <b>And if</b> Rabba <b>did not hear</b> this refutation, <b>certainly he acted</b> in accordance with Rav’s opinion, <b>as Abaye said:</b> In <b>all</b> halakhic <b>matters of the Master,</b> Rabba, <b>he conducted himself in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav, except these three where he conducted himself in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b> He ruled: <b>One may untie</b> ritual fringes <b>from garment to garment, and one may light from</b> one Hanukkah <b>lamp to</b> another <b>lamp, and the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in</b> the case of <b>dragging.</b> According to Rabbi Shimon, it is permitted to drag heavy objects, and there is no concern that, as a result, a ditch might be dug in the ground. In any case, it is certainly reasonable to say that he acted in accordance with the opinion of Rav in the case of bathing on Shabbat as well. The Gemara answers: His is not an absolute proof. Perhaps Rabba’s custom was that <b>he acted in accordance with the stringencies of Rav</b> and <b>he did not act in accordance with the leniencies of Rav.</b> Washing with hot water on Shabbat is one of Rav’s leniencies. Therefore, it is not clear how Rabba acted in practice.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>A bathhouse whose openings were sealed on Shabbat eve</b> so that the heat would not diminish, <b>after Shabbat one may bathe in it immediately.</b> If <b>its openings were sealed on the eve of a Festival, the next day,</b> on the Festival itself, <b>one may enter and sweat</b> in the heat produced by the hot water <b>and emerge and rinse</b> with cold water <b>in the outer room</b> of the bathhouse.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> There was <b>an incident in the bathhouse of Benei Berak, whose openings were sealed on the eve of a Festival. The next day,</b> on the Festival itself, <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya and Rabbi Akiva entered and sweated there, and emerged and rinsed themselves in the outer room. However,</b> this bathhouse was unique <b>because</b> the <b>hot water</b> was <b>covered by</b> wooden <b>boards</b> and there was no concern lest a person bathe in the hot water. <b>When this matter came before the Sages, they said: Even if its hot water is not covered by boards,</b> it is permitted to sweat from the heat in the bathhouse. <b>When the</b> number of <b>transgressors increased,</b> the Sages <b>began to prohibit</b> this. However, the <b>large bathhouses</b> [<b><i>ambatyaot</i>] in cities, one may stroll through them</b> as usual <b>and need not be concerned</b> about the prohibitions of Shabbat, even if he sweats while doing so.

### Part 9
And the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are these <b>transgressors?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of bar Kappara: Initially, people would bathe</b> even on Shabbat <b>in hot water that was heated before Shabbat. The</b> bathhouse <b>attendants began to heat</b> water <b>on Shabbat and say</b> that <b>it was heated before Shabbat.</b> Therefore, the Sages <b>prohibited</b> bathing in <b>hot water and permitted sweating. And they would still bathe in hot water and say: We are sweating,</b> and that is why we entered the bathhouse. Therefore, the Sages <b>prohibited sweating and permitted</b> bathing in <b>the hot springs of Tiberias. And people would still bathe in hot water heated by fire and say: We bathed in the hot springs of Tiberias.</b> Therefore, <b>they prohibited</b> even <b>the hot springs of Tiberias and permitted them</b> to bathe in <b>cold water.</b> When the Sages <b>saw that their</b> decrees <b>were not upheld</b> by the people because of their stringency, <b>they permitted them</b> to bathe in <b>the hot springs of Tiberias, and</b> the decree prohibiting <b>sweating remained in place.</b>

### Part 10
In this context, <b>Rava said: One who violates</b> a decree <b>of the Sages, it is permitted to call him a transgressor.</b> Transgressor is not a term limited to one who violates a severe Torah prohibition. The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose opinion</b> did Rabba make this statement?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC