
### Part 1
<b>unless they constructed a partition</b> around <b>it</b> that is <b>ten handbreadths high.</b> Everything within the partition is then considered a private domain, and one standing within the partition may draw water from the pit. <b>And</b> similarly, <b>one may only drink</b> water from the pit <b>on Shabbat if he inserts his head and most of his</b> body into the well. <b>And a pit and its bank join together to</b> constitute the total of <b>ten</b> handbreadths, as stated by Rabbi Yoḥanan.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Mordekhai raised a dilemma before Rava:</b> In a case where there is <b>a column in the public domain that is ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, and one threw</b> an object <b>and it landed atop</b> the column, <b>what</b> is the ruling? The two sides of the dilemma are: <b>Do we say</b> that the <b>lifting</b> from the public domain <b>was</b> performed <b>in a prohibited</b> manner and the <b>placing</b> in the private domain <b>was</b> performed <b>in a prohibited</b> manner, and therefore one is liable? <b>Or perhaps,</b> we say that <b>since</b> the object <b>comes from an exempt domain,</b> the one who threw the object would <b>not</b> be liable. Prior to landing on the column, the object traveled through the airspace above the public domain. The airspace of a public domain extends ten handbreadths from the ground. Beyond that point the airspace is an exempt domain.

### Part 3
Rava <b>said to</b> Rav Mordekhai: <b>It is our mishna</b> that states that one who places an object atop a boulder that is more than ten handbreadths high is liable. Rav Mordekhai <b>came</b> and <b>asked Rav Yosef</b> about the same dilemma: Rav Yosef <b>said to him: It is our mishna.</b> Rav Mordekhai <b>came</b> and <b>asked Abaye. He said to him: It is our mishna.</b> Rav Mordekhai <b>said to them: You are all spewing the same spittle.</b> None of you taught anything new. You repeat the same unsatisfactory answer.

### Part 4
<b>They said to</b> Rav Mordekhai: <b>And do you not hold</b> this to be correct? <b>Didn’t we learn</b> explicitly in the mishna: <b>One who takes</b> an object from <b>them, and one who places</b> an object <b>atop them is liable? He said to them: Perhaps the mishna</b> is referring <b>to a needle</b> that can be placed atop the column without passing through the exempt area above ten handbreadths, since it is so small and hardly takes up any space.

### Part 5
They said to him: With regard to <b>a needle, too, it is still impossible that it will not be raised somewhat</b> above the public domain. He answered them: It is possible <b>that</b> the boulder <b>has a protrusion</b> below ten handbreadths from the ground. Since the protrusion is not significant in and of itself, it has the legal status of a hole in the wall of a private domain. One who throws an object into it is liable, just like one who throws into the private domain itself. <b>Alternatively,</b> it is possible <b>that</b> the needle <b>is placed in a groove</b> that is below ten handbreadths from the ground. The needle did not enter the groove from above ten handbreadths. It passed directly into the groove, which is a private domain. Therefore, Rav Mordekhai’s dilemma is not resolved from the mishna.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Meyasha said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised a dilemma:</b> There is <b>a wall in the public domain</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and is not</b> quite <b>four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, and it surrounds a <i>karmelit</i> and renders</b> the area that it encloses <b>the private domain.</b> The wall serves as a partition of this private domain. <b>And</b> if <b>one threw</b> an object from the public domain <b>and it landed atop</b> the wall, <b>what is</b> the ruling? <b>Do we say: Since it is not four</b> handbreadths <b>wide it is an exempt domain,</b> and the one who threw the object is exempt? <b>Or perhaps</b> we say that <b>since it rendered</b> the <i>karmelit</i> <b>the private domain,</b> the wall together with the private domain <b>is considered to be filled.</b> Therefore, the object is considered to have landed on an area that is four handbreadths wide, and the one who threw the object is liable.

### Part 7
<b>Ulla said:</b> The fact that it is considered a private domain is derived by means of an <b><i>a fortiori</i> inference:</b> If this wall <b>creates a partition</b> that renders <b>other</b> areas surrounded by the wall a private domain, <b>all the more so</b> does it render <b>itself</b> a private domain. <b>It was also stated</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said, and so too, Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>a wall in the public domain</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and is not</b> quite <b>four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, and it surrounds a <i>karmelit</i> and renders</b> the area that it surrounds <b>the private domain,</b> if <b>one threw</b> an object from the public domain <b>and it landed atop</b> the wall, <b>he is liable.</b> If this wall <b>creates a partition</b> that renders <b>other</b> areas a private domain, <b>all the more so</b> does it render <b>itself</b> a private domain.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised a dilemma:</b> In a case where there is <b>a pit</b> that is <b>nine</b> handbreadths deep, <b>and one dug out a segment</b> of earth from the bottom of the pit <b>and</b> thereby <b>completed</b> the depth of the pit <b>to ten</b> handbreadths, and then he proceeded to throw the earth into the public domain, <b>what</b> is the ruling? The two sides to the dilemma are: Is it that the <b>lifting</b> of <b>the object and establishment of the</b> ten-handbreadth <b>partition came</b> about <b>simultaneously, and he is liable? Or</b> perhaps <b>he is not liable. And if you say: Since the partition was not ten</b> handbreadths deep <b>initially, he is not liable,</b> then in a case where there is <b>a pit</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths deep, <b>and one placed a segment</b> of earth <b>into</b> the pit <b>and</b> thereby <b>minimized</b> its depth to less than ten handbreadths, nullifying its status as a private domain, <b>what</b> is the ruling? The two sides of the question are: Is it that <b>placement of the object and the elimination of the</b> ten-handbreadth <b>partition came</b> about <b>simultaneously,</b> and <b>he is liable?</b> Or perhaps, <b>he is not liable</b> because the partition was not intact throughout the performance of the action.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Resolve</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s dilemma <b>from his own</b> statement, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>one who throws</b> an object <b>four cubits</b> in the public domain and it hits <b>the wall above ten handbreadths</b> from the ground, which is an exempt domain, it is <b>as if he threw it in the air,</b> and he is exempt. If it was <b>below ten</b> handbreadths from the ground, it is <b>as if he threw it</b> and it landed <b>on the ground, and one who throws</b> an object <b>four cubits</b> and it lands <b>on the ground is liable. And we discussed it:</b> How could he be liable for carrying in that case? The object <b>did not come to rest</b> on the wall and there was no placement.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It is <b>with regard to</b> the case of <b>a juicy cake of figs</b> that sticks to the wall when thrown against it that <b>we learned</b> in the mishna. The Gemara asks: <b>And why</b> is one liable in that case? When the cake of figs sticks to the wall, <b>it reduces</b> the distance the figs traveled <b>from</b> the measure of <b>four cubits</b> that determines liability. If one threw the cake of figs at a distance of exactly four cubits from the wall, and, based on Rabbi Yoḥanan, the object becomes part of the wall, the distance that the cake of figs traveled is slightly less than four cubits, and therefore he should be exempt. Since Rabbi Yoḥanan did not take this into account, apparently, in his opinion, when the placement of the object and the elimination of the partition are simultaneous, one is liable.

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this and says: The cases are not similar because <b>there,</b> in the case of the cake of figs, the one who threw it <b>does not nullify its</b> independent existence vis-à-vis the wall, as the food will eventually be removed from the wall. <b>Here,</b> in the case of the dirt in the pit, <b>one nullifies its</b> independent existence vis-à-vis the pit, and it eliminates the ten-handbreadth partition.

### Part 12
<b>Rava raised</b> a similar <b>dilemma:</b> In a case where one <b>threw a board and it landed on top of stakes</b> that are ten handbreadths high but not four handbreadths wide, <b>what</b> is the ruling? Once the board lands, the surface is ten handbreadths high and four handbreadths wide. The Gemara asks: <b>What is his dilemma?</b> Does his dilemma pertain to the ruling in a case where <b>the placement of the object and the establishment of the partition came about simultaneously? That is</b> precisely the dilemma raised <b>by Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: The case <b>where Rava raised a dilemma</b> is more complex. His dilemma is with regard to a case <b>where one threw a board and</b> there was <b>an object</b> resting <b>atop</b> the board. In that case, <b>what</b> is the ruling? The two sides of the dilemma are: <b>Since</b> the board and the object <b>come simultaneously,</b> the legal status is <b>similar</b> to a case where <b>the placement of the object and the establishment of the partition</b> came about simultaneously. The object and the board are a single unit that creates a partition when it lands, and therefore one is exempt. <b>Or perhaps</b> we say that <b>since it is impossible,</b> when they land, for the object <b>not to rise slightly and then land</b> because the object and the board are not connected, <b>it is like</b> the case where <b>the establishment of the partition</b> was completed <b>and the placement of the object</b> followed, and therefore one is liable. These dilemmas remain, and therefore <b>let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 14
Rava raised an issue related to the previous dilemmas, and before doing so he sought to clarify certain points. <b>Rava said: It is obvious to me</b> that if one poured <b>water onto water that is its placement,</b> and if one did so from one domain to another he is liable. If one placed <b>a nut onto water,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC