### Part 1
<b>trimming vegetables is permitted. And Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If <b>Yom Kippur occurs on</b> a <b>weekday, one may crack nuts and remove pomegranate seeds from</b> the late <b>afternoon and onward,</b> because doing so involves no actual labor and <b>due to anxiety,</b> i.e., if a person does not know that there is food prepared for when the fast ends, he suffers more during the final hours of the day (Rabbi Zeraḥia HaLevi). The Gemara relates: The members of <b>Rav Yehuda’s house would trim cabbage.</b> The members of <b>Rabba’s house would scrub gourds. Once</b> Rabba <b>saw</b> that <b>they were doing</b> this <b>early,</b> before the late afternoon, <b>he said to them: A letter came from the West,</b> i.e., from Eretz Yisrael, <b>in the name</b> of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> saying that doing so is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 2
end of chapter

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>all sacred writings, one may rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat, <b>whether they are read</b> in public, e.g., Torah or Prophets scrolls, <b>or whether they are not read</b> in public, e.g., Writings scrolls. This ruling applies <b>even though they were written in any</b> foreign <b>language.</b> According to the Rabbis, those scrolls are not read in public, but they are still sacred and require burial. <b>And why</b> does <b>one not read</b> the Writings on Shabbat? <b>Due to suspension</b> of Torah study <b>in the study hall.</b> People came to the study hall at specific times on Shabbat to hear words of <i>halakha,</i> and other texts were not allowed at those times.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> debated the status of sacred writings <b>written in</b> Aramaic <b>translation or in any</b> other <b>language. Rav Huna said: One may not rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat. <b>And Rav Ḥisda said: One may rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat. The Gemara adds: <b>According to the one who said</b> that sacred writings written in other languages <b>may be read, everybody agrees</b> that <b>one may rescue</b> them. <b>Where they argue</b> is <b>according to the one who said that they may not be read. Rav Huna said: One may not rescue</b> them, <b>as they may not be read.</b> Whereas <b>Rav Ḥisda said: One may rescue</b> them <b>due to disgrace to sacred writings</b> that will result. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: With regard to <b>all sacred writings, one may rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat <b>whether they are read</b> in public <b>or whether they are not read</b> in public, <b>even if they are written in any</b> foreign <b>language. What, is it not</b> that the phrase: <b>“That they are read”</b> is referring to the books of the <b>Prophets, and</b> the phrase: <b>“That they are not read”</b> is referring to the <b>Writings? Even though these are</b> books <b>written in any</b> foreign <b>language, which may not be read, it is taught that one may save them.</b> This then is <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you: And</b> do <b>you understand</b> the mishna that way? <b>Say the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which states: They <b>require burial.</b> This is unnecessary, as <b>now,</b> that it was mentioned that <b>we rescue them</b> from the fire, <b>is it necessary</b> to say that they require <b>burial? Rather,</b> the mishna must be emended. <b>Rav Huna reconciles</b> the mishna <b>in accordance with his reasoning, and Rav Ḥisda reconciles</b> the mishna <b>in accordance with his reasoning. Rav Huna reconciles</b> this <b>in accordance with his reasoning: Whether they are read</b> is referring to the <b>Prophets, and whether they are not read</b> is referring to the <b>Writings. In what</b> case <b>is</b> this <b>statement said? It is</b> in a case <b>where they are written in the holy tongue, but</b> if they are not written in Hebrew but <b>in any</b> other <b>language,</b> they are <b>not rescued</b> from the fire on Shabbat, <b>and even so, they require burial. Rav Ḥisda reconciles</b> the mishna <b>in accordance with his reasoning: Whether they are read</b> is referring to the <b>Prophets, and whether they are not read</b> is referring to the <b>Writings, even if they are written in any language</b> other than Hebrew, they are <b>also rescued. And this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: And even the decayed</b> sections of parchment <b>require burial.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>they were written in</b> Aramaic <b>translation</b> or in <b>any language</b> other than Hebrew, <b>they are rescued from the fire</b> on Shabbat. And this is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Rav Huna,</b> who states that these are not rescued. <b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you: This <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that sacred writings not written in Hebrew <b>may be read,</b> whereas Rav Huna stated his ruling in accordance with the opinion of the <i>tanna</i> who holds that they may not be read, and therefore may not be rescued. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from that which was taught in a different <i>baraita</i>: Sacred writings that <b>were written</b> in <b>Coptic,</b> Egyptian; <b>Median; <i>Ivrit</i>,</b> i.e., ancient Hebrew script; <b>Eilamitic;</b> or <b>Greek are rescued from the fire</b> on Shabbat, <b>even though they may not be read.</b> This is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Rav Huna,</b> who holds that they are not rescued. <b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you: This is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im,</i> as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>they were written in</b> Aramaic <b>translation or in any language</b> other than Hebrew, <b>one may rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: One may not rescue them from the fire.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yosei said:</b> There was <b>an incident involving</b> my <b>father, Ḥalafta, who went to the esteemed Rabban Gamliel</b> of Yavne in <b>Tiberias, where he found him sitting at the table of Yoḥanan HaNazuf and in his hand</b> there was <b>a translation of the book of Job, and he was reading</b> from <b>it.</b> Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> Rabban Gamliel of Yavne: <b>I remember Rabban Gamliel, your father’s father, who was standing on top of a step on the Temple Mount. And they brought before him a translation of the book of Job, and he said to the builder: Bury this</b> book <b>under the course of bricks.</b> When he heard of that incident, Rabban Gamliel of Yavne <b>ordered that it</b> be buried <b>and he buried it. Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says</b> that on the Temple Mount <b>they overturned a large bowl of mortar on it. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said:</b> There are <b>two responses to this</b> that prove that it did not happen: <b>One, from where would they get mortar on the Temple Mount?</b> Construction on the Temple Mount was performed with other materials, not with mortar. <b>And furthermore, is it permitted to</b> actively <b>destroy</b> even sacred writings that are not read, <b>with one’s hands? Rather,</b> at the very least <b>they leave them in a neglected place,</b> where they are likely to decompose quickly, <b>and they decay on their own.</b> The Gemara seeks to clarify: <b>Who are</b> the <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> who dispute this <i>halakha</i> according to Rav Huna?