
### Part 1
and according <b>to the Rabbis, they established eight</b> months that were <b>lacking.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara cites another objection. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> that <b>which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in the anthology called <b><i>Seder Olam</i>:</b> In the month of <b>Nisan during which</b> the <b>Jewish people left Egypt, on the fourteenth they slaughtered their Paschal</b> lambs, <b>on the fifteenth</b> they <b>left</b> Egypt, <b>and that day was Shabbat eve. From</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <b>New Moon</b> of <b>Nisan</b> was on <b>Shabbat eve,</b> we can infer that the <b>New Moon</b> of <b>Iyyar</b> was on the <b>first</b> day <b>of the week, and</b> the New Moon of <b>Sivan</b> was <b>on</b> the <b>second</b> day <b>of the week.</b> This is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who holds that the New Moon of Sivan was on Sunday. The Gemara answers that <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> could have <b>said to you: Whose</b> is the opinion in <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> the opinion of the <b>Rabbis.</b> Therefore, this <i>baraita</i> poses no difficulty to the opinion of the Rabbi Yosei.

### Part 3
The Gemara cites another objection: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from that which was taught, that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: On the second</b> day of Sivan, <b>Moses ascended</b> Mount Sinai <b>and descended. On the third</b> day, <b>he ascended and descended. On the fourth</b> day, <b>he descended and did not ascend</b> Mount Sinai <b>again</b> until he was commanded along with all of the Jewish people. <b>And</b> the Gemara asks: How is it possible that he descended on the fourth day? <b>Since he did not ascend, from where did he descend? Rather,</b> this must be emended: <b>On the fourth</b> day, <b>he ascended and descended. On the fifth</b> day, <b>he built an altar and sacrificed an offering. On the sixth</b> day, <b>he had no time.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that not because</b> he received the <b>Torah</b> on the sixth day of the month? Apparently, this <i>baraita</i> supports the opinion of the Rabbis.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> he had no time <b>due to the burden of</b> preparing for <b>Shabbat.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>A Galilean taught,</b> while standing <b>above Rav Ḥisda: Blessed is the all-Merciful One, Who gave the three-fold Torah:</b> Torah, Prophets, and Writings, <b>to the three-fold nation:</b> Priests, Levites, and Israelites, <b>by means of a third-</b>born: Moses, who followed Aaron and Miriam in birth order, <b>on the third day</b> of the separation of men and women, <b>in the third month:</b> Sivan. On <b>whose</b> opinion is this homily based? It is based on the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that the Torah was given on the third day of separation and not on the fourth day.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites additional homiletic interpretations on the topic of the revelation at Sinai. The Torah says, “And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet God; <b>and they stood at the lowermost part of the mount”</b> (Exodus 19:17). <b>Rabbi Avdimi bar Ḥama bar Ḥasa said:</b> the Jewish people actually stood beneath the mountain, and the verse <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, overturned the mountain above</b> the Jews <b>like a tub, and said to them: If you accept the Torah, excellent, and if not, there will be your burial. Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: From here</b> there is <b>a substantial caveat to</b> the obligation to fulfill the <b>Torah.</b> The Jewish people can claim that they were coerced into accepting the Torah, and it is therefore not binding. <b>Rava said: Even so, they again accepted it</b> willingly <b>in the time of Ahasuerus, as it is written:</b> “The Jews <b>ordained, and took upon them,</b> and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves unto them” (Esther 9:27), and he taught: The Jews <b>ordained what they had already taken upon themselves</b> through coercion at Sinai.

### Part 6
<b>Ḥizkiya said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You caused sentence to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was silent”</b> (Psalms 76:9)? <b>If it was afraid, why was it silent; and if it was silent, why was it afraid? Rather,</b> the meaning is: <b>At first, it was afraid, and in the end, it was silent.</b> “You caused sentence to be heard from heaven” refers to the revelation at Sinai. <b>And why was</b> the earth <b>afraid?</b> It is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Reish Lakish, as Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day”</b> (Genesis 1:31)? <b>Why do I require the superfluous</b> letter <b><i>heh</i>,</b> the definite article, which does not appear on any of the other days? It <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, established a condition with the act of Creation, and said to them: If Israel accepts the Torah</b> on the sixth day of Sivan, <b>you will exist; and if</b> they do <b>not</b> accept it, <b>I will return you to</b> the primordial state of <b>chaos and disorder.</b> Therefore, the earth was afraid until the Torah was given to Israel, lest it be returned to a state of chaos. Once the Jewish people accepted the Torah, the earth was calmed.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Simai taught: When Israel accorded precedence</b> to the declaration <b>“We will do”</b> over the declaration <b>“We will hear,” 600,000 ministering angels came</b> and <b>tied two crowns to each and every member of the Jewish people, one corresponding to “We will do” and one corresponding to “We will hear.” And when the people sinned</b> with the Golden Calf, <b>1,200,000 angels of destruction descended and removed them</b> from the people, <b>as it is stated</b> in the wake of the sin of the Golden Calf: <b>“And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from Mount Horeb onward”</b> (Exodus 33:6). <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: At Horeb they put on</b> their ornaments, <b>and at Horeb they removed</b> them. The source for this is: <b>At Horeb they put them on, as we have said; at Horeb they removed them, as it is written: “And the children of Israel stripped themselves</b> of their ornaments from Mount Horeb.” <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And Moses merited all</b> of these crowns <b>and took</b> them. What is the source for this? <b>Because juxtaposed to this</b> verse, it is stated: <b>“And Moses would take the tent [<i>ohel</i>]”</b> (Exodus 33:7). The word <i>ohel</i> is interpreted homiletically as an allusion to an aura or illumination [<i>hila</i>]. <b>Reish Lakish said: In the future, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will return them to us, as it is stated: “And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads”</b> (Isaiah 35:10). <b>The joy that</b> they <b>once</b> had will once again be <b>upon their heads.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: When the Jewish people accorded precedence</b> to the declaration <b>“We will do”</b> over <b>“We will hear,” a Divine Voice emerged and said to them: Who revealed to my children this secret that the ministering angels use? As it is written: “Bless the Lord, you angels of His, you mighty in strength, that fulfill His word, hearkening unto the voice of His word”</b> (Psalms 103:20). <b>At first,</b> the angels <b>fulfill</b> His word, <b>and then</b> afterward they <b>hearken. Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “As an apple tree among the trees of the wood,</b> so is my beloved among the sons. Under its shadow I delighted to sit and its fruit was sweet to my taste” (Song of Songs 2:3)? <b>Why were the Jewish people likened to an apple tree?</b> It is <b>to tell you that just as this apple</b> tree, <b>its fruit</b> grows <b>before its leaves, so too, the Jewish people accorded precedence to “We will do” over “We will hear.”</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates that <b>a heretic saw that Rava was immersed in</b> studying <b><i>halakha</i>, and his fingers were beneath his leg and he was squeezing them, and his fingers were spurting blood.</b> Rava did not notice that he was bleeding because he was engrossed in study. The heretic <b>said to</b> Rava: You <b>impulsive nation, who accorded precedence to your mouths over your ears. You still bear your impulsiveness,</b> as you act without thinking. <b>You should listen first.</b> Then, <b>if you are capable</b> of fulfilling the commands, <b>accept</b> them. <b>And if not,</b> do <b>not accept</b> them. He <b>said to him:</b> About <b>us,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC