
### Part 1
<b>I called you first,</b> as it is stated: “Israel is the Lord’s hallowed portion, His first fruits of the increase” (Jeremiah 2:3) <b>and I warned you about matters of the first:</b> “Of the first of your dough you shall set apart <i>ḥalla</i> for a gift” (Numbers 15:20). <b>The soul that I have placed in you is called <i>ner</i>:</b> “The spirit of man is the lamp [<i>ner</i>] of the Lord” (Proverbs 20:27), and <b>I warned you about matters of the</b> Shabbat <b>lamp. If you fulfill these</b> mitzvot, <b>fine, and if not, then I will take your soul.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And,</b> if so, <b>what is different during childbirth?</b> Why does the divine attribute of judgment punish them for dereliction in fulfillment of these mitzvot specifically then? The Gemara cites several folk sayings expressing the concept that when a person is in danger, he is punished for his sins. <b>Rava said:</b> If <b>the ox fell, sharpen the knife</b> to slaughter it. <b>Abaye said:</b> If <b>the maidservant’s insolence abounds, she will be struck by a single blow</b> as punishment for all her sins. So too, when a woman is giving birth and her suffering is great due to Eve’s sin of eating from the Tree of Knowledge, all the punishments for her own sins are added to that suffering. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Leave the drunk, as</b> he <b>falls on his own.</b> Similarly, the time of birth is a time of danger, and if the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not come to her assistance at that time, that is sufficient to cause her death. <b>Mar Ukva said: The shepherd is crippled, and the goats are running,</b> and he cannot catch them. However, <b>next to the gate,</b> he speaks harsh <b>words, and inside the pen</b> he settles the <b>account.</b> Similarly, as long as a woman is in a healthy state, her sins are in abeyance, and she is not held accountable for them. However, when she is giving birth, which is a time of danger, she is held accountable for her sins and a calculation is made whether or not she is worthy of a miracle. <b>Rav Pappa said: At the entrance to the stores,</b> during a time of prosperity, <b>brothers and loved ones abound.</b> When a person is prospering financially, everyone acts like his brother or friend. However, <b>at the gate of disgrace,</b> during a time of loss and poverty, he has <b>no brothers and no loved ones;</b> everyone abandons him.

### Part 3
And the Gemara asks: <b>And where</b> are <b>men examined?</b> When are men vulnerable to judgment and held accountable for their actions? <b>Reish Lakish said: When they are crossing a bridge.</b> The Gemara wonders: Only when they are crossing <b>a bridge and at no other</b> time? Rather, <b>say:</b> Anything <b>like a bridge,</b> any place where danger is commonplace. On a similar note, the Gemara relates: <b>Rav would not cross</b> a river <b>in a ferry in which a gentile sat. He said</b> to himself: <b>Perhaps a judgment will be reckoned with him, and I will be caught together with him</b> when he is punished. Whereas, <b>Shmuel would only cross in a ferry if there was a gentile in it. He said: Satan does not have dominion over two nations.</b> He settles his accounts with people from each nationality separately.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yannai would examine</b> the ferry <b>and cross.</b> The Gemara comments that <b>Rabbi Yannai</b> acted <b>in accordance with his reasoning</b> stated elsewhere, as <b>he said: A person should never stand in a place of danger saying that they</b> on High <b>will perform a miracle for him, lest</b> in the end <b>they do not perform a miracle for him. And,</b> moreover, even <b>if they do perform a miracle for him, they will deduct it from his merits. Rabbi Ḥanin said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? When Jacob said: <b>“I am not worthy of all the mercies, and of all the truth,</b> which You have shown unto Your servant” (Genesis 32:11), and he explains: Since You have bestowed upon me so much kindness and truth, my merits have been diminished. Similarly, the Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Zeira would not go out</b> and walk <b>among the palm trees on a day when there was a southern wind</b> blowing due to the fear that the trees might fall on him.

### Part 5
In a similar vein, <b>Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rav Yehuda, said: A person should always pray that he will not become ill, as if he becomes ill they say to him: Bring</b> proof of your <b>virtue and exempt yourself.</b> It is preferable for a person not to be forced to prove that he merits staying alive, as he might not be able to prove it. <b>Mar Ukva said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? As it says: “When you build a new house, then you shall make a parapet for your roof, that you bring not blood upon your house, <b>if the fallen falls <i>mimenu</i>”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:8). He explains: <b><i>Mimenu</i>, from him proof must be brought.</b> When one falls from his previous situation, it is his own responsibility to prove his innocence and emerge unharmed. <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> What is the meaning of the phrase: <b>If the fallen falls from it? This</b> person <b>was destined to fall</b> from that roof <b>from the six days of Creation,</b> it was ingrained into nature. <b>As,</b> although <b>he did not</b> yet <b>fall, the verse calls him fallen. Nevertheless,</b> the owner of the house is indicted for this, as <b>merit is engendered by means of</b> the <b>innocent and guilt by means of</b> the <b>guilty.</b>

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught: One who became ill and tended toward death, they say to him: Confess, as all those executed</b> by the courts <b>confess.</b> Even if he is dying of natural causes, it is worthwhile for him to consider his death atonement for his sins. The Sages said: When <b>a person goes out to the marketplace</b> where there are fights and disputes, <b>he should consider himself as someone who has been handed over to a soldier [<i>seradiyot</i>].</b> If <b>his head hurt, he should consider it as if they placed him in a chain [<i>kolar</i>]</b> around his neck. If <b>he climbed into bed and fell ill, he should consider himself as if they took him up to the gallows to be judged, as</b> with regard to <b>anyone who goes up to the gallows to be judged, if he has great advocates [<i>peraklitin</i>], he is spared, and if not, he is not spared.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And</b> with regard to divine judgment, <b>these are a person’s advocates: Repentance and good deeds.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And even</b> if there are <b>nine hundred ninety-nine asserting his guilt and</b> only <b>one</b> asserting his <b>innocence, he is spared,</b> as <b>it is stated: “If there be for him an angel, an advocate, one among a thousand, to vouch for a man’s uprightness; then He is gracious unto him, and says: Deliver him from going down to the pit,</b> I have found a ransom” (Job 33:23–24). <b>Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, says: Even</b> if there are <b>nine hundred ninety-nine</b> portions <b>within that same angel accusing</b> him, <b>and one</b> portion asserting <b>his innocence, he is spared, as it stated: “An advocate, one among a thousand.”</b> Even when the advocate who asserts his innocence finds only one-tenth of one percent of innocence in this man, even then, he is gracious unto him, and says: Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>For three transgressions women die in childbirth [<i>yoledot</i>]. Rabbi Elazar</b> has a different version and <b>says</b> that <b>women die</b> when they are <b>young [<i>yeladot</i>].</b> These transgressions are those enumerated in the mishna: The <i>halakhot</i> of a menstruating woman, <i>ḥalla</i>, and Shabbat lights. <b>Rabbi Aḥa says</b> they are punished <b>for the sin of laundering their children’s feces</b> from clothing <b>on Shabbat. And some say: Because they call the Holy Ark</b> simply <b>ark.</b>

### Part 9
Similarly, <b>we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael ben Elazar says: On account of two sins, ignoramuses [<i>amei ha</i>’<i>aretz</i>] die</b> young (Rav Ya’akov Emden): <b>Because they call the Holy Ark</b> simply <b>ark, and because they call the synagogue the house of the people. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Three crucibles</b> potentially leading to <b>death were created in the woman, and some say: Three accelerants of death.</b> They are: <b>Menstruation, <i>ḥalla</i>, and lighting the Shabbat lights.</b> The Gemara explains that <b>one</b> version, accelerants of death, is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> who said that women die young. <b>And</b> the other <b>one,</b> crucibles of death, is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who said that women die in childbirth.

### Part 10
Similarly, <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says: The <i>halakhot</i> of consecrated items, <i>terumot</i>, and tithes are themselves</b> the <b>essence of Torah</b> and are extremely severe,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC