
### Part 1
<b>If we say</b> it is the <b>first <i>tanna</i></b> who disagrees with <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> that is not necessarily so, <b>and perhaps they are disagreeing about this: This Master,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that books written in other languages <b>may be read; and this Master,</b> Rabbi Yosei, <b>holds</b> that <b>they may not be read,</b> and their dispute is unrelated to the dispute between Rav Huna and Rav Ḥisda. <b>Rather,</b> it is the dispute between <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> and <b>the</b> first <b><i>tanna</i>,</b> who spoke <b>about</b> books written in <b>Coptic.</b> According to that <i>tanna</i>, even books that may not be read are rescued, whereas Rabbi Yosei holds that they are not rescued.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The blessings</b> that are written <b>and the amulets, even though there are the letters of the Name</b> of God <b>in them</b> and <b>matters that</b> appear <b>in the Torah</b> are mentioned in them, they <b>are not rescued from the fire; rather, they burn in their place, they and the names</b> of God contained therein. <b>From here</b> the Sages <b>said: Writers of blessings</b> are <b>like burners of Torah</b> scrolls, as it is prohibited to rescue these texts from the fire on Shabbat even though it is likely that they will be destroyed. There was <b>an incident involving one who was writing</b> pages with blessings <b>in Sidon. They came and informed Rabbi Yishmael</b> of his actions, <b>and Rabbi Yishmael went to examine him</b> to determine if the report was true. <b>When</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>was ascending the ladder</b> to confront him, the scribe <b>sensed his</b> presence, <b>took a bundle [<i>tomos</i>] of blessings, and submerged it in a basin of water</b> to conceal it from Rabbi Yishmael. <b>And in these words Rabbi Yishmael said to him:</b> The <b>punishment</b> for <b>the latter</b> action is <b>greater than</b> the punishment for <b>the former.</b> Although it is prohibited to write blessings, destroying them is a greater violation.

### Part 3
<b>The Exilarch raised a dilemma before Rabba bar Rav Huna:</b> If the sacred scrolls <b>were written in</b> yellow-tinged <b>arsenic, or red paint, in gum, or in iron sulfate,</b> types of ink which may not be used to write Torah scrolls; however, the scrolls were written properly <b>in the holy tongue,</b> does <b>one rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat <b>or does one not rescue</b> them? The Gemara adds: This <b>dilemma is raised according to the one who said</b> that <b>one rescues</b> sacred writings written in other languages; and this <b>dilemma is raised according to the one who said</b> that <b>one does not rescue</b> them. The Gemara elaborates. This <b>dilemma is raised according to the one who said</b> that <b>one does not rescue</b> them: Perhaps <b>that applies</b> specifically in a case <b>where</b> they <b>are written in</b> Aramaic <b>translation and in any</b> foreign <b>language; however, here, where they are written in the holy tongue, one rescues</b> them. <b>Or perhaps even according to the one who said</b> that <b>one rescues</b> them, <b>that applies</b> specifically in a case <b>where</b> they <b>are written in ink that endures; however, here, since</b> the script <b>does not endure,</b> they are <b>not</b> rescued. Rabba bar Rav Huna <b>said to him: One does not rescue them.</b> The Exilarch said to him: <b>Didn’t Rav Hamnuna teach</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>that one saves them.</b> Rabba bar Rav Huna <b>said to him: If it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>it was taught,</b> and I retract my statement. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the <i>baraita</i> that <b>was taught</b> on this matter? <b>Rav Ashi said, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The only</b> difference <b>between</b> the <b>books</b> of the Bible <b>and the Megilla</b> of Esther <b>is that</b> the <b>books are written in any language</b> and are valid, <b>and the Megilla</b> is only valid <b>if it is written in Assyrian script,</b> the familiar square Hebrew script, <b>on a</b> parchment <b>scroll, and in ink.</b> Apparently, other sacred books need not be written in ink.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Huna bar Ḥaluv raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman:</b> With regard to <b>a Torah scroll in which there is not</b> enough <b>to compile</b> from it <b>eighty-five</b> complete <b>letters</b> written properly and in order, which is the minimum measure determined by the Sages for a Torah to maintain the sanctity of a Torah scroll, <b>as in the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled”</b> (Numbers 10:35–36), <b>does one rescue it from the fire</b> on Shabbat <b>or does one not rescue</b> it? Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: And raise a dilemma</b> with regard to <b>the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled,” itself,</b> i.e., does one rescue it on Shabbat if it is missing a single letter? Rav Huna bar Ḥaluv answered: In a case <b>where the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled,” is incomplete, it is not a dilemma for me, as since it contains names</b> of God, <b>even though there are not eighty-five letters in it, it is rescued.</b> However, the case <b>where it is a dilemma for me is</b> with regard to <b>a Torah scroll in which there is not</b> enough <b>to compile</b> from it eighty-five complete letters; <b>what</b> is the ruling? Is it rescued on Shabbat or not? Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: It is not rescued.</b>

### Part 5
Rav Huna bar Ḥaluv <b>raised an objection to his</b> opinion from that which we learned: A verse that is originally written in Aramaic <b>translation that was written</b> in the language of <b>the Bible, and</b> a verse that is originally written in the language of <b>the Bible that was written</b> in Aramaic <b>translation, and</b> a Torah that was written in ancient <b>Hebrew script, one rescues</b> them <b>from the fire</b> on Shabbat. <b>And, needless to say,</b> one saves the verses written in Aramaic <b>translation that are in</b> the book of <b>Ezra, and that are in</b> the book of <b>Daniel, and that are in the Torah. What are the</b> verses originally written in Aramaic <b>translation in the Torah?</b> It is the verse: “And Laban called it <b>Yegar Sahaduta,</b> and Jacob called it Gal Ed” (Genesis 31:47), <b>and</b> apparently, it is rescued, <b>even though there are not eighty-five letters in it.</b> Rav Naḥman answered him: That is no proof, as <b>when that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught,</b> it was in a case where the Aramaic verse is counted <b>to complete</b> the total of eighty-five letters, but it is not independently significant.

### Part 6
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>these eighty-five letters</b> that allow one to rescue a Torah scroll, is that specifically when they <b>are juxtaposed, or</b> even when they are <b>scattered? Rav Huna said:</b> Only when they are <b>juxtaposed. Rav Ḥisda said: Even</b> when they are <b>scattered.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which we learned: With regard to <b>a Torah scroll that is worn, if there is</b> enough <b>to compile</b> from it <b>eighty-five</b> complete <b>letters as in the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled,” one rescues</b> it from the fire, <b>and if not one does not rescue</b> it. The term: To compile, indicates that the letters are not juxtaposed, and this is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Rav Huna. Rav Ḥisda interpreted</b> it <b>according to</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Huna:</b> Indeed, the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case where the letters are scattered, but they are juxtaposed <b>in</b> the form of <b>words.</b> In that case, even Rav Huna agrees that it is a sacred book. Rav Huna and Rav Ḥisda only disagree in a case where isolated letters are scattered.

### Part 7
Apropos the portion: “And when the Ark traveled,” the Gemara cites that which <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>. It is stated: <b>“And when the Ark traveled and Moses proclaimed:</b> Rise up, God, and Your enemies will scatter and those who hate You will flee from before You.” <b>And The Holy One, Blessed be He, made signs</b> in the Torah <b>for this portion, above and below,</b> i.e., before and after it, in order <b>to say</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC