
### Part 1
<b>Ḥisda: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to taking</b> those stones <b>up with him to the roof</b> if his bathroom is there? Is it permitted or is it prohibited due to the exertion involved? <b>He said to him:</b> It is permitted; <b>great is human dignity as it overrides a prohibition in the Torah.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Mareimar sat and stated this <i>halakha</i>. Ravina raised an objection to</b> the statement of <b>Mareimar</b> from a <i>baraita</i> where <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: A person may take a</b> wood <b>chip from</b> the ground <b>before him to</b> clean <b>his teeth</b> on Shabbat. <b>And the Rabbis say one may take</b> a wood chip <b>only from the animal’s trough,</b> which is already designated for the animal’s use, but not from wood on the ground, which is set-aside. Apparently, despite the fact that using the wood chip enhances human dignity, it is nevertheless prohibited due to the prohibition of set-aside. The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can you compare? There, a person determines</b> the <b>place for</b> his <b>meal.</b> Since he knows where he will eat he should have prepared toothpicks beforehand. <b>Here, does a person determine</b> the <b>place for a bathroom?</b> He relieves himself wherever he finds a discreet place to do so.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Huna said: It is prohibited to defecate in a plowed field on Shabbat.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for that prohibition? <b>If you say</b> it is <b>due to</b> the fact that in doing so he <b>treads</b> on the furrows and destroys them, it should be prohibited <b>even on weekdays. Rather,</b> it is <b>due to</b> the concern that he will clean himself with a clod of earth on which <b>grasses</b> have grown. <b>Didn’t Reish Lakish say</b> that <b>it is permitted to wipe with a stone upon which grasses have grown</b> even though the grasses will be detached as a result? <b>And</b> that is the <i>halakha</i> even though <b>one who</b> unwittingly <b>detaches</b> grasses <b>from it on Shabbat is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering. Rather,</b> the concern is <b>lest he take</b> a clod of earth <b>from</b> a <b>high</b> place, a pile of dirt, <b>and throw it to</b> a <b>low</b> place, into a hole in the ground. <b>And</b> in that case, he would <b>be liable due to that</b> which <b>Rabba</b> said, <b>as Rabba said:</b> If one <b>had a hole and filled it, in the house, he is liable due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>building; in the field, he is liable due to plowing.</b>

### Part 3
With regard to <b>the matter itself, Reish Lakish said: It is permitted to wipe with a stone upon which grasses have grown. And one who detaches</b> grasses <b>from it</b> unwittingly <b>on Shabbat is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering. Rav Pappi said: Learn from that</b> which <b>Reish Lakish</b> said that <b>it is permitted to carry this perforated flowerpot</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rav Kahana strongly objects to this: If they said</b> that it is permitted to carry a stone with weeds on it <b>for a purpose, will they say</b> it is permitted to carry a flowerpot <b>for no purpose? Abaye said: Since</b> the topic of <b>a perforated pot has come to our hands, let us say something with regard to it:</b> If <b>it</b> had been <b>placed on the ground and one</b> lifted it and <b>placed it on top of pegs</b> on Shabbat, <b>he is liable for</b> the labor of <b>detaching.</b> The roots of the plant could have protruded through the holes to draw sustenance from the ground, and when one lifts it he detaches it from that sustenance. Similarly, if <b>it</b> had been <b>placed on pegs and one placed it on the ground, he is liable for</b> the labor of <b>planting.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is prohibited to wipe with an earthenware shard on Shabbat.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for that prohibition? <b>If you say</b> that it is <b>due to</b> the <b>danger</b> that he might injure himself with the sharp edges of the shard, it should be prohibited <b>also on weekdays. Rather,</b> it is <b>due to</b> the fact that it invites <b>witchcraft.</b> If so, he should <b>also not</b> do so <b>on weekdays. Rather,</b> the concern is <b>lest</b> he <b>remove hairs</b> with the earthenware shard. However, that is <b>an unintentional act,</b> which is permitted. <b>Rav Natan bar Oshaya said to</b> those who raised the question: <b>A great man said something, let us say a reason for it,</b> and explain Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement as follows: <b>It is not necessary</b> to say that it is <b>prohibited on a weekday</b> for the aforementioned reasons because he has the option of using a stone. <b>However, with regard to Shabbat</b> we would have said that <b>since</b> this shard <b>has the status of a utensil</b> and is not set-aside, he may <b>well</b> use it, as it is preferable to a stone, which is set-aside. Therefore, <b>he teaches us</b> that it is prohibited.

### Part 5
<b>Rava taught</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan ruled that it is prohibited <b>due to the removal of hairs, and he</b> raised <b>a difficulty</b> between <b>that</b> which <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> said here and <b>that</b> which <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> said elsewhere. <b>Did Rabbi Yoḥanan say it is forbidden to wipe with an earthenware shard on Shabbat? Apparently,</b> he holds that <b>an unintentional act is prohibited. Didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan state</b> a principle: <b>The <i>halakha</i></b> is ruled <b>in accordance with an unattributed mishna? And we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A nazirite,</b> for whom it is prohibited to cut his hair, <b>may wash</b> his hair on a weekday with sand and natron <b>and separate</b> it with his fingers; <b>however, he may not comb</b> it, which would certainly pull out some hair. Apparently, the unintentional act of removing hair while shampooing is permitted. <b>Rather, it is clearly in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Rav Natan bar Oshaya.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the <b>witchcraft</b> involved with wiping with an earthenware shard? The Gemara explains: It is <b>as that</b> which transpired when <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rabba bar Rav Huna were going on a boat. A certain matron [<i>matronita</i>] said to them: Let me sit with you, and they did not let her sit. She said something,</b> an incantation of witchcraft, and <b>stopped the boat. They said something,</b> the Holy Name, and <b>freed it. She said to them: What will I do to you,</b> to enable me to harm you with witchcraft,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC