
### Part 1
that one may even <b>return</b> it, doing so is permitted <b>even on Shabbat</b> and not only on Shabbat eve. <b>And Rav Oshaya also holds:</b> One may <b>even return</b> it <b>even on Shabbat. As Rav Oshaya said: Once we were standing</b> on Shabbat <b>before Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great and we passed up to him a kettle [<i>kumkemos</i>] of hot</b> water <b>from the bottom floor [<i>deyota</i>] to the top floor, and we poured him a cup and returned</b> the kettle <b>to its place</b> on top of the stove, <b>and he did not say anything to us.</b> Apparently, he is of the opinion that even on Shabbat it is permitted to return a pot to the stove.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Zerika said</b> that <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Tadai said: They only taught</b> that it is permitted to return vessels with the food inside them when <b>they are still in his hand; however,</b> if he already <b>placed them on the ground,</b> he obviously regretted placing them on the fire and <b>it is prohibited</b> to replace them on the stove. <b>Rabbi Ami said:</b> That which <b>Rabbi Tadai did</b> and said, <b>he did on his own,</b> and not in accordance with the accepted <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rather, Rabbi Ḥiyya said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said as follows: Even</b> if <b>one placed</b> the pot <b>on the ground, it is permitted</b> to return it to the stove.

### Part 3
The Gemara remarks that <b>Rav Dimi and Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda disagreed about this</b> matter, <b>and both stated</b> their opinion <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar. One said</b> that when <b>they are still in his hand, it is permitted</b> to return them to the stove; when they were already <b>placed on the ground, it is prohibited</b> to do so. <b>And one said</b> that even if <b>one placed them on the ground, it is also permitted</b> to return it to the stove. <b>Ḥizkiya said in the name</b> of <b>Abaye: That</b> which <b>you said,</b> that when <b>it is still in his hand, it is permitted</b> to return it to the stove; <b>we only said</b> that <i>halakha</i> <b>when his</b> original <b>intention</b> was <b>to return</b> it to the stove. <b>However,</b> when <b>it was not his</b> original <b>intention to return</b> it, and he reconsidered and decided to return it, <b>it is prohibited</b> to return it. This proves <b>by inference</b> that if one placed it <b>on the ground, even if his intention</b> was <b>to return</b> it, <b>it is prohibited.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Some say</b> a different version of what <b>Ḥizkiya said in the name</b> of <b>Abaye: That</b> which <b>you said,</b> if one placed it <b>on the ground it is prohibited; we only said</b> that <i>halakha</i> <b>when it was not his</b> original <b>intention to return</b> it. <b>However,</b> if <b>his</b> original <b>intention was to return</b> it, <b>it is permitted.</b> With regard to this matter, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya raised a dilemma:</b> In a case where he neither placed them on the floor nor held them in his hand, but he <b>hung them on a stick, what is</b> the ruling? In a case where he <b>placed it on top of a bed, what is</b> the ruling? Similarly, <b>Rav Ashi raised a dilemma:</b> If <b>one transferred them from</b> one <b>urn to</b> another <b>urn what is</b> the ruling? The Gemara said: These dilemmas <b>stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The <i>halakhot</i> that were stated with regard to a stove were specific to a stove’s unique structure and the manner in which it retains heat. However, with regard to other baking apparatuses, i.e., an oven or a <i>kupaḥ,</i> there are different rules. The mishna delineates: <b>An oven that they lit</b> even <b>with straw</b> or <b>rakings, one may neither place</b> a pot <b>inside it nor atop it</b> on Shabbat. Whereas a <b><i>kupaḥ</i> that was lit with straw</b> or <b>rakings, its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>a stove,</b> and one is permitted to place a pot atop it on Shabbat. If it were lit <b>with pomace</b> or <b>with wood, its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>an oven</b> and it is prohibited to place a pot atop it on Shabbat.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to that which we learned in the mishna that <b>an oven that they lit</b> even with straw or rakings, one may neither place a pot atop it nor inside it, <b>Rav Yosef thought to say</b> that when the mishna says <b>inside it,</b> it means <b>actually inside it;</b> and when it says <b>atop it,</b> it means <b>actually atop it. However, to lean</b> a pot against an oven, it may <b>well</b> be done. <b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rav Yosef from that which we learned in our mishna: <b>A <i>kupaḥ</i> that was lit with straw</b> or <b>rakings, its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>a stove.</b> If it were lit <b>with pomace</b> or <b>with wood, its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>an oven, and it is prohibited.</b> By inference: If it were <b>like a stove, it</b> would be <b>permitted. With what</b> circumstances <b>are we dealing? If you say</b> that he placed the pot <b>atop</b> the <i>kupaḥ</i>, <b>and in what</b> case? <b>If you say</b> it is referring to a case where <b>it is not swept and covered with ashes; a stove</b> that <b>is not swept and covered with ashes, is it permitted</b> even to place a pot <b>atop it</b> on Shabbat? <b>Rather, isn’t</b> it referring to a case where one seeks <b>to lean</b> a pot against a <i>kupaḥ</i>, and <b>it taught: It is like an oven, and prohibited?</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava</b> said: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> the cases of <b>a <i>kupaḥ</i> that is swept and covered with ashes and an oven that is swept and covered with ashes,</b> and the mishna is to be understood as follows: <b>It is like an oven in</b> the sense <b>that</b>, <b>although</b> it is <b>swept and covered with ashes, it is prohibited to place</b> a pot <b>atop it; as, if</b> its legal status were <b>like</b> that of <b>a stove, when</b> it is <b>swept and covered</b> it may <b>well</b> be done. The Gemara comments that there is a <i>baraita</i> that <b>taught in accordance</b> with the opinion of <b>Abaye: An oven that one lit with straw and with rakings, one may not lean</b> a pot against <b>it, and needless to say</b> one may not place a pot <b>atop it, and needless to say</b> one may not place a pot <b>inside it, and, needless to say</b> if it was lit <b>with pomace</b> or <b>with wood</b> it is prohibited. While with regard to a <b><i>kupaḥ</i> that was lit with straw</b> or <b>with rakings, one may lean</b> a pot against <b>it, but he may not place</b> a pot <b>atop it.</b> If it was lit <b>with pomace</b> or <b>with wood, one may not lean</b> a pot against <b>it.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Aha, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: This <i>kupaḥ</i>, what are its circumstances? If</b> it is <b>considered like a stove, even</b> if it was lit <b>with pomace</b> or <b>with wood,</b> it should <b>also</b> be permitted. <b>And if</b> it is <b>considered like an oven, even with straw</b> or <b>with rakings,</b> it should <b>also not</b> be permitted. Rav Ashi <b>said to him:</b> From a halakhic perspective, a <i>kupaḥ</i> has intermediate status. <b>Its heat is greater than</b> that of <b>a stove;</b> however, <b>its heat is less than</b> that of <b>an oven.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances of a <i>kupaḥ</i>? What are the circumstances of a stove</b> in terms of the configuration of the vessels? <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: A <i>kupaḥ</i></b> is a small vessel that is similar to a stove; however, it only has one hole with enough <b>space to place a single pot. A stove</b> is like a double <i>kupaḥ</i> with enough <b>space to place two pots. Abaye said, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya</b> said: <b>We also learned</b> this matter in a mishna dealing with the laws of ritual purity and impurity: <b>An</b> impure <b>stove that was divided lengthwise is pure</b> because it can no longer be considered a vessel. It is a broken vessel, and a broken vessel cannot become ritually impure. However, if the stove was divided <b>widthwise,</b> between the spaces for the pots, then it remains <b>impure</b> because it became two small stoves. However, a <b><i>kupaḥ</i>, whether</b> it was divided <b>lengthwise</b> or <b>whether</b> it was divided <b>widthwise,</b> is <b>pure</b> because it can no longer be used as there is no way to put even a single pot on it. That is the difference between a <i>kupaḥ</i> and a stove.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In addition to the <i>halakhot</i> that deal with cooking on the fire on Shabbat, several related <i>halakhot</i> are discussed. The mishna says: <b>One may not place a</b> raw <b>egg next to an urn</b> full of hot water <b>so that it will roast slightly. And one may not</b> even <b>wrap it in cloths,</b> i.e., one may not heat the egg inside cloths that were heated in the sun. <b>And Rabbi Yosei permits</b> doing so in that case. <b>And,</b> similarly, <b>one may not insulate it in sand</b> or <b>in road dust</b> that was heated in the sun <b>so that it will roast.</b> Although there is no actual cooking with fire here, it is similar to cooking and the Sages issued a decree to prohibit doing so.

### Part 11
The mishna relates <b>a story about the people of</b> the city of <b>Tiberias, and they ran a cold-water pipe [<i>silon</i>] through a canal of hot</b> water from the Tiberias hot springs. They thought that by doing so, they could heat the cold potable water on Shabbat. <b>The Rabbis said to them: If</b> the water passed through <b>on Shabbat,</b> its legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>hot water that was heated on Shabbat, and</b> the water is <b>prohibited</b> both <b>for bathing and for drinking. And if</b> the water passed through <b>on a Festival, then it is prohibited</b> for <b>bathing but permitted for drinking.</b> On Festivals, one is even permitted to boil water on actual fire for the purposes of eating and drinking.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: One who violated the <i>halakha</i> in the mishna and <b>slightly roasted</b> an egg next to an urn, <b>what is</b> the ruling? <b>Rav Yosef said: One</b> who <b>slightly cooked</b> an egg is <b>liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering,</b> as he performed the act of cooking on Shabbat, which is prohibited by Torah law. <b>Mar, son of Ravina, said: We also learned</b> something similar in the mishna:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC