
### Part 1
Jewish <b>official</b> in <b>Pumbedita that was bitten by a snake. There were thirteen white donkeys in Pumbedita</b> and <b>they tore them all</b> open <b>and they were found to be <i>tereifot</i>. There was one</b> donkey <b>on the other side</b> of <b>Pumbedita,</b> and <b>until they went to bring it, a lion ate it. Abaye said to them:</b> Since all of these things have happened, <b>perhaps a snake of the Rabbis bit him, for which there is no cure, as it is written:</b> “One that digs a pit will fall into it, and <b>one who breaches a fence will be bitten by a snake</b>” (Ecclesiastes 10:8). Perhaps this person violated a rabbinic decree, also known as a fence, and was bitten by a snake as punishment. That bite has no cure. <b>They said to him: Yes, my teacher,</b> it is so, <b>as when Rav died Rav Yitzḥak bar Bisna ruled that one may not bring myrtle and</b> palm <b>branches to a wedding hall to</b> accompany <b>bells, and he went</b> and <b>brought myrtle and</b> palm <b>branches to the wedding hall with bells.</b> Therefore, <b>a snake bit him. And</b> it is reported that ultimately the official <b>died.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara cites additional information about the dangers posed by snakes and how to deal with them. <b>One whom a snake encircled should descend into water and place a basket on</b> his <b>head and remove</b> the snake slowly <b>from him</b> into the basket. <b>And once the snake goes into</b> the basket, <b>let</b> him <b>throw it into the water and climb and emerge. One at whom a snake is angry</b> and is being pursued by a snake, <b>if he has another with him, let</b> him <b>ride him four cubits. And if not, let</b> him <b>jump</b> over <b>a ditch. And if not, let</b> him <b>cross a river. And at night let</b> him <b>place his bed on four barrels and sleep</b> outside beneath <b>the stars. And let</b> one <b>bring four cats and let</b> one <b>tie them to the four legs of the bed. And let</b> one <b>bring twigs and branches and throw them there so that when</b> the cats <b>hear the sound</b> of the snake crawling <b>they will eat it. One who is being pursued</b> by a snake, <b>let</b> him <b>run in sand</b> because a snake cannot move as quickly in sand as a person can.

### Part 3
<b>A woman who is seen</b> by <b>a snake and does not know whether it has directed his attention</b> toward <b>her or whether it has not directed his attention</b> toward <b>her, she should remove her garment and throw it before</b> the snake. <b>If</b> the snake <b>wraps itself in</b> the garments, it is an indication that <b>it has directed his attention</b> toward <b>her; and if not,</b> it is an indication that <b>it has not directed his attention</b> toward <b>her.</b>

### Part 4
<b>What is her remedy</b> so the snake will leave her alone? <b>She should have relations</b> with her husband <b>before</b> the snake. <b>Some say:</b> If she has relations in front of the snake, <b>all the more so that its desire will become stronger. Rather, she should take from her hair and her nails and throw them at</b> the snake, <b>and say</b> the following <b>to it</b> as an incantation: <b>I am a menstruating woman [<i>dishtana</i>]. A woman whom a snake has entered, let them spread her legs and place her on two barrels, and let them bring fatty meat and throw it onto coals. And let them bring her a bowl of cress and fragrant wine and place them there and mix them together. And</b> she should <b>take tongs in her hand, as when</b> the snake <b>smells</b> the <b>fragrance</b> it <b>emerges. And</b> then one <b>should take</b> the snake <b>and burn it in the fire, as if</b> it is <b>not</b> burned, <b>it will come back onto her.</b>

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna: <b>All</b> types of <b>food</b> that healthy people eat may be eaten by one eating them for medicinal purposes on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: The phrase: <b>All foods, what</b> does it come <b>to include?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to include spleen for</b> healing <b>teeth</b> and <b>vetch for</b> healing <b>intestines,</b> although they are not common foods. We also learned in the mishna: And one may drink all <b>drinks</b> on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: The phrase: <b>All drinks, what</b> does it come <b>to include?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to include</b> mixing <b>water in which capers have soaked, with vinegar. Ravina said to Rava: What</b> is the ruling with regard to <b>drinking urine on Shabbat?</b> Rava <b>said to him: We</b> already <b>learned</b> in the mishna: <b>One may drink all drinks, and people do not drink urine</b> and is not considered a drink. It is only consumed for medical purposes and is therefore prohibited.

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: One may drink anything on Shabbat <b>except for palm tree water [<i>mei dekalim</i>].</b> It was <b>taught</b> slightly differently in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Water that stabs [<i>mei dekarim</i>].</b> The Gemara explains: <b>The one who taught water that stabs</b> means <b>that the</b> waters <b>pierce the gall bladder; and the one who said palm tree water</b> means <b>that they come from two palm trees.</b> In order to explain <b>what palm tree water</b> is, <b>Rabba bar Beruna said: There are two palm trees in Eretz Yisrael, and a spring of water emerges from between them. The first cup</b> one drinks of this water <b>loosens</b> the intestines, <b>another</b> cup <b>causes diarrhea, and another,</b> a third cup, <b>just as it entered</b> as water, <b>so</b> too <b>it emerges. Ulla said: For me, I drink Babylonian beer, and</b> it <b>is more effective than</b> palm tree water in causing diarrhea. The Gemara comments: <b>And this is</b> true. It is effective for the stomach when the person who drinks it <b>has not become accustomed to</b> beer <b>for forty days.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> Water that stabs is <b>Egyptian <i>zitom</i>,</b> which is made from <b>one-third barley, and one-third saffron, and one-third salt. Rav Pappa said:</b> It is <b>one-third wheat, and one-third saffron, and one-third salt and cumin. And</b> this is <b>your mnemonic</b> to remember which said <i>zitom</i> is made from barley: A basket which is called <b><i>sisanei</i>,</b> a word with two <i>samekhs.</i> This word alludes to the fact that <b>Rav Yosef,</b> who has a <i>samekh</i> in his name, is the one who says that Egyptian <i>zitom</i> is made from barley [<i>se’orim</i>], which has the letter <i>sin. Sin</i> is interchangeable with <i>samekh</i>. <b>And one</b> should <b>drink it between Passover and <i>Shavuot</i>. For one whose</b> intestines <b>are blocked,</b> it will <b>loosen</b> his intestines and cure <b>him; and</b> for one <b>whose</b> bowels are <b>loose,</b> it will <b>block him</b> and cure him as well<b>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And</b> we also learned about a <b><i>kos ikarin</i></b> in the mishna. The Gemara asks: <b>What is a <i>kos ikarin</i>? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Let</b> one <b>bring the weight of a <i>zuz</i> of Alexandrian gum, and a weight of a <i>zuz</i> of alum, and a weight of a <i>zuz</i> of garden saffron, and let</b> one <b>grind them together.</b> The procedure <b>for</b> treating <b>a <i>zava</i></b> is that she should drink these <b>three</b> ingredients <b>with wine,</b> and she will be cured of her emission <b>and will not become barren. For</b> treating <b>jaundice</b> one should drink <b>two</b> of these ingredients <b>with beer; however, one will become sterile</b> from it. It was said that <b>for</b> treating <b>a <i>zava</i>,</b> she should drink these <b>three</b> ingredients <b>with wine</b> and she will be healed from her emission <b>and will not become barren. And if</b> it is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one bring three</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC