
### Part 1
therefore, <b>the verse states “one,”</b> which means one complete labor. <b>How</b> can the two phrases be reconciled? Rather it must be explained that <b>one is liable only if he writes a small name</b> that constitutes part <b>of a longer name,</b> e.g., <b>Shem from</b> the name <b>Shimon</b> or <b>from Shmuel, Noaḥ from Naḥor, Dan from Daniel, Gad from Gaddiel. Rabbi Yehuda says: One is liable even</b> if <b>he wrote only two letters that are one type</b> of letter, <b>e.g., <i>shesh</i> [<i>shin shin</i>], <i>tet</i> [<i>tav tav</i>], <i>rar</i> [<i>reish reish</i>], <i>gag</i> [<i>gimmel gimmel</i>], <i>ḥaḥ</i> [<i>ḥet ḥet</i>].</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: And is one liable due to</b> the labor of <b>writing? Isn’t one liable only due to</b> the prohibition of <b>marking, as they</b> would <b>write</b> symbols <b>on</b> adjacent <b>beams of the Tabernacle to know which</b> beam was another beam’s <b>counterpart? Therefore, one who made a single scratch on two boards, or two scratches on a single board, is liable.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The verse states, “When a leader sinned, <b>and he</b> unwittingly <b>performed one</b> of any of the commandments which the Lord his God commanded not to do, and is guilty” (Leviticus 4:22), and from the word one, I <b>might</b> have thought that one is not guilty until he performs a complete labor, e.g., <b>until he writes the entire name</b> that he intended to write, or <b>until he weaves the entire garment,</b> or <b>until he crafts the entire sieve</b> made from the reeds of the warp and the woof; therefore, <b>the verse states “from one.”</b> However, <b>if</b> that is derived from the use of the phrase <b>“from one,”</b> I <b>might</b> have thought that one is liable <b>even if he wrote only a single letter, or</b> even if <b>he wove only a single thread, or</b> even if <b>he crafted only a single eye of the sieve.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states “one.” But how</b> can we reconcile the two phrases? <b>One is only liable for performing a labor that</b> is <b>of the type</b> that <b>endures.</b> In that case it is considered a complete labor.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> that the verse states: “And did an action from one of these” (Leviticus 4:2). This unusual expression indicates repetition: <b>And he performed one, and he performed these.</b> From here it is derived that <b>at times one is liable</b> to bring <b>one</b> sin-offering <b>for them all, and at times one is liable</b> to bring several offerings, one <b>for each and every one.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara returns to the matter of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>In any event, it was taught</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One is liable even</b> if <b>he only wrote two letters that are one type</b> of letter; he does not insist that one is liable only if he writes two different letters. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> opinion is <b>his own,</b> and <b>that</b> other opinion is <b>that of his teacher, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says in the name of Rabban Gamliel: Even if one only wrote two identical letters,</b> forming words <b>such as <i>shesh</i>, <i>tet</i>, <i>rar</i>, <i>gag</i>,</b> or <b><i>ḥaḥ</i>, he is liable.</b> That is Rabban Gamliel’s opinion, but Rabbi Yehuda himself holds that one is only liable for writing two different letters.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: The opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> identical to the opinion of the <b>first <i>tanna</i>. And if you say</b> that <b>there is</b> a practical difference <b>between</b> their opinions in the case of the letters <b><i>alef alef</i></b> in a word such as <b><i>a’azerkha</i></b> (Isaiah 45:5), in that the <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that if one wrote the letters <b><i>alef alef</i></b> of the word <b><i>a’azerkha</i> he is not liable</b> because the two letters do not spell a complete word, <b>and Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that <b>since</b> that combination of letters <b>appears in standard amulets [<i>gelatorei</i>] he is liable</b> because this writing is considered to be enduring; <b>is that to say</b> that the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> tends <b>to stringency</b> in this matter?

### Part 7
<b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who drills</b> a hole of <b>any size</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable, one who scrapes</b> and smooths posts or parchments in <b>any amount</b> is liable, <b>one who tans any amount</b> of an animal hide is liable, <b>one who draws any size form on a vessel</b> is liable? <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> One is liable <b>only if he drills the entire</b> hole that he intended to drill, or if <b>he scrapes the entire</b> post or parchment that he intended to scrape, or if <b>he tans the entire hide</b> that he intended to tan, or if <b>he draws the entire form</b> that he intended to draw. Clearly, Rabbi Shimon’s opinion is the lenient one.

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Rabbi Shimon comes to teach us this:</b> It is considered writing that endures only <b>if he writes the entire name.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how can you say this? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> From the phrase <b>“and he performed one”</b> I <b>might</b> have thought that one is liable <b>only if he writes the entire name;</b> therefore, <b>the verse states “from one.”</b> Apparently, he does not require that the entire word be written in order to be liable. The Gemara answers: <b>Resolve</b> the contradiction between these statements <b>and say this:</b> I <b>might</b> have thought that one is liable only <b>if he writes the entire verse</b> that he intended to write; therefore, <b>the verse states “from one.”</b> One is liable for writing less than that. However, one is certainly not liable for writing less than a complete word.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> cites that <b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> that the verse states: “And did an action from one of these.” This unusual expression indicates repetition and it is as if it says: <b>And he did one, and he did these.</b> From here it is derived that <b>at times one is liable</b> to bring <b>one</b> sin-offering <b>for them all, and at times one is liable</b> to bring several offerings, one <b>for each and every one.</b>

### Part 10
And <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: What is the reason for Rabbi Yosei’s</b> opinion? Since the verse says “from one” and “of these,” Rabbi Yosei detects both a restriction, i.e., “from” and “of,” an amplification based on superfluous expressions, as it would have been sufficient for the verse to say <b>“one”</b> and not <b>“from one,”</b> and it would have been sufficient to say <b>“these”</b> instead of <b>“of these.”</b> The repetitive language teaches that there are cases of <b>one that is these and</b> cases of <b>these that are one.</b>

### Part 11
Similarly, Rabbi Yosei explained that had the verse said <b>“one,”</b> the conclusion would have been that one is only liable for performing a complete transgression, e.g., writing the name <b>Shimon</b> on Shabbat. <b>“From one”</b> teaches that one is liable even if he does not complete the intended action, e.g., writing <b>Shem from Shimon. “These”</b> refers to the transgressions themselves, e.g., <b>the primary categories of labor</b> prohibited on Shabbat. The words <b>“from these”</b> teach that even <b>subcategories</b> are included. The Gemara illustrates the case of <b>one that is these.</b> One <b>was aware that</b> he was in violation of the prohibition of <b>Shabbat but not aware</b> that the individual <b>labors</b> were prohibited. In that case, if he performed several prohibited labors during this lapse of awareness, he is liable to bring a sin-offering for each violation. <b>These that are one</b> refers to a case where one <b>was unaware that</b> he was in violation of the prohibition of <b>Shabbat but he was aware</b> that the individual <b>labors</b> were prohibited. In that case, he is liable to bring only one sin-offering for all of the prohibited labors.

### Part 12
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: We found</b> that one is liable for writing even if he did not complete what he was writing and wrote <b>a small name</b> that constituted part <b>of a longer name,</b> e.g., Shem from Shimon. The Gemara asks: <b>Is it similar?</b> The <b><i>mem</i></b> in <b>Shem is closed and the <i>mem</i></b> in <b>Shimon is open. Rav Ḥisda said: That is to say</b> that a <b>closed</b> letter that <b>one rendered open is valid</b> even in writing a Torah scroll, and it is not considered an irregularity in the writing. Therefore, one is liable for writing an open letter instead of a closed one.

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raised an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i> that interprets the verse: <b>“And you shall write them</b> on the doorposts of your house and on your gates” (Deuteronomy 6:9). “And you shall write them [<i>ukhtavtam</i>]” means <b>that it should be perfect writing [<i>ketiva tamma</i>]</b> with no mistakes, and clear writing. This means that <b>one should not write</b> an <b><i>alef</i> as</b> an <b><i>ayin</i>,</b> an <b><i>ayin</i> as</b> an <b><i>alef</i>,</b> a <b><i>beit</i> as</b> a <b><i>kaf</i>,</b> a <b><i>kaf</i> as</b> a <b><i>beit</i>,</b> a <b><i>gimmel</i> as</b> a <b><i>tzadi</i>,</b> a <b><i>tzadi</i> as</b> a <b><i>gimmel</i>,</b> a <b><i>dalet</i> as</b> a <b><i>reish</i>,</b> a <b><i>reish</i> as</b> a <b><i>dalet</i>,</b> a <b><i>heh</i> as</b> a <b><i>ḥet</i>,</b> a <b><i>ḥet</i> as</b> a <b><i>heh</i>,</b> a <b><i>vav</i> as</b> a <b><i>yod</i>,</b> a <b><i>yod</i> as</b> a <b><i>vav</i>,</b> a <b><i>zayin</i> as</b> a <b><i>nun</i>,</b> a <b><i>nun</i> as</b> a <b><i>zayin</i>,</b> a <b><i>tet</i> as</b> a <b><i>peh</i>,</b> a <b><i>peh</i> as</b> a <b><i>tet</i>.</b>

### Part 14
Similarly, one should not write <b>bent</b> letters like <i>kaf</i> and <i>nun</i> found in the middle of a word as <b>straight</b> letters like <i>kaf</i> and <i>nun</i> found at the end of a word, nor should one write <b>straight</b> letters as <b>bent</b> letters. A final <b><i>mem</i></b> should not be written like a <b><i>samekh</i>,</b> and a <b><i>samekh</i></b> should not be written like a <b><i>mem</i>.</b> A <b>closed</b> <i>mem</i> should not be written <b>open,</b> and an <b>open</b> one should not be written <b>closed.</b> Similarly, if there is <b>an open paragraph</b> in the Torah <b>one may not render it closed,</b> and <b>one may not render a closed</b> paragraph <b>open.</b> If <b>one wrote</b> a <i>mezuza</i> or a Torah scroll <b>following the</b> Torah’s format <b>for poetry or if one wrote poetry like</b> regular text, as a <i>mezuza</i> is typically written, <b>or if one wrote without ink</b> but with another material, <b>or if one wrote the mentions</b> of God’s names <b>in gold,</b> all of <b>these must be suppressed.</b> Apparently, one may not write closed letters as open letters, contrary to the statement of Rav Ḥisda.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: Rav Ḥisda <b>stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> While on the rest of the days of Sukkot the verse employs the phrase: “And its libation [<i>veniska</i>],” on the <b>second</b> day <b>it is stated: “And their libations [<i>veniskeihem</i>]”</b> (Numbers 29:19) with an extra letter <i>mem</i>; <b>on the sixth day, it is stated: “And its libations [<i>unsakhe’ah</i>]”</b> (Numbers 29:31) with an extra letter <i>yod</i>. <b>On the seventh</b> day, instead of “according to the law [<i>kamishpat</i>]” employed on the other days, <b>it is stated: “According to their laws [<i>kemishpatam</i>]”</b> (Numbers 29:33) with an extra letter <i>mem</i>. Together these additional letters, <b><i>mem</i>, <i>yod</i>,</b> and <b><i>mem</i>, form the word <i>mayim</i>,</b> which means water. <b>This is an allusion to the water libation from the Torah.</b> On <i>Sukkot</i>, a water libation was poured onto the altar in addition to the wine libation that accompanied sacrifices throughout the year. However, here, the closed <i>mem</i> at the end of the word <i>veniskeihem</i> is interpreted as if it were an open <i>mem</i> and used as the first <i>mem</i> in <i>mayim</i>.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> from the fact <b>that an open</b> letter <b>that one rendered closed is valid,</b> in the case of a <b>closed</b> letter, <b>too, a closed letter that one rendered open is valid.</b> This homiletic interpretation supports Rav Ḥisda’s opinion.

### Part 17
The Gemara rejects this comparison: <b>Is it similar?</b> If <b>one rendered an open</b> letter <b>closed,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC