
### Part 1
The Gemara questions this leniency: By putting cold water into the urn, <b>doesn’t it harden</b> the vessel? Cold water poured into a heated metal vessel reinforces the vessel. It is one of the stages in the labor of a blacksmith. How is it permitted to do something similar on Shabbat? The Gemara answers: This mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who <b>stated</b> a principle with regard to the laws of Shabbat: <b>An unintentional act,</b> i.e., a permitted action from which a prohibited labor inadvertently ensues, <b>is permitted.</b> Here too, his intention was to warm the water, not to reinforce the vessel. <b>Abaye strongly objects to this</b> explanation: <b>Does it say</b> in the mishna: <b>An urn from which water was emptied?</b> That would indicate that he sought to fill the vessel with other water and warm up that water. Rather, <b>an urn that was removed was taught</b> in the mishna, meaning that the urn was removed from the fire, not that the water was emptied from it.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Abaye said this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: An urn that was removed</b> from the fire <b>and contains hot water, one may not place a small quantity of water in it so that</b> the water will <b>become hot; rather, one may place a large quantity of water in it so that</b> the water will <b>become warm. And</b> with regard to <b>an urn from which water was removed; one may not place any water into it because he hardens</b> the vessel by placing cold water into a hot vessel. <b>And,</b> according to this explanation, our mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who <b>said</b> that <b>an unintentional act</b> from which a prohibited labor inadvertently ensues <b>is prohibited</b> on Shabbat.

### Part 3
With regard to the matter itself, <b>Rav said: They taught</b> that one is permitted to place cold water into an urn with hot water after it was removed from the fire, when his intention is <b>only to warm</b> the cold water. <b>However,</b> if he did this in order <b>to harden</b> the vessel, <b>it is prohibited. And Shmuel said: Even</b> if he does so in order <b>to harden</b> the vessel, it <b>is also permitted.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>Is hardening permitted <i>ab initio</i>?</b> Isn’t it a full-fledged prohibited labor on Shabbat? Rather, <b>if</b> the dispute between Rav and Shmuel <b>was stated, it was stated as follows. Rav said: They taught</b> that it is permitted to add water <b>only</b> in <b>a measure</b> that is sufficient <b>to warm</b> the water, i.e., to only partially fill the vessel. <b>However,</b> filling it completely with <b>a measure</b> sufficient <b>to harden</b> the vessel <b>is prohibited. And Shmuel said: Even a measure</b> sufficient <b>to harden</b> the vessel

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC