
### Part 1
Additionally, <b>the clasps in the loops,</b> which connected the curtains to one another, <b>looked like stars in the sky.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Our Sages taught:</b> The <b>bottom curtains</b> in the Tabernacle were made <b>of sky blue</b> wool, <b>and of purple</b> wool, <b>and of scarlet</b> wool, <b>and of fine linen; and</b> the <b>top</b> curtains were made <b>of goat hair,</b> even though that material is considered to be inferior and common. However, <b>the wisdom that was stated with regard to the top</b> curtains <b>was greater than that which was stated with regard to the bottom ones. This is because, with regard to the bottom</b> curtains, <b>it is written: “And every wise-hearted woman spun with her hands,</b> and they brought that which they had spun, the blue, and the purple, the scarlet, and the linen” (Exodus 35:25); <b>while with regard to the top</b> curtains, <b>it is written: “And all of the women whose hearts inspired them with wisdom spun the goats”</b> (Exodus 35:26). The phrase “whose hearts inspired them” suggests a greater degree of wisdom. Apparently, spinning the goat’s hair curtains required greater skill than spinning the various kinds of wool. <b>And</b> on a similar note, <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in the name of Rabbi Neḥemya:</b> The hair <b>was rinsed on</b> the <b>goats, and it was</b> even <b>spun from the goats,</b> which required a great deal of skill.

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna with regard to <b>two balconies. Rav said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> With regard to the <b>wagons</b> on which the beams of the Tabernacle were transported, the areas <b>beneath them, and between them, and to their sides</b> are considered to be <b>the public domain. Abaye said:</b> The space <b>between</b> one <b>wagon</b> and <b>the wagon</b> alongside it equaled <b>the full length of a wagon. And how much</b> was <b>the length</b> of a <b>wagon?</b> It was <b>five cubits.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I need</b> the wagon to be five cubits long? <b>Four and a half</b> cubits <b>would suffice</b> whether the beams were arranged in three stacks, each a cubit and a half wide, or four stacks, each one cubit wide. The Gemara answers: You need the wagon to be five cubits long <b>so</b> that space remains between <b>the beams and</b> they will <b>not be pressed</b> against each other.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: The</b> area on the <b>sides of</b> the <b>wagon</b> between the wagon and the wheel and the thickness of the wheel together equaled <b>the full width of the wagon</b> (<i>Tosafot</i>). <b>And how much was the width of</b> the <b>wagon?</b> It was <b>two and a half cubits.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I need</b> the wagon to be two and a half cubits wide? <b>A cubit and a half would suffice.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>So</b> that <b>the beams would not teeter.</b> Ten-cubit beams on a one-and-a-half-cubit wide surface would be unstable.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>However,</b> with regard to the principle that <b>we maintain</b> that <b>a thoroughfare in the public domain is sixteen cubits</b> wide; <b>we who derive it from</b> the <b>Tabernacle</b> encounter a difficulty: The thoroughfare associated with the <b>Tabernacle was fifteen cubits</b> wide. When two wagons stood side by side, the width of the wagons plus the space between them and the space on their sides totaled fifteen cubits. The Gemara explains: <b>There was an extra cubit where a member of</b> the tribe <b>of Levi stood,</b> to ensure that <b>if</b> the <b>beams fell, he would take</b> hold of <b>them</b> and restore them to their stack. Therefore, the total width was no less than sixteen cubits.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>the bank</b> surrounding <b>a pit and the boulder that are ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, one who takes</b> an object from <b>them</b> to the public domain <b>and</b> similarly <b>one who places</b> an object from the public domain <b>atop them is liable</b> for carrying from one domain to another. If the height or width of the pit or the boulder is <b>less than that</b> height, ten handbreadths, <b>one is exempt</b> because the legal status of those protrusions is not distinct from that of the surrounding public domain.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>to teach</b> in the mishna about the cases of <b>the bank of a pit and a boulder? Let</b> the mishna simply <b>teach</b> about <b>a pit and a boulder.</b> One could derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an object that is ten handbreadths high from the case of the boulder, and the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an object that is ten handbreadths deep from the pit. The fact that the mishna taught the case of the bank of a pit <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A pit and its bank join together to</b> constitute the total <b>ten</b> handbreadths. If the distance from the bottom of the pit to the top of its bank is ten handbreadths, it is considered a private domain, even though some of the ten handbreadths are above ground and some are below. <b>That</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>was also taught</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a pit in the public domain</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>deep and four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, one may not fill</b> water <b>from it on Shabbat</b> because the pit itself is a private domain, and carrying water from the pit to the public domain is prohibited

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC