
### Part 1
<b>and of: What</b> significance <b>does it have,</b> it is <b>permitted to calculate them.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> based on what was taught in another <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may make calculations that are unnecessary, but one may not make calculations that are necessary on Shabbat. How</b> so? <b>One may say to another: I sent out such and such</b> number of <b>workers to this field, and I spent such and such</b> number of <b><i>dinar</i> for this home. But he may not say to him: I spent such and such</b> amount of money, <b>and I am going to spend such and such</b> amount <b>in the future.</b> Apparently, one is permitted to calculate one’s previous expenditures on Shabbat.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning, it itself,</b> the <i>Tosefta</i> quoted previously, <b>is difficult for you,</b> for it prohibits calculating past expenditures while allowing one to make calculations that do not have practical significance. <b>Rather,</b> it must be explained in the following manner: <b>This</b> <i>Tosefta</i>, which taught that it is prohibited to calculate past expenses, is referring to a case in which <b>he has payment with him</b> that he still owes his workers. Therefore, although his calculation pertains to projects that have already been completed, it is still relevant in a practical manner. And <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>, which taught that it is permitted to calculate past expenses, is referring to a case <b>in which he does not have payment with him</b> that he must still pay his workers, and therefore his calculation does not have practical significance.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna that <b>one may not wait for nightfall</b> at the edge of the Shabbat boundary in order to hire workers or bring produce from outside of the boundary immediately after Shabbat. <b>The Sages taught: There was an incident with a pious man</b> in which <b>a breach was made in</b> the fence around <b>his field, and</b> when he saw it <b>he decided to fence it in. And</b> then <b>he remembered that it was Shabbat. And that pious man refrained from fixing the fence</b> forever because he had thought about fixing it on Shabbat. <b>And a miracle was done for him, and a caper bush grew in</b> the breach, thereby closing it up. <b>And from it</b> and its produce he then <b>received his livelihood and the livelihood of the members of his household.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: A person is permitted to say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>I am going to such and such city tomorrow, for if there were small guardhouses [<i>burganin</i>] one</b> would be permitted to <b>walk.</b> If small guardhouses, from which the surrounding area and fields could be watched, were located along the way one needs to travel, the entire area would attain the status of a single city, and walking from one part to the other on Shabbat would be permitted <i>ab initio</i>. Since it would be permitted to traverse this area on Shabbat with <i>burganin</i> present, it is permitted to talk about such a journey on Shabbat, even when these guardhouses are not present. This is because it is permitted to speak about or prepare for something that can be done in a permitted fashion on Shabbat, even in the absence of the conditions that make it permitted.

### Part 6
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>One may not wait for nightfall at</b> the edge of <b>the Shabbat boundary</b> in order <b>to hire workers or bring produce</b> after Shabbat from the other side of the boundary. <b>Granted,</b> it makes sense that it is prohibited to wait at the Shabbat boundary <b>in order to hire workers,</b> as <b>one may not hire</b> workers under any circumstances on Shabbat. <b>But</b> if one waits there in order <b>to bring produce,</b> why is it prohibited? <b>Let us say that</b> since one would be permitted to bring produce at the edge of the boundary on Shabbat <i>ab initio</i> <b>if there were partitions there, one may</b> wait for nightfall at the border to <b>bring</b> produce even when there are not partitions present, in accordance with Rav Yehuda’s ruling mentioned above. The Gemara answers: <b>You find</b> a case where bringing <b>produce</b> is not permitted under any circumstances; <b>that is</b> when the produce is still <b>attached</b> to the ground, as there is no permitted way to pick produce on Shabbat.

### Part 7
The Gemara again questions Rav Yehuda’s ruling: <b>But Rabbi Oshaya taught: One may not wait for nightfall at the</b> edge of <b>the Shabbat boundary in order to bring in hay and straw</b> after Shabbat. <b>Granted,</b> Rabbi Oshaya taught that it is prohibited in the case of <b>straw; you find</b> the case of straw that is still <b>attached</b> to the ground, which it is clearly prohibited to pick under any circumstances. <b>But hay,</b> which has already been detached from the ground, <b>how do you find</b> a case in which it would be prohibited to carry it on Shabbat, even with partitions present? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Oshaya’s ruling referred <b>to rotten straw,</b> which may not be carried on Shabbat because it is considered set-aside [<i>muktze</i>].

### Part 8
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof with regard to this matter based on what was taught elsewhere: <b>One may wait for nightfall at the</b> edge of the Shabbat boundary in order <b>to attend to the needs of a bride or the needs of a corpse.</b> The Gemara infers from this that <b>for the needs of a bride or a corpse, yes,</b> one is permitted to wait for nightfall at the edge of the Shabbat boundary, but <b>for the needs of another person, no,</b> it is not permitted.

### Part 9
<b>Granted,</b> with regard to attending to the needs of <b>another</b> in a manner <b>similar to attending to</b> the needs of <b>a bride, you find</b> a case where it is prohibited <b>to cut him a myrtle</b> branch as was customarily done for brides because this is absolutely prohibited on Shabbat. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a corpse, what is it</b> that one might do which would be prohibited to do for others? <b>To bring for it a coffin and shrouds. And it teaches</b> that for <b>a corpse, yes,</b> it is permitted, <b>but</b> for <b>another</b> it is <b>not.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And why</b> is it prohibited to do so for others? <b>Let us say that</b> since one would be permitted to bring these items on Shabbat <b>if there were partitions there, one may</b> wait for nightfall at the edge of the border to <b>bring</b> these items after Shabbat, in accordance with the ruling of Rav Yehuda. The Gemara answers: In the case of <b>a corpse, you also find</b> a case where bringing an item is prohibited under any circumstance, e.g., if one is waiting <b>to cut a garment for</b> the corpse to use as shrouds. There is no permissible way to do that on Shabbat. In that case, it would be prohibited to wait at the edge of the Shabbat boundary for this purpose if not for the fact that it is for the sake of a corpse, as it is a mitzva to attend to the needs of a corpse.

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna: <b>But one may wait for nightfall</b> at the Shabbat boundary in order to guard one’s produce. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is this the case <b>even if he has not</b> recited <b>the blessing of distinction [<i>havdala</i>]</b> marking the end of Shabbat? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Elazar ben Antigonos say in the name of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> that <b>it is prohibited for a person to tend to his</b> weekday <b>affairs</b> after Shabbat <b>before he recites <i>havdala</i>? And if you say</b> that this is referring to a case <b>in which one</b> already <b>recited <i>havdala</i> during prayer,</b> as formulated by the Sages in the blessing of: Who graciously grants knowledge, <b>didn’t Rav Yehuda say</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> that <b>one who recites <i>havdala</i> in prayer must</b> still <b>recite <i>havdala</i> over a cup</b> of wine? <b>And if you say</b> that this is an instance <b>in which one</b> already <b>recited <i>havdala</i> over a cup</b> of wine, <b>does one have a cup</b> of wine <b>in the field? Rabbi Natan bar Ami explained</b> this <b>before Rava: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to a unique case in which the edge of the Shabbat boundary was situated <b>among wine presses,</b> and one took wine from the wine press and recited <i>havdala</i> over it.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Abba said</b> another explanation <b>to Rav Ashi: In the West,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>we say this</b> at the end of Shabbat: <b>The One who distinguishes between the sacred and the mundane, and</b> then <b>we attend to our needs,</b> as reciting <i>havdala</i> over a cup is unnecessary in order to begin doing labor after Shabbat. It is therefore possible that the mishna addressed a similar case. Similarly, <b>Rav Ashi said: When I was in the house of Rav Kahana, he would say: The One who distinguishes between the sacred and the mundane,</b> at the end of Shabbat, and <b>we would cut wood</b> to burn for light and heat.

### Part 13
We learned in the mishna: <b>Abba Shaul stated a</b> general <b>principle:</b> With regard to <b>anything that I am</b> permitted to discuss on Shabbat, I am permitted to wait for nightfall at the edge of the Shabbat boundary for its sake. The Gemara raises a <b>dilemma: To which</b> part of the mishna did <b>Abba Shaul’s</b> statement <b>refer? If you say</b> that it <b>relates to the first clause</b> of the mishna, which taught: <b>One may not wait for nightfall at the</b> edge of the Shabbat boundary in order <b>to hire workers or to bring produce,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC