
### Part 1
<b>When I was in Babylonia, I said</b> with regard to <b>that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>Yom Kippur occurred</b> on <b>Shabbat eve, they would not sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> as they did every Friday to herald the start of Shabbat; <b>and</b> if Yom Kippur occurred <b>at the conclusion of Shabbat, they would not recite <i>havdala</i></b> to mark the end of the sanctity of Shabbat and the start of the sanctity of Yom Kippur, is <b>a statement</b> accepted by <b>all. When I went</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>I found Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi, who sat and said:</b> This <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> as it equates the sanctity of Yom Kippur with that of Shabbat. <b>As, if</b> you say that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, then, since</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>said</b> that <b>fats from Shabbat are offered on Yom Kippur, let them sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>so that</b> the priests <b>will know</b> that <b>the fats from Shabbat are offered on Yom Kippur</b> and they may begin offering them (Rav Hai Gaon). <b>And I said to him:</b> You cannot prove this from here, because <b>priests are vigilant</b> and can be trusted to know this on their own, and there is no need to sound the <i>shofar</i>.

### Part 2
<b>Mar Kashisha,</b> the <b>son</b> of <b>Rav Ḥisda, said to Rav Ashi: Do we say</b> that <b>priests are vigilant</b> in that regard? <b>Didn’t we learn in</b> a mishna that <b>three</b> blasts were sounded in the Temple on Friday <b>to stop the people from work,</b> and <b>three</b> more were sounded <b>to demarcate between sacred and profane?</b> Apparently, even priests required the blasts to alert them to the beginning and end of Shabbat. The Gemara answers: <b>As Abaye said</b> in a different context, that certain matters were undertaken <b>for the rest of the people in Jerusalem, so too here,</b> these blasts were sounded <b>for the rest of the people in Jerusalem</b> and not for the priests.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: In any event, <b>Let them sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>so that they will know that trimming the vegetables,</b> i.e., removing the leaf heads from vegetables in preparation for cutting them, <b>is permitted from the</b> late <b>afternoon and onward.</b> On Yom Kippur, it is permitted, starting at a certain point of the day, to prepare vegetables for the meal following the fast. However, this is not permitted on Shabbat, when it is prohibited to perform any action in preparation for the weekdays after Shabbat. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> This is <b>because a rabbinic prohibition [<i>shevut</i>] is not overridden</b> in order <b>to permit</b> another action. Although sounding the <i>shofar</i> is not prohibited by Torah law on Shabbat, it is prohibited by rabbinic law on Shabbat and Yom Kippur, and this prohibition is not overridden to permit another action.

### Part 4
<b>And Rav Sheisha, son</b> of <b>Rav Idi, said: The Sages permitted</b> doing so for <b>an immediate rabbinic prohibition,</b> e.g., sounding the <i>shofar</i> to permit prohibited actions immediately. <b>They did not permit</b> doing so for <b>a</b> more <b>remote rabbinic prohibition,</b> such as trimming vegetables, which is allowed only beginning late in the afternoon, several hours after the start of Yom Kippur (Rabbeinu Ḥananel).

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> did <b>they permit</b> doing so for <b>an immediate rabbinic prohibition? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna that if <b>a Festival occurs on Shabbat eve, one sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> to announce that Shabbat has begun, <b>but one does not recite <i>havdala</i></b> over wine to mark the conclusion of the Festival, because the sanctity of Shabbat is greater than the sanctity of the Festival? And if a Festival occurs at <b>the conclusion of Shabbat, one recites <i>havdala</i></b> to demarcate between the sanctity of Shabbat and the sanctity of the Festival, <b>but one does not sound</b> the <i>shofar</i>. <b>And why</b> does one not sound the <i>shofar</i>? <b>Let them sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> at the beginning of the Festival, <b>so that</b> people <b>will know that slaughtering is permitted immediately</b> on the Festival, although it was prohibited on Shabbat. <b>Rather, it is clear</b> that this must be explained <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yosef,</b> who says that a rabbinic prohibition is not overridden to permit the performance of actions that were prohibited.

### Part 6
With regard to trimming vegetables on Yom Kippur, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said, and some say Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said:</b> If <b>Yom Kippur occurs on Shabbat, trimming vegetables is prohibited. Rav Mana said: It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>on Yom Kippur that occurs on Shabbat trimming vegetables is prohibited? The verse states: “A solemn rest [<i>shabbaton</i>],</b> a holy Shabbat unto the Lord” (Exodus 16:23), which means that there is an obligation to issue a <b>rabbinic prohibition</b> on this day. Issue a rabbinic prohibition <b>for what</b> activity? <b>If you say</b> this refers to prohibiting actual <b>labor, isn’t it written</b> explicitly: “But the seventh day is Shabbat for the Lord your God; <b>you shall not perform any labor”</b> (Exodus 20:9)? <b>Rather, does</b> it not refer to <b>trimming vegetables,</b> which is prohibited on Shabbat even though it is not a full-fledged prohibited labor? The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that trimming vegetables is prohibited.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If <b>Yom Kippur occurs on Shabbat, trimming vegetables is permitted.</b> The Gemara <b>raised an objection</b> from what we learned in the <i>baraita</i> cited earlier: <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>on Yom Kippur that occurs on Shabbat trimming vegetables is prohibited? The verse states: “A solemn rest [<i>shabbaton</i>],</b> a holy Shabbat unto the Lord” (Exodus 16:23), which means that there is an obligation to issue a <b>rabbinic prohibition</b> on this day. Issue a rabbinic prohibition <b>for what</b> activity? <b>If you say</b> this refers to prohibiting actual <b>labor, isn’t it written</b> explicitly: “But the seventh day is Shabbat for the Lord your God; <b>you shall not perform any labor”</b> (Exodus 20:9)? <b>Rather, is it not</b> referring to <b>trimming vegetables,</b> which is prohibited on Shabbat? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> that is not; rather, solemn rest <b>actually</b> refers <b>to labor.</b> It is a positive commandment to rest on Shabbat. Although the verse says explicitly: “But the seventh day is Shabbat for the Lord your God; you shall not perform any labor,” this adds that one who performs a prohibited labor <b>violates</b> both <b>a positive mitzva and a prohibition.</b>

### Part 8
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> If <b>Yom Kippur occurs on Shabbat,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC