
### Part 1
in the <b>exact</b> amount of <b>an egg-bulk,</b> the liquid <b>is ritually pure.</b> Even though the ritually impure individual touched the food, less than an egg-bulk of food cannot become ritually impure. Once the first drop of liquid is squeezed out, less than an egg-bulk of food remains, and it cannot render the liquid impure. By inference, if he squeezed <b>more than an egg-bulk,</b> the liquid <b>is ritually impure. And if you say</b> that <b>liquid that comes into food is</b> considered <b>food, in what</b> manner was this liquid <b>rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity? <b>He raised the objection and he resolved it:</b> It is referring to a case <b>where</b> one <b>squeezes into an</b> empty <b>bowl,</b> in which case the juice is considered a liquid.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> The question of whether liquid squeezed directly from one food into another is considered liquid or food is <b>parallel to</b> the following dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> We learned in a mishna: In the case of <b>one who smooths</b> bread before baking it <b>by</b> squeezing <b>grapes</b> onto it, the bread <b>was not rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: It was rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. <b>What, do they not disagree about this?</b> One <b>Sage held that liquid that comes into food is food,</b> and therefore it cannot render bread susceptible to ritual impurity, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage held</b> that <b>it is not food</b> but rather a liquid, and therefore it renders the bread susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa said</b> that the disputes are not necessarily parallel; it can be explained that <b>everyone agrees that liquid that comes into food is not food, and here they disagree with regard to liquid that goes to waste,</b> as the liquid that dripped onto the bread eventually evaporates due to the heat of the oven. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>held</b> that <b>it is</b> nonetheless <b>a liquid</b> and therefore can render the bread susceptible to ritual impurity, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage held that it is not a liquid. And</b> they disagree in <b>the dispute between these <i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who cuts olives with soiled,</b> i.e., ritually impure, <b>hands,</b> the olives <b>are rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity through the liquid that comes from them, and his hands render the olives ritually impure. If he cut them in order <b>to dip them in salt,</b> the olives <b>are not rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, because if that liquid emerged from the olives against the owner’s will, the liquid cannot render food susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 4
If he was cutting in order <b>to ascertain whether his olives have reached</b> the stage of ripeness at which they are fit <b>to be harvested or not, they are not rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: They are rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. <b>What, do they not disagree with regard to this?</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>held</b> that <b>liquid</b> that emerges when one tests the olives but <b>which stands to</b> go to <b>waste, is liquid</b> and renders food susceptible to ritual impurity; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage held that it is not liquid</b> and does not render food susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> The last two disputes are not necessarily parallel. <b>These <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> who disagreed with regard to olives, <b>disagreed with regard to liquid that stands</b> to go <b>to waste, and those <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> who disagreed with regard to the liquid on the bread, <b>disagreed with regard to liquid that stands</b> to be used <b>to shine it.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: A person may squeeze a cluster of grapes into a pot</b> with food in it on Shabbat, because liquid that is squeezed directly into food is considered food rather than liquid; <b>however,</b> one may <b>not</b> do so <b>into a bowl</b> that is empty or that contains liquid. <b>And</b> squeezing a <b>fish for its brine</b> is permitted <b>even into a bowl.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Dimi sat and stated this <i>halakha</i>. Abaye said to Rav Dimi: You teach</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in the name of Rav and it is not difficult for you; we teach it in the name of Shmuel and it is difficult for us</b> for the following reason: <b>Did Shmuel say</b> that it is permitted to squeeze <b>a fish for its brine even into a bowl? Wasn’t it stated</b> that there was a dispute with regard to <b>pickled vegetables that one squeezed? Rav said:</b> If he wants to squeeze them because he needs the vegetables <b>themselves</b> without the liquid, <b>it is permitted</b> to do so even <i>ab initio</i> on Shabbat. And if he squeezes them because he needs <b>their liquid, he is exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 8
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>boiled vegetables, whether</b> he needs the vegetables <b>themselves</b> without their liquid <b>or whether</b> he wants to squeeze the vegetables <b>for their liquids, it is permitted</b> to squeeze them on Shabbat. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>both pickled vegetables and boiled vegetables,</b> if he squeezes them <b>for</b> the vegetables <b>themselves, it is permitted, and</b> if he squeezes them <b>for their liquids, he is exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>. Apparently, squeezing fish for its brine falls into the category of squeezing boiled items for their liquid, which according to Shmuel is prohibited. As such, Shmuel’s two statements appear contradictory.

### Part 9
<b>He said to him:</b> You can certainly rely on my version of this statement. To underscore his point, he uttered the oath-like expression: <b>By God!</b> and applied the verse: “Whom I shall see for myself; <b>my eyes have seen it, and not another’s”</b> (Job 19:27). <b>I heard</b> this tradition <b>from the mouth of Rabbi Yirmeya, and Rabbi Yirmeya</b> heard it <b>from Rabbi Zeira, and Rabbi Zeira</b> heard it <b>from Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi, and Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi</b> heard it <b>from Rav,</b> and each transmitter of this tradition is a reliable source.

### Part 10
Apropos the topic of squeezing pickled vegetables, the Gemara addresses <b>the matter itself.</b> We learned that with regard to <b>pickled vegetables that one squeezed, Rav said</b> that if he squeezes them <b>for themselves, it is permitted,</b> and if he squeezes them <b>for their liquids he is exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>; <b>and</b> with regard to <b>boiled vegetables,</b> if he squeezes them <b>both for themselves and for their liquids it is permitted. And Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>both this,</b> pickled vegetables, <b>and that,</b> boiled vegetables, squeezing <b>for</b> the vegetables <b>themselves</b> without liquid <b>is permitted;</b> squeezing them <b>for their liquids, one is exempt, but it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>both pickled vegetables and boiled vegetables,</b> if one squeezes them for the vegetables <b>themselves it is permitted;</b> if one squeezes them <b>for their liquids, he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering</b> for having performed a labor prohibited by Torah law.

### Part 11
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may squeeze pickled vegetables on Shabbat for the purpose of</b> using them on <b>Shabbat but not for the conclusion of Shabbat. And one may not squeeze olives and grapes</b> at all on Shabbat, <b>and if one squeezed</b> them unwittingly, he is <b>liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> Apparently, it is permitted to squeeze pickled vegetables <i>ab initio</i> on Shabbat for any purpose, even for their juice, and if so, it is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> it is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel,</b> and it is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> which all assert that squeezing pickled vegetables for their juice is prohibited on some level. The Gemara responds that <b>Rav interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning, Shmuel interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> and <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning.</b> The Gemara proceeds to elucidate how the <i>baraita</i> is explained according to each opinion.

### Part 12
<b>Rav interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> by emending the <i>baraita</i> and adding to it: <b>One may squeeze pickled vegetables on Shabbat for the purpose of Shabbat, but not for the conclusion of Shabbat. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> When one squeezes the vegetables <b>for themselves; however,</b> if one squeezes them <b>for their liquid,</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>boiled vegetables, whether</b> one squeezes them <b>for themselves or</b> whether he does so <b>for their liquid, it is permitted. And</b> with regard to <b>olives and grapes, one may not squeeze</b> them at all, <b>and if one squeezed them</b> unwittingly <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Shmuel interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> by emending the <i>baraita</i> and adding to it: <b>One may squeeze pickled vegetables on Shabbat for the purpose of Shabbat,</b> and <b>the same is true for boiled vegetables. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> When one squeezes them <b>for themselves; however,</b> if he squeezes them <b>for their liquids,</b> he is <b>not liable</b> to bring a sin-offering, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>olives and grapes, one may not squeeze</b> them at all, <b>and if one squeezed</b> them unwittingly, he is <b>liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 14
And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> also <b>interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> by emending the <i>baraita</i> and adding to it: <b>One may squeeze pickled vegetables for the purpose of Shabbat but not for the conclusion of Shabbat,</b> and that ruling applies <b>both to pickled vegetables and to boiled vegetables. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> When one squeezes them <b>for themselves, but</b> if he does so <b>for their liquids, one may not squeeze</b> them, <b>and if one squeezed</b> them unwittingly, <b>he becomes like one who squeezed olives or grapes, and he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: By Torah law, one is only liable for stomping</b> on <b>olives and grapes,</b> and all other prohibitions related to squeezing or juicing are rabbinic decrees and protective measures. <b>And similarly, it was taught</b> in <b>the school of Menashe: By Torah law, one is only liable for stomping on olives and grapes.</b> And it was taught in the school of Menashe: <b>And</b> testimony of one <b>witness</b> based solely on what he learned <b>from the mouth of</b> another <b>witness,</b> i.e., hearsay testimony, <b>is valid</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC