
### Part 1
Therefore, Abaye <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is an unwitting</b> violation <b>of an oath on a statement</b> relating <b>to the past?</b> What is an example of one who unwittingly swore falsely with regard to an incident that occurred in the past? It cannot be a case where he forgot the incident, as in that case he is exempt from bringing an offering. It is a case <b>where if he said: I know that</b> taking <b>this</b> false <b>oath is prohibited, but I do not know whether or not one is liable to</b> bring <b>an offering for</b> swearing falsely, he is <b>liable</b> to bring an offering for an unwitting transgression. Apparently, with regard to an oath on a statement, unwitting with regard to the sacrifice renders the action unwitting. The Gemara rejects this: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Munbaz.</b> In his opinion, one who commits a transgression while unaware whether or not one is liable to bring an offering if he performs that transgression unwittingly is considered to have performed the transgression unwittingly.

### Part 2
There is <b>another version</b> of the discussion of Abaye’s statement where, after quoting the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an oath on a statement, the question was raised: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>this</b> mishna? <b>If you say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Munbaz,</b> that is <b>obvious: Now,</b> if <b>throughout the entire Torah where there is no novelty</b> in the obligation to bring an offering, <b>he said</b> that <b>unwitting with regard to an offering is considered unwitting; here,</b> where <b>there is a novelty</b> and the offering in the case of an oath on a statement is more significant than other sin-offerings, <b>certainly</b> unwitting with regard to the offering should be considered unwitting. <b>Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> this is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Abaye?</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Abaye said: Everyone agrees</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i> that one is only liable</b> to add <b>a</b> payment of <b>one-fifth</b> the value of the <i>teruma</i> <b>for</b> eating <b>it</b> unwittingly <b>if he is unwitting with regard to its prohibition.</b> The Gemara asks: To <b>whose</b> opinion is Abaye referring in the phrase: <b>Everyone agrees?</b> Certainly, it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> Even though, in general, he holds that unwitting with regard to <i>karet</i> is sufficient to render the action unwitting, the case of <i>teruma</i> is different. The Gemara asks: In the case of <i>teruma</i>, <b>it is obvious</b> that he would agree. <b>When Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that one need not be unwitting with regard to the prohibition, it is in a case <b>where there is</b> a prohibition punishable by <b><i>karet</i>;</b> however, here, <b>where there is no</b> punishment of <b><i>karet</i>,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan would <b>not</b> say so. The Gemara answers that nonetheless Abaye introduced a novel element: <b>Lest you say</b> that since one who intentionally eats <i>teruma</i> is subject to death at the hand of Heaven, perhaps <b>death stands in place of <i>karet</i>. And where he was unwitting with regard to</b> the punishment of <b>death</b> for this sin, <b>he should also be liable</b> to pay the added fifth as one who performed the transgression unwittingly because his case is analogous to one who is considered unwitting due to lack of awareness of <i>karet</i>. Therefore, <b>Abaye teaches us</b> that it is not so. <b>Rava said:</b> Indeed, <b>death stands in place of <i>karet</i> and the</b> added <b>one-fifth stands in place of a sacrifice.</b> One who is unwitting with regard to death at the hand of Heaven and the added fifth has the same legal status as one who is unwitting with regard to <i>karet</i> and an offering.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Huna said: One who was walking along the way or in the desert, and he does not know when Shabbat</b> occurs, <b>he counts six days</b> from the day that he realized that he lost track of Shabbat <b>and</b> then <b>observes one day</b> as Shabbat. <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav says: He</b> first <b>observes one day</b> as Shabbat and then <b>he counts six</b> weekdays. The Gemara explains: <b>With regard to what do they disagree?</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rav Huna, <b>held:</b> It is <b>like the creation of the world,</b> weekdays followed by Shabbat. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Ḥiyya bar Rav, <b>held:</b> It is <b>like Adam, the first</b> man, who was created on the sixth day. He observed Shabbat followed by the six days of the week. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Ḥiyya bar Rav from a <i>baraita</i>: If a person <b>was walking along the way and does not know when Shabbat</b> occurs, <b>he observes one day for</b> every <b>six. What, does</b> this <b>not</b> mean that <b>he counts six and</b> then <b>observes one day</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rav Huna? The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it could also mean that <b>he observes one day and</b> then <b>counts six.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> if that is what the <i>baraita</i> meant, why employ the phrase: <b>He observes one day for six? It should have</b> stated: <b>He observes one day and counts six. And furthermore, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>was walking along the way or</b> was <b>in the desert, and he does not know when Shabbat</b> occurs, <b>he counts six</b> days <b>and observes one day.</b> That is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rav.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of Ḥiyya bar Rav.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said:</b> The person who lost track of Shabbat and treats one day a week as Shabbat, <b>each day he makes</b> enough food <b>to sustain himself, except for that day</b> which he designated as Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>And on that day let him die?</b> Rather, it means <b>that the day before he makes twice</b> the amount of food that he prepared on the other days <b>to sustain</b> him for that day and the following day. The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps the day before was</b> actually <b>Shabbat?</b> In that case, not only did he perform labor on Shabbat, but he also performed labor on Shabbat in preparation for a weekday. Rather, on <b>each and every day he makes</b> enough food <b>to sustain himself</b> for that day, <b>including</b> on <b>that day</b> that he designated as Shabbat. And if you ask: <b>And how is that day</b> which he designated as Shabbat <b>distinguishable</b> from the rest? It is distinguishable <b>by</b> means of <b>the <i>kiddush</i> and the <i>havdala</i></b> that he recites on that day.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: If he had partial knowledge of the day on which he left,</b> i.e., he does not recall what day of the week it was but he does recall the number of days that passed since he left, every week <b>he can perform labor throughout the day</b> of his departure, since he certainly did not leave his house on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious,</b> and what novel element was introduced here? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say, since he did not leave</b> on <b>Shabbat, he also did not leave on Friday, and this</b> person, <b>even if he left on Thursday, should be permitted to perform labor</b> for <b>two days,</b> the eighth day and the ninth day from his departure, the same day of the week that he left and the following day. Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that <b>at times one finds a convoy and happens to leave</b> on a journey even on Friday. Therefore, he is not permitted to perform labor on the day of the week following the day of his departure.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna that there is a difference in <i>halakha</i> between <b>one who knows the essence of Shabbat</b> and one who does not know it. The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> in the Torah <b>are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said: Two verses are written.</b> One states: <b>“And the children of Israel observed the Shabbat,</b> to perform the Shabbat through their generations, an everlasting covenant” (Exodus 31:16). <b>And it is written: “And you shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i></b> and you shall revere My Sanctuary, I am God” (Leviticus 26:2). <b>How</b> is it that Shabbat is in the singular in one verse, while in the other it is in the plural [<i>Shabbatot</i>]? It should be understood as follows: <b>“And the children of Israel observed the Shabbat”: One observance for multiple <i>Shabbatot</i>.</b> If one commits several transgressions, in certain cases he is only liable to bring one sacrifice. <b>“And you shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i>”: One observance for each and every Shabbat.</b> In certain cases, one is liable to bring a sin-offering for each time that he unwittingly desecrated Shabbat.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak strongly objects: On the contrary, the opposite is reasonable. “And the children of Israel observed the Shabbat”: One observance for each and every Shabbat. “And you shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i>”: One observance for multiple <i>Shabbatot</i>.</b> In any case, Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak also holds that the <i>halakha</i> of our mishna is derived from comparing and contrasting these two verses.

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna that there is a difference between <b>one who is aware that</b> the day <b>is Shabbat</b> and performs labor and one who forgets the essence of Shabbat and performs prohibited labors.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC