
### Part 1
<b>One who drills a hole of any size is liable. Granted,</b> according <b>to Rav,</b> who said that one who makes a hole is liable due to the prohibited labor of building, here too, he should be liable because he <b>appears as one who is making a hole for</b> the purpose of <b>building. However,</b> according <b>to Shmuel,</b> drilling a hole is <b>not a completion of the labor.</b> The labor will be complete only when a stake or pin is inserted into the hole. Until he does so, he cannot be liable for completing the labor. The Gemara answers: <b>With what we are dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where one drilled a hole with an iron nail and left it inside</b> the surface in which he drilled the hole. <b>That is</b> considered <b>a completion of labor</b> because there is no intention to remove the nail from its hole.

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna that <b>this is the principle:</b> Anyone who performs a prohibited labor and his labor endures on Shabbat is liable. The Gemara asks: <b>What does</b> the phrase: <b>This is the principle,</b> come <b>to include?</b> The Gemara explains: It comes <b>to include</b> a case <b>where one carved out</b> a vessel with a capacity of <b>half a <i>kav</i> [<i>kefiza</i>]</b> into a piece of wood <b>in</b> which it was possible to chisel a vessel with a capacity of <b>a</b> whole <b><i>kav</i>.</b> Since this labor endures on Shabbat and it can be used, it is considered a complete labor and he is liable.

### Part 3
We also learned in the mishna that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> Even <b>one who strikes an anvil with a sledgehammer</b> is liable. The Gemara wonders: <b>What has he done</b> by striking the anvil that would render him liable? It was <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef who both said</b> in explanation: He is liable <b>because he trains his hand</b> for his work by striking the anvil. <b>The sons of</b> a man named <b>Raḥava</b> found <b>this</b> answer <b>difficult: If so, one who observed a craft</b> being performed <b>on Shabbat and learned</b> to perform that craft through observation, would <b>he also be liable?</b> Only one who performs an actual labor on Shabbat is liable. <b>Rather,</b> it was <b>Abaye and Rava who both said</b> in explanation: He is liable, <b>as those who flatten plates</b> of metal <b>for the Tabernacle do so.</b> They would strike the anvil with the sledgehammer in order to straighten the sledgehammer’s handle, which became crooked. <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Even one who strikes an anvil with a sledgehammer during his labor is liable, as those who flatten plates</b> of metal <b>for the Tabernacle do so.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who plows</b> is liable for plowing <b>any amount</b> of land on Shabbat. <b>One who weeds</b> and removes grass on Shabbat, <b>and one who removes dry branches and who prunes any amount is liable.</b> With regard to <b>one who gathers wood, if</b> he did so <b>to enhance</b> the tree or the land, he is liable for <b>any amount; if</b> he did so <b>for fuel,</b> he is liable for collecting a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to cook an easily</b> cooked <b>egg.</b> With regard to <b>one who gathers grass, if</b> he did so <b>to enhance</b> the plants or the land, he is liable for <b>any amount; if</b> he did so to feed <b>an animal,</b> he is liable for collecting a measure <b>equivalent to a goat’s mouthful.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: For <b>what</b> use <b>is</b> plowing any amount of land <b>suited?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>suited</b> for <b>a</b> single <b>pumpkin seed.</b> The <b>corresponding</b> situation <b>in the Tabernacle</b> was <b>as it is suitable</b> for planting <b>a single stalk of herbs</b> to make dyes.

### Part 6
We also learned in the mishna: <b>One who weeds, and one who removes dry branches, and who prunes</b> any amount is liable. <b>The Sages taught</b> that in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who severs endives</b> that grow like weeds, <b>or who prunes reeds [<i>zeradim</i>]; if</b> he did so <b>for</b> human <b>consumption,</b> he is liable in the measure of <b>a fig-bulk; if</b> he did so <b>for animal</b> consumption, he is liable in a measure <b>equivalent to a goat’s mouthful. If</b> he did so <b>for fuel,</b> he is liable for severing a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to cook an easily</b> cooked <b>egg. If</b> he did so <b>to enhance the land,</b> he is liable for <b>any amount.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Aren’t all these</b> done <b>to enhance the land?</b> Each stalk that a person uproots enhances the land. It was <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef who both said</b> in explanation: <b>They taught</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to swampland,</b> where grass is not uprooted to enhance the land. <b>Abaye said: Even if you say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>a field that is not a swampland,</b> it can be referring to <b>a case where one did not intend</b> to enhance the land. The Gemara asks: <b>However,</b> is it not <b>Abaye and Rava who both say</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that one is liable only for performing an intentional action, <b>concedes</b> that one is liable in a case of <b>cut off its head, will it not die?</b> In any case where the outcome is inevitable, as in this case where the land will be enhanced, one’s lack of intention does not exempt him. The Gemara answers: Abaye’s statement <b>was</b> only <b>necessary</b> in a case <b>where one did so on another’s land.</b> Since he did not intend for that outcome to eventuate and he derives no benefit from enhancing the land, he is not liable in that case.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who writes two letters</b> on Shabbat, <b>whether</b> he did so <b>with his right</b> hand <b>or his left, whether</b> they were <b>the same letter or two</b> different <b>letters, whether</b> he did so <b>using two</b> different types of <b>ink, in any language, he is liable. Rabbi Yosei said: One is deemed liable</b> for writing <b>two letters only due to marking, as they</b> would <b>write</b> symbols <b>on</b> adjacent <b>beams of the Tabernacle to know which</b> beam was another beam’s <b>counterpart. Rabbi Yehuda said: We found</b> that one is liable for writing even if he did not complete what he was writing, so that he wrote <b>a small name</b> that constituted part <b>of a longer name,</b> e.g., <b>Shem [<i>shin mem</i>] from</b> the name <b>Shimon</b> or <b>from Shmuel; Noaḥ [<i>nun ḥet</i>] from Naḥor; Dan [<i>dalet nun</i>] from Daniel; Gad [<i>gimmel dalet</i>] from Gaddiel.</b> In all of these cases, the first two letters of the longer name constitute the shorter name.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara questions the beginning of the mishna: <b>Granted, for</b> writing with <b>the right</b> hand <b>let one be liable, as that is the</b> typical <b>manner of writing. However, for</b> writing with <b>the left</b> hand, <b>why</b> is one liable? <b>That is not the</b> typical <b>manner of writing. Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> When the mishna taught that one who writes with his left hand is liable, <b>they taught</b> it <b>with regard to</b> one who is <b>left-handed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if so, <b>let his left</b> hand have the same legal status <b>as everyone’s right</b> hand; for writing <b>with</b> his <b>left</b> hand, <b>let him be liable,</b> for writing <b>with</b> his <b>right</b> hand, <b>let him not be liable. Rather, Abaye said:</b> This mishna refers to an <b>ambidextrous</b> person, who is liable for writing with either hand.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ya’akov, son of the daughter of Ya’akov, said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, who said: One is deemed liable</b> for writing <b>two letters only due to marking.</b> As such, one is liable for writing a letter even if he writes it imprecisely with his left hand. The Gemara asks: <b>From the fact that the latter clause</b> of the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, the first clause</b> of the mishna <b>is not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> The Gemara answers: That is not necessarily the case. <b>The entire</b> mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> and the attribution of his second statement was for emphasis alone.

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: We found</b> that one is liable for writing even if he did not complete what he was writing, so that he wrote a small name that constituted part of a longer name. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather,</b> is that to say that according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> it is one who writes <b>two letters that are two different types</b> of letters <b>who is liable;</b> however, one who writes <b>two letters that are one type</b> of letter <b>is not liable?</b>

### Part 12
<b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: “When a leader sinned, <b>and he</b> unwittingly <b>performed one</b> of any of the commandments which the Lord his God commanded not to do, and is guilty” (Leviticus 4:22)? The Sages taught: I <b>might</b> have thought that one is not guilty until he performs a complete labor, e.g., <b>until he writes the entire name</b> that he intended to write, <b>or until he weaves the entire garment, or until he crafts the entire sieve</b> made from the reeds of the warp and the woof; therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “A soul who sins unintentionally in any of the Lord’s commandments which one shall not perform, and did an action <b>from one</b> of these” (Leviticus 4:2).

### Part 13
The emphasis on the phrase “from one” teaches that in order for one to be liable, it is sufficient that he perform only part of the prohibited labor. However, <b>if</b> that is derived from the use of the phrase <b>“from one,”</b> I <b>might</b> have thought that one is liable <b>even if he wrote only a single letter, or</b> even if <b>he wove only a single thread, or</b> even if <b>he crafted only a single eye of the sieve,</b> i.e., arranging the reeds to create a warp, and then interweaving a single reed as a woof;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC