
### Part 1
with regard to those animals <b>enumerated by the Sages</b> as having skin, since their skin is considered by the Sages to be similar to their flesh. The Gemara asks: <b>On the contrary, those that the Sages enumerated</b>, whose skin and flesh are equated, <b>do not have skins. And Abaye said: This is what</b> the <i>tanna</i> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: Only those that the Sages did not enumerate have skin discrete from</b> their <b>flesh. Rava said to him: Doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>say</b> the opposite: <b>That those enumerated by the Sages</b> have skin discrete from their flesh? <b>Rather, Rava said: This is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: Only the skin of those</b> animals <b>enumerated by the Sages transmits impurity like flesh.</b> The Gemara asks: Is that to say <b>by inference that Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri</b> holds that even the creeping animals <b>not enumerated by the Sages also transmit impurity? Isn’t</b> the opposite <b>taught,</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says:</b> The <b>eight creeping animals have skin</b> that <b>does not transmit impurity? Rav Adda bar Mattana said</b> to <b>resolve</b> it <b>this way: And the Rabbis say: With regard to impurity, those</b> animals <b>enumerated by</b> the <b>Sages do not have skin.</b> According to this explanation, Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri and the Rabbis disagree only with regard to the laws of impurity.

### Part 2
<b>But still,</b> is it clear that <b>they do not disagree with regard to the matter of Shabbat? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps one of the eight creeping animals mentioned in the Torah</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable,</b> as is <b>one who wounds them, if they are creeping animals that have skins? And what is</b> considered to be <b>an irreversible wound?</b> It is a wound where <b>the blood collects</b> in a single spot beneath the skin, <b>even if it does not emerge. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says:</b> The <b>eight creeping animals have skins.</b> Apparently, there is disagreement with regard to Shabbat as well.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi said: Who is</b> the <b>first <i>tanna</i>?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who follows the texture</b> of the skin. He does not distinguish between those creeping animals whose skin is considered like flesh and those whose skin is discrete from the flesh as the verses may imply; rather, creeping animals are distinguished based on the texture of their skin, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Even though <b>the lizard</b> is mentioned in the verse, it has <b>the same</b> ruling <b>as the weasel</b> because the weasel has skin discrete from its flesh. <b>However, the Rabbis, who disagree with Rabbi Yoḥanan with regard to impurity, concede with regard to Shabbat</b> and hold that all creeping animals have skins. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, the</b> phrase in the <i>baraita</i>: This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri,</b> is difficult. <b>It should</b> have said: This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> ben Nuri <b>and those who disagree with him,</b> as the Rabbis who disagree with him with regard to impurity concede to him with regard to the laws of Shabbat. The Gemara responds: This is not difficult. Emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>teach: The statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri and those who disagree with him.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Levi raised a dilemma before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that a wound is</b> defined as something <b>irreversible?</b> He answered him that it is derived <b>as it is written: “Can a Cushite change his skin, or a leopard its spots [<i>ḥavarburotav</i>]?”</b> (Jeremiah 13:23). The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> does <b><i>ḥavarburotav</i></b> mean? <b>If you say that they are spotted marks</b> on the leopard’s skin, <b>that</b> phrase: <b>Or a leopard its spots, should</b> have been: <b>Or a leopard its colors. Rather,</b> <i>ḥavarburotav</i> means wounds, and they are <b>similar to</b> the skin of <b>a Cushite: Just like the skin of a Cushite will not change</b> its color to white, <b>so too a wound</b> is something that <b>does not reverse.</b>

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna: <b>And</b> one who traps <b>other abominations</b> is exempt. The Gemara infers: If <b>one kills them</b> he is <b>liable.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> who holds this opinion? <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: One who kills lice on Shabbat is akin to one who kills a camel on Shabbat.</b> Apparently, he is the Sage who holds that one is liable for killing any living creature. <b>Rav Yosef strongly objects to this:</b> Perhaps this is not so, as <b>the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer only with regard to lice,</b> which <b>do not procreate. However,</b> with regard to <b>other abominations and crawling things that procreate, they do not disagree</b> with him.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> fundamentally <b>they both derived</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the reddened <b>ram</b> skins used to cover the Tabernacle. <b>Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that liability for killing an animal on Shabbat exists only with regard to animals <b>like rams. Just as rams have their lives taken</b> and die, <b>so too,</b> one is liable for killing <b>any animal whose life is taken,</b> including lice. <b>And the Rabbis</b> also <b>hold</b> that liability for killing an animal on Shabbat exists only with regard to animals <b>like rams. Just as rams procreate, so too,</b> one is liable for killing <b>any</b> creature <b>that procreates.</b> One is not liable for killing lice, which do not procreate. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>And lice do not procreate? Didn’t the Master say: The Holy One, Blessed be He, sits and sustains</b> everything <b>from the horns of wild oxen to the eggs of lice?</b> Apparently, lice reproduce by laying eggs. Rav Yosef answered him: <b>There is a species</b> of insect <b>that is called lice eggs,</b> but lice themselves do not actually lay eggs.

### Part 7
Again he asked: <b>And wasn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that lists types of creeping animals: <b><i>Tefuyei</i>,</b> a type of insect, <b>and lice eggs?</b> He answered him: <b>There is a species</b> of insect <b>called lice eggs.</b> Again he asked: <b>And</b> still, there is the issue of <b>a flea, which procreates</b> according to all opinions, <b>and nevertheless, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who traps a flea on Shabbat, Rabbi Eliezer deems him liable and Rabbi Yehoshua deems him exempt. Rav Ashi said: Are you raising a contradiction between trapping</b> with <b>killing? Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua disagree only</b> in <b>that</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds</b> that <b>one is liable</b> for trapping even <b>a species that is not typically trapped; and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua, <b>holds</b> that one is <b>exempt</b> in that case. <b>However, with regard to killing, even Rabbi Yehoshua concedes</b> that one is liable.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna that <b>one who traps</b> creeping animals <b>for</b> a specific <b>need is liable,</b> but one who traps them for no specific need is exempt. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> who holds this way? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is Rabbi Shimon, who said</b> that for <b>a</b> prohibited <b>labor</b> performed <b>not for its own sake, one is exempt.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Some taught</b> the statement of Rav in reference <b>to this:</b> With regard to <b>one who drains an abscess</b> in a boil containing pus <b>on Shabbat, if</b> his intention is <b>to create an opening for it</b> he <b>is liable; if</b> his intention is <b>to remove pus from it he is exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> who holds this way? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is Rabbi Shimon, who said</b> that for <b>a</b> prohibited <b>labor</b> performed <b>not for its own sake, one is exempt.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Some teach the statement of</b> Rav as referring <b>to this:</b> With regard to <b>one who traps a snake on Shabbat, if</b> he <b>engages</b> in <b>its</b> trapping <b>so it does not bite him, he is exempt; if</b> he does so <b>for medicinal</b> purposes <b>he is liable.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> who holds this way? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is Rabbi Shimon, who said</b> that for <b>a</b> prohibited <b>labor</b> performed <b>not for its own sake, one is exempt.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>one who removes a fish from the sea, when</b> an area on the skin of the fish <b>has dried up the size of a <i>sela</i>,</b> he is <b>liable.</b> A fish in that condition cannot survive, and therefore the individual who removed it from the water is liable for killing it. <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Avin said:</b> That is so <b>as long as</b> the skin that dried is <b>between its fins. Rav Ashi said: Do not say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies only in a case where <b>it actually dried. Rather,</b> it applies <b>even if</b> the fish has dried to the extent <b>that mucus has formed,</b> and if one were to touch that area it would stick to his fingers.

### Part 12
<b>Mar bar Hamdurei said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One who reached his hand into the innards of an animal</b> on Shabbat <b>and detached a fetus that was in its womb is liable.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? It does not make sense to consider the fetus as a full-fledged living creature. <b>Rava said: Bar Hamdurei explained</b> this <b>to me. Didn’t Rav Sheshet say: One</b> who <b>detaches hops</b> on Shabbat <b>from the shrubs and thorns</b> on which they are growing <b>is liable for uprooting an object from its</b> place of <b>growth? Here, too,</b> in the case of the fetus, <b>one is liable for uprooting an object from its</b> place of <b>growth. Abaye said: One who detached</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC