
### Part 1
It means: <b>Until</b> the <b>debtor says: I repaid</b> the debt, or, <b>I did not repay</b> the debt. If the debtor says: I repaid the debt in the promissory note and there are no witnesses to ratify the document in court, the document has no value. That is the opinion of the Rabbis who hold that an unratified document cannot force a debtor to pay. According to Rabbi Yehuda, who holds that a document need not be ratified, the debtor’s claim that he repaid the debt is not accepted and the creditor can collect his debt with the unratified promissory note.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said: Everyone agrees</b> that when a debtor <b>admits that he wrote a</b> promissory <b>note,</b> the creditor <b>must ratify it</b> in court. <b>And here,</b> it is with regard to the question whether or not <b>one writes a receipt</b> that <b>they disagree.</b> The <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds: One writes a receipt</b> for a promissory note that was repaid. Since the debtor has the receipt in his possession, the creditor may keep the note and use it as paper. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds: One does not write a receipt.</b> Therefore, the creditor is required to return the note to the debtor immediately upon repayment of the debt. It is in the interest of the debtor to destroy the document, and he has no reason to keep it. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The dispute is with regard to a case where the debtor carried out the promissory note into the public domain. Rabbi Yehuda said he is liable <b>because he needs</b> the repaid document <b>to show</b> it <b>to a second creditor, as he says to him: Look, I am a man who repays</b> his debts.

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out animal <b>hide</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used to make an amulet. <b>Rava raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman:</b> With regard to <b>one who carries out</b> animal <b>hide, how much</b> must he carry out on Shabbat in order to be liable? <b>He said to him,</b> it is <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out animal <b>hide</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make an amulet.</b> He raised another dilemma: With regard to one who <b>tans</b> that hide, <b>how much</b> must he tan in order to be liable? <b>He said to him:</b> It is <b>no different,</b> the same measure. He raised another dilemma: With regard to one who carries out animal hide <b>to tan it, how much</b> must he carry out on Shabbat in order to be liable? <b>He said to him:</b> It is <b>no different.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And from where do you</b> derive and <b>say</b> that there is no difference whether or not the hide one carries out is tanned? <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>one who whitens, and one who combs, and one who dyes, and one who spins, the measure</b> of wool for which one is liable in performing those prohibited labors is <b>double the full</b> width of the <b>distance between the forefinger and the middle finger. And the measure</b> that determines liability for <b>one who weaves two threads</b> is <b>double the full</b> width of the <b>distance between the forefinger and the middle finger. Apparently, since</b> the wool <b>is designated for spinning, the measure</b> for which one is liable for whitening, combing, and dyeing is <b>equal</b> to the measure for which one is liable for weaving that <b>spun</b> thread. <b>Here too, since it is designated for tanning, its measure</b> that determines liability for carrying it out into the public domain is <b>equal</b> to the measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>tanned</b> hides. Rava raised another dilemma: With regard to one who carries out animal hide <b>and</b> has <b>no</b> intention <b>to tan it, how much</b> must he carry out on Shabbat in order to be liable? <b>He said to him:</b> It is <b>no different.</b>

### Part 5
Rava asked: <b>And</b> is there <b>no</b> halakhic <b>difference between</b> carrying out <b>tanned</b> hides <b>and</b> carrying out hides that are <b>not tanned? He raised an objection to him</b> based on a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who carries out herbs</b> that were <b>soaked</b> in water and ready for use as a dye is liable if he carried out a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to dye a sample</b> the size of <b>a stopper for the shuttle</b> of a loom. <b>While</b> with regard to <b>herbs that were not soaked, we learned</b> in a mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>nutshells, and pomegranate peels,</b> and for carrying out <b>safflower, and madder,</b> which are herbs used as dyes, is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to dye a small cloth</b> to cover the <b>opening of a woman’s</b> hair <b>net.</b> Apparently, the measure for which one is liable for carrying out raw materials is greater than the measure for which one is liable for carrying out prepared dyes. The Gemara answers: <b>But wasn’t it stated with regard to that</b> mishna that <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said: Because a person does not</b> go to the <b>trouble to soak herbs</b> just <b>to dye a sample for</b> the <b>shuttle</b> of a loom? As a rule, there is no distinction between finished and unfinished products. The case of dye is different, as people do not typically prepare dyes in amounts that small. Therefore, even though that size is significant in and of itself, he is exempt for carrying them out.

### Part 6
He asked further: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>seeds of garden</b> plants <b>before one sowed them, we learned</b> in a mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>seeds of garden</b> plants is <b>less than a dried fig-bulk. Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> He is liable if he carries out <b>five</b> seeds. <b>While</b> with regard to carrying out seeds <b>after he sowed them, we learned</b> in a mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>manure</b> or <b>fine sand</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to fertilize</b> one <b>stalk of cabbage with it;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. And the Rabbis say:</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying it out is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to fertilize a leek.</b> Apparently, after the seed was sown, the measure for liability is one plant. Before it is sown, the measure is at least five. The Gemara answers: As a rule, there is no distinction between an object that was processed and one that was not. However, this case is different. <b>Wasn’t it stated with regard to that</b> <i>halakha</i> that there is a distinction between <b>this,</b> where one is liable for carrying out one plant, and the mishna is referring to a case <b>where</b> it <b>is</b> already <b>sown;</b> and <b>that,</b> where one is only liable for carrying out at least five, and the mishna is referring to a case <b>where it is not</b> yet <b>sown, because a person does not</b> go to the <b>trouble to carry out</b> just <b>one</b> seed <b>for sowing?</b>

### Part 7
He asked further: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>clay before one kneads it, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And the Rabbis agree with Rabbi Shimon with regard to one who carries out waste water to the public domain, that the measure</b> that determines liability is <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. <b>And we discussed</b> this question: <b>For what</b> use <b>is waste water fit? Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> It is used <b>to knead clay.</b> Apparently, the measure that determines liability for the raw material is the amount kneaded with a quarter of a <i>log</i> of waste water to form clay. <b>While</b> with regard to clay <b>after one kneads it, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>clay,</b> the measure for liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make an opening for</b> the bellows to be placed in <b>a crucible,</b> which is a small amount. The Gemara answers: <b>There too, it is as we stated: Because a person does not</b> go to the <b>trouble of kneading clay</b> just <b>to make an opening for</b> the bellows to be placed in <b>a crucible.</b>

### Part 8
In order to resolve the dilemma with regard to the measure that determines liability for carrying out an animal hide on Shabbat, the Gemara states: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>that Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ami said in the name</b> of <b>Ulla: There are three hides,</b> i.e., three stages in the process of tanning hides, and at each stage it is known by a different name: <b><i>Matza</i>, and <i>ḥifa</i>, and <i>diftera</i>. <i>Matza</i>, as per its plain meaning,</b> with no additives. It is <b>not salted, and not treated with flour, and not treated with gallnuts. And how much is the measure that determines liability for</b> carrying out that hide on Shabbat? <b>Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yehuda taught:</b> It is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to wrap around a small weight. And how</b> big is this small weight? <b>Abaye said: A quarter of a quarter</b> of a <i>litra</i> in the system of weights in use in <b>Pumbedita.</b>

### Part 9
<b><i>Ḥifa</i></b> is hide <b>that is salted, and not treated with flour, and not treated with gallnuts. And how much is the</b> measure that determines liability for carrying out that hide on Shabbat? <b>As we learned</b> in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out animal <b>hide</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make an amulet. <i>Diftera</i></b> is hide <b>that is salted, and treated with flour, and not treated with gallnuts. And how much is the measure that determines liability for</b> carrying out that hide on Shabbat? The measure that determines liability for carrying it out is <b>equivalent</b> to the amount which is used <b>to write a bill of divorce on it. In any case, it was taught</b> that before it is tanned the measure for liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to wrap around a small weight. And Abaye said: A quarter of a quarter</b> of a <i>litra</i> in the system of weights in use in <b>Pumbedita.</b> That is not the same as the measure that determines liability for a tanned hide, which is equivalent to that which is used to make an amulet. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> it is referring to <b>wet hide</b> just flayed that was left out to dry in the sun and is suitable only for wrapping around a weight (Rabbeinu Ḥananel). However, for carrying out hide that is tanned, his measure for liability is equivalent to that which is used to make an amulet.

### Part 10
The Gemara raises another difficulty: <b>And didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>The garment</b> must be at least <b>three by three</b> handbreadths to become impure with ritual impurity <b>imparted by treading? And the sack</b> made from goat hair must be at least <b>four by four</b> handbreadths. <b>And the</b> animal <b>hide</b> must be <b>five by five,</b> and a <b>mat</b> must be <b>six by six.</b> Those are the minimum measures for becoming a primary source of ritual impurity by means of <b>both</b> ritual impurity <b>imparted by treading and</b> ritual impurity <b>imparted by a corpse. And it was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> <b>with regard to</b> that mishna: With regard to <b>the garment and the sack and the hide; like</b> the <b>measure for ritual impurity, so too is</b> the <b>measure for carrying out</b> on Shabbat. That is significantly larger than the measure for liability cited in the mishna for carrying out hide. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> <i>Tosefta</i> is referring to <b><i>kortovela</i>,</b> which is hide that was tanned in a manner that rendered it unfit for writing or wrapping. It is used for covering vessels and other similar uses (Rambam).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC