
### Part 1
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ḥisda. All of these</b> oils <b>with which</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one may not light on Shabbat, one may light with them on a Festival, with the exception of burnt oil, because one may not burn consecrated items on a Festival.</b>

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the ruling with regard to the obligation <b>to mention Hanukkah in Grace after Meals?</b> The dilemma is: <b>Since it is merely an obligation by rabbinic law, do we not mention it? Or, perhaps due to publicity of the miracle, we mention it. Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Seḥora said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said: One does not mention</b> it. <b>And if,</b> nevertheless, <b>he comes to mention</b> it, <b>he mentions it in</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda happened by Rava’s house</b> on Hanukkah. When, after eating, he came to recite Grace after Meals, <b>he thought to mention</b> Hanukkah <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who builds Jerusalem. Rav Sheshet said to</b> the yeshiva students: One mentions Hanukkah in Grace after Meals <b>just as</b> he does <b>in</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer. Just as</b> in the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer</b> one mentions Hanukkah <b>in</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving, so too, in Grace after Meals</b> one mentions Hanukkah <b>in</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving.</b>

### Part 3
Based on the previous dilemma, <b>an</b> additional <b>dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the ruling with regard to the obligation <b>to mention the New Moon in Grace after Meals?</b> The dilemma is: <b>If you say</b> that <b>on Hanukkah,</b> since it is only <b>by rabbinic law, one need not</b> mention it in Grace after Meals; perhaps <b>the New Moon,</b> which is <b>by Torah law, one is required</b> to mention it. <b>Or, perhaps since it is not</b> a day on which it is <b>prohibited to perform labor, one need not mention it.</b> The Sages disputed this matter: <b>Rav said: One mentions</b> the New Moon in Grace after Meals. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: One does not mention</b> it. <b>Rav Zerika said: Take</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rav in your hand</b> as authoritative, since <b>Rabbi Oshaya holds in accordance with his</b> opinion. <b>As Rabbi Oshaya taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Days</b> on <b>which there is an additional offering sacrificed</b> in the Temple, i.e., <b>the New Moon and the intermediate days of a Festival;</b> in <b>the evening, morning, and afternoon prayers, one recites</b> the <b>eighteen</b> blessings of the <i>Amida</i> prayer <b>and says</b> a passage <b>pertaining to the event</b> of the day <b>during</b> the blessing of <b>Temple service. And if he did not recite</b> it, <b>we require him to return</b> to the beginning of the prayer and repeat it. <b>And</b> on those days, <b>there is no <i>kiddush</i> recited over the cup</b> of wine at the start of the day, <b>but there is mention</b> of the day recited <b>in Grace after Meals,</b> in accordance with Rav’s opinion. <b>Days</b> on <b>which there is no additional offering, i.e., Monday, and Thursday, and fast days, and</b> non-priestly <b>watches [<i>ma’amadot</i>],</b> have a different legal status as detailed below.

### Part 4
Before drawing a conclusion, the Gemara seeks to clarify: <b>Monday and Thursday, what is their purpose</b> in this discussion, i.e., why are Monday and Thursday mentioned here if no special prayers are recited on those days? The Gemara explains: <b>Rather,</b> certainly the reference is to <b>Monday and Thursday and Monday</b> that are <b>fast days</b> for rain <b>and of <i>ma</i>’<i>amadot</i>.</b> On those days, in the <b>evening, morning, and afternoon prayers, one recites eighteen</b> blessings <b>and recites</b> a passage <b>pertaining to the event</b> of the day, i.e., the fast, <b>in</b> the blessing: <b>Who listens to prayer. However, if one did not mention</b> it, <b>we do not require him to return</b> to the beginning of the prayer and repeat it. <b>And,</b> on those days, <b>there is no <i>kiddush</i> recited over a cup</b> of wine, <b>and there is no mention</b> of the day recited <b>in Grace after Meals.</b>

### Part 5
<b>An</b> additional <b>dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the ruling with regard to the obligation <b>to mention Hanukkah in</b> the <b>additional prayer</b> on Shabbat during Hanukkah or on the New Moon of Tevet, which falls during Hanukkah? The sides of the dilemma are: Do we say that <b>since</b> Hanukkah <b>has no</b> additional prayer <b>of its own,</b> and the additional prayer has no connection to Hanukkah, <b>we do not mention</b> it? <b>Or, perhaps it is</b> the essence of <b>the day that is obligated</b> in the mention of Hanukkah, in which case there is no distinction between the various prayers, and it should be mentioned <b>in</b> all <b>four prayers,</b> including the additional prayer on Shabbat and the New Moon. There is a dispute: <b>Rav Huna and Rav Yehuda both said: One does not mention</b> it. <b>Rav Naḥman and Rabbi Yoḥanan both said: One mentions</b> it.

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: This</b> opinion of <b>Rav Huna and Rav Yehuda</b> is <b>Rav’s</b> opinion, as <b>Rav Giddel said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> In the case of <b>the New Moon that occurs on Shabbat, the one who recites the portion from the Prophets [<i>haftara</i>] on Shabbat need not mention the New Moon</b> in the blessing, <b>as, if</b> it <b>were not Shabbat, there would be no</b> reading from <b>the Prophets on the New Moon.</b> The <i>haftara</i> is unrelated to the New Moon, and therefore the New Moon is not mentioned in the blessing. The same should be true with regard to mention of Hanukkah in the additional service on the New Moon, as, if it were not the New Moon, he would not be reciting the additional service on Hanukkah. Therefore, when he recites the additional prayer, he need not mention Hanukkah.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this comparison. <b>Is</b> this <b>comparable? There,</b> reading from the <b>Prophets</b> is <b>not at all part of</b> the service <b>on the New Moon. Here, there is</b> mention of Hanukkah <b>in</b> the <b>evening, morning, and afternoon prayers. Rather,</b> it is <b>comparable to this:</b> As <b>Rav Aḥadvoi said</b> that <b>Rav Mattana said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> On <b>a Festival that occurs on Shabbat, one who recites the portion from the Prophets during the afternoon service on Shabbat need not mention the Festival, as, if</b> it were <b>not Shabbat, there would be no</b> reading from the <b>Prophets during the afternoon service on a Festival.</b> If so, even though there is a <i>haftara</i> during the morning service on a Festival, since they do not read from the Prophets in the afternoon, the reading is considered totally unrelated to the Festival and one does not mention the Festival. The same is true with regard to Hanukkah. One does not mention Hanukkah in the additional prayer.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC