
### Part 1
<b>but one may make salt water and dip one’s bread in it, and place it in cooked food. Rabbi Yosei said: But isn’t it</b> still <b>brine, whether</b> it is <b>a large quantity or whether</b> it is <b>a small quantity? And this is</b> the type of <b>salt water that is permitted:</b> Salt water in which <b>one places oil initially into the water or into the salt.</b> This is salt water prepared not in the usual manner.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to that which was stated in the mishna, the Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>saying</b> with regard to the distinction between brine and salt water? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: This is what he is saying: One may not prepare a large quantity of salt water,</b> brine, <b>on Shabbat, but one may prepare a small quantity of salt water.</b>

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yosei said: But isn’t it</b> still <b>brine whether</b> it is <b>a large quantity or a small quantity? A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: When <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> said that there is no difference between a large and small quantity of salt water, was his intention <b>to prohibit</b> preparing any salt water on Shabbat or <b>to permit</b> doing so? <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> His intention is <b>to permit</b> doing so, which is understood <b>from</b> the fact that the mishna <b>is not teaching: Rabbi Yosei prohibits. Rabba said to him: From</b> the fact <b>that it is taught in the latter</b> clause of the mishna: <b>And this is</b> the type of <b>salt water that is permitted, by inference, Rabbi Yosei</b> intended <b>to prohibit</b> preparing salt water. <b>Rather, Rabba said:</b> Rabbi Yosei intended <b>to prohibit</b> preparing any salt water on Shabbat. <b>And similarly, Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Rabbi Yosei’s intention was <b>to prohibit.</b>

### Part 4
<b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not prepare a large quantity of salt water to add to the pickled</b> vegetables <b>that are inside a</b> flat <b>earthenware shard</b> used for pickling [<b><i>gistera</i>]</b>. <b>However, one may prepare a small quantity of salt water and eat his bread with it and add it to cooked food. Rabbi Yosei said: Is it because this is a large quantity and this is a small quantity</b> that <b>this is prohibited and this is permitted?</b> People <b>will</b> learn from this and <b>say: A large</b> amount of <b>labor is prohibited</b> on Shabbat, but <b>a small</b> amount of <b>labor is permitted. Rather,</b> certainly <b>they are both prohibited. And this is</b> the type of <b>salt water that is permitted: One may place oil and salt</b> together <b>or oil and water</b> and then add salt to the mixture, <b>and</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>provided one does not place water and salt</b> together <b><i>ab initio</i></b>.

### Part 5
<b>Strong, radish, and citron are a mnemonic</b> for the following <i>halakhot</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehuda bar Ḥaviva taught: One may not prepare strong salt water</b> on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>What is strong salt water? Rabba and Rav Yosef bar Abba both said: Any</b> water <b>in which an egg can float.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> salt is in this salt water? <b>Abaye said: Two-thirds salt and one-third water.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> purpose is this salt water <b>prepared? Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> It is prepared <b>for fish brine [<i>muraisa</i>]<i>.</i></b> And <b>Rabbi Yehuda bar Ḥaviva taught</b> with regard to salting: <b>One may not salt a radish or an egg on Shabbat</b> because by salting them he performs a labor that improves them. <b>Rav Ḥizkiya said in the name of Abaye:</b> Preparing <b>a radish is prohibited, and</b> preparing <b>an egg is permitted. Rav Naḥman said: Initially, I would salt radishes</b> on Shabbat, as <b>I said: I am ruining it</b> by doing so, <b>as Shmuel said: Sharpness is good</b> for <b>radishes;</b> since salt reduces their sharpness, one who adds salt ruins the radish. However, <b>once I heard this, that when Ulla came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> that <b>in the West,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, <b>they salt many piles</b> of radishes throughout the week, I <b>do not salt</b> them on Shabbat anymore, but <b>I certainly dip</b> them in salt because that is not considered to be an improvement.

### Part 8
The Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Yehuda bar Ḥaviva taught</b> with regard to radishes and eggs: With regard to <b>a citron, a radish, and an egg, if it were not for their outer peel,</b> or egg white, <b>they would never emerge from the intestines,</b> because they are extremely hard to digest.

### Part 9
<b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said: No person has ever drowned in the Sea of Sodom,</b> the Dead Sea. Since there is so much salt, people easily float in it. <b>Rav Yosef said: Sodom is overturned and</b> Rav Dimi’s <b>statement is backward.</b> Is his statement saying that <b>it is a man who does not drown</b> in the Dead Sea, but <b>a plank sinks? Abaye said to him: He is saying</b> his statement utilizing the style of: <b>It is not necessary: It is not necessary</b> to mention <b>a plank</b> because it <b>does not sink in any</b> body of <b>water in the world. But even a man, who drowns in other</b> bodies of <b>water in the world, does not drown in the Sea of Sodom.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are</b> the <b>practical consequences</b> of this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains: This <i>halakha</i> is relevant in a case <b>of this</b> kind: <b>Ravin was walking after Rabbi Yirmeya on the shore of the Sea of Sodom.</b> Ravin <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yirmeya: <b>What is</b> the ruling? Is it permitted <b>to wash oneself with this water on Shabbat,</b> or perhaps it is prohibited because it has healing properties? Rabbi Yirmeya <b>said to him:</b> One may <b>well</b> do so.

### Part 10
Ravin asked another question: When one washes himself on Shabbat in water from the Dead Sea, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is it permitted for him to <b>close and open</b> his eyes in the water so that the water gets inside? Rabbi Yirmeya <b>said to him: That</b> case <b>I did not hear</b>; however, with regard to <b>a similar case,</b> placing wine in one’s eye on Shabbat, <b>I did hear. As Rabbi Zeira said, sometimes he said it in the name</b> of <b>Rav Mattana and sometimes he said it in the name of Mar Ukva, and they both said</b> it <b>in the name</b> of <b>Shmuel’s father and</b> in the name of <b>Levi: One</b> of them <b>said:</b> With regard to placing <b>wine inside the eye</b> on Shabbat, it <b>is prohibited</b> because it heals; <b>on the eye,</b> it <b>is permitted. And one</b> of them <b>said: Bland saliva,</b> saliva from one who has not eaten since waking, <b>even</b> placing it <b>on the eye</b> on Shabbat <b>is prohibited</b> because it is commonly used as medicine.

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: <b>Conclude that Shmuel’s father is the one who said</b> that placing <b>wine inside the eye is prohibited</b> but <b>on the eye is permitted, from</b> the fact <b>that Shmuel said: A person may soak his bread in wine and place it on his eye on Shabbat.</b> He said this after <b>he heard this</b> <i>halakha</i> from <b>whom?</b> Is it <b>not that he heard it from his father?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>And according to your reasoning, that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>which Shmuel said: It is prohibited</b> to place <b>bland saliva even on the eye</b> on Shabbat, he said this after <b>he heard this</b> <i>halakha</i> from <b>whom? If we say that he heard it from his father, then Levi,</b> who was cited together with Shmuel’s father in the list of those who stated the <i>halakhot</i>, <b>did</b> he himself <b>not say</b> even <b>one</b> <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rather, one</b> <i>halakha</i> Shmuel <b>heard from his father, and one</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>he heard one from Levi, and we do not know which</b> he heard <b>from his father</b> and <b>which</b> he heard <b>from Levi.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Mar Ukva said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One may soak eye salves from Shabbat eve and place</b> them <b>on his eyes on Shabbat, and</b> he <b>need not be concerned</b> that he is violating the prohibition against healing on Shabbat. The Gemara relates: <b>Bar Liva’ei was standing before Mar Ukva</b> on Shabbat. <b>He saw</b> Mar Ukva, <b>who was opening and closing</b> his eyes while applying a salve to them. Bar Liva’ei <b>said to him: Master Shmuel certainly did not permit</b> doing <b>all of this. Rabbi Yannai sent</b> a message <b>to Mar Ukva: Can the master send us some of Master Shmuel’s eye salves?</b> Mar Ukva <b>sent him</b> in response: <b>I will send</b> it <b>to you</b> so that <b>you do not say I am miserly, but</b> be aware that <b>this is what Shmuel said:</b> For healing the eyes, <b>better a drop of cold</b> water in the <b>morning and washing the hands and feet with hot water</b> in the <b>evening than all the eye salves in the world.</b> Follow these instructions and you will need nor other cures. <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Mona said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: Better a drop of cold</b> water in the <b>morning and washing the hands and feet</b> in the <b>evening than all the eye salves in the world.</b>

### Part 13
Apropos Rabbi Mona’s statement with regard to healing, the text cites what <b>he would say</b> about other matters that require special attention: <b>A hand</b> that touches the <b>eye should be severed</b> because it harms the eye. <b>A hand</b> that touches the <b>nose should be severed. A hand</b> that touches the <b>mouth should be severed. A hand</b> that touches the <b>ear should be severed. A hand</b> that touches one’s <b>wound should be severed. A hand</b> that touches one’s <b>member should be severed,</b> lest one arouse himself. <b>A hand</b> that touches one’s <b>anus should be severed,</b> lest one make himself ill. <b>A hand</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC