
### Part 1
<b>one</b> acted <b>unwittingly</b> with regard <b>to the food and intentionally</b> with regard <b>to the vessel.</b> He is liable to bring a sin-offering for the food and to receive <i>karet</i> for the vessel. <b>Rav Ashi strongly objects to this. Didn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach:</b> He is liable <b>even for the vessel?</b> Apparently, the liability for the food and the liability for the vessel are identical. <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said:</b> This is referring to a case <b>where one</b> acted <b>unwittingly</b> both <b>with regard to this,</b> the food, <b>and with regard to that,</b> the vessel. <b>And he became aware</b> of one transgression, <b>and</b> then <b>he became aware</b> of the other transgression. And the ruling is dependent upon <b>the dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish</b> cited above, with regard to the question whether or not one who unwittingly performed a single transgression twice and became aware of each separately is liable to bring two sin-offerings.

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: One who carries out a <b>living</b> person <b>on a bed is exempt even for</b> carrying out <b>the bed.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>the mishna is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who carries out a domesticated animal, an undomesticated animal, and fowl into the public domain</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable whether</b> they are <b>alive or whether</b> they are <b>slaughtered. Rabbi Natan says: For</b> carrying out <b>slaughtered</b> animals, he is <b>liable, and for</b> carrying out <b>live</b> animals, he is <b>exempt, because a living</b> being <b>carries itself.</b> A living being attempts to lighten the load of the person carrying it and thereby participates in the act of carrying. <b>Rava said:</b> The mishna can be understood <b>even</b> if <b>you say</b> that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. The Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Natan only as far as</b> the case of <b>a domesticated animal, an undomesticated animal, and fowl</b> is concerned <b>because</b> they deaden their weight in an attempt to <b>free themselves</b> from the one carrying them. <b>However,</b> with regard to the fact <b>that a live person carries himself, even the Rabbis agree.</b> Therefore, one who carries a live person out is exempt.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said to Rava: And</b> with regard to that <b>which we learned</b> in a mishna that it is prohibited to sell work animals to gentiles, to prevent a situation where animals still belonging to a Jew would be lent to a gentile who would perform labor with them on Shabbat, but <b>ben Beteira permits</b> selling <b>a horse</b> to a gentile. <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ben Beteira permits</b> selling <b>a horse</b> for riding <b>because</b> the horse <b>is performing an act for which one is not liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering,</b> as riding a horse is not actually a prohibited labor. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Ben Beteira and Rabbi Natan said one,</b> the same, <b>thing.</b> They both hold that an animal with a rider on its back is not considered to be bearing a burden. <b>And if you say that the Rabbis only argue with Rabbi Natan</b> with regard to <b>a domesticated animal, an undomesticated animal, and fowl because they</b> deaden their weight in an attempt to <b>free themselves, why</b> did Rabbi Yoḥanan say <b>specifically</b> that <b>ben Beteira and Rabbi Natan</b> agree? <b>Didn’t you say</b> that in the case of a person riding a horse <b>even the Rabbis agree?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that ben Beteira and Rabbi Natan said the same thing, he was referring to <b>a horse designated</b> specifically <b>for</b> carrying <b>fowl.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And is there a horse designated for</b> carrying <b>fowl?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, there is</b> the horse for carrying <b>a hunter’s falcons [<i>devei vayadan</i>].</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And Rabbi Natan agrees in</b> the case of a person who is <b>bound</b> because he is unable to lighten the load of the person carrying him. <b>Rav Adda bar Mattana said to Abaye: And</b> what of <b>those Persians who are</b> considered <b>as</b> if they were <b>bound</b> because they don heavy armor and always ride horses, <b>and</b> nevertheless <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Ben Beteira and Rabbi Natan said one thing</b> and permitted selling horses even to Persians? The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> with regard to the Persians, it is not that they are unable to dismount their horses. <b>It is arrogance that keeps them</b> from dismounting their horses. As proof, the Gemara relates: There was <b>that</b> Persian <b>officer [<i>pardashka</i>] at whom the king was angry, and</b> he <b>ran three parasangs on foot.</b> Apparently, even Persian horsemen are not considered bound and are capable of walking without their horses.

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna that according to the first <i>tanna</i>: One who carries out <b>a corpse on a bed is liable. And similarly,</b> one who carries out <b>an olive-bulk of a corpse,</b> or an olive-bulk of an animal carcass, or a lentil-bulk of a creeping animal is liable. Rabbi Shimon deems him exempt. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said, and Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: Rabbi Shimon would deem exempt</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC