
### Part 1
<b>Is that to say</b> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>deems</b> one <b>liable</b> for <b>a subcategory</b> of prohibited labor when performed <b>with a primary category</b> of prohibited labor? After all, carrying out and carrying in constitute a primary category of prohibited labor and its subcategory.

### Part 2
<b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that Shabbat is mentioned in the verse: “These are the things [<i>eleh hadevarim</i>] that God has commanded to perform them” (Exodus 35:1)? Several points are derived from the superfluous emphases in this verse. The Torah could simply have stated: This is a thing [<i>davar</i>]. When it states <b>things [<i>devarim</i>]</b> in the plural, it teaches at least two points. The addition of the definite article the in the term <b>the things [<i>hadevarim</i>]</b> adds at least a third point. The numerological value of letters of the word <i>eleh</i>, which are <i>alef</i>, one; <i>lamed</i>, thirty; and <i>heh</i>, five, is thirty-six. The phrase: <b>These are the things,</b> alludes to three plus thirty-six derivation, i.e., the <b>thirty-nine prohibited labors that were stated to Moses at Sinai.</b> Since Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi maintains that there are a fixed number of primary categories of labor, he would certainly hold a person liable for the primary categories but not for the subcategories. 

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yosef said to him: The Master taught</b> Rav Yehuda’s statement <b>with regard to this, and</b> consequently, <b>he</b> encounters <b>a difficulty.</b> One statement of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi contradicts another statement of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>We learn</b> the statement of Rav Yehuda <b>with regard to the</b> opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and</b> therefore <b>there is no difficulty for us.</b>

### Part 4
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to one who threw an object <b>from the private domain to the public domain, and it traveled four cubits in the public domain, Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> him <b>liable and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Rabbi Yehuda would deem him liable</b> to bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings in this case, <b>one for carrying out</b> from the private domain into the public domain <b>and one for carrying</b> the object four cubits through the public domain. The Rabbis deem him exempt for carrying four cubits in the public domain. And it must be interpreted that way <b>because if it would enter your mind</b> to say that Rabbi Yehuda <b>deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring only <b>one</b> sin-offering, <b>by inference, the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>completely exempt.</b> How is that possible? Didn’t <b>he carry</b> an object out <b>from the private domain into the public domain?</b> This proof is rejected: <b>And from where</b> do you draw that conclusion? <b>Perhaps I could actually say to you</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring <b>one</b> sin-offering <b>and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>completely exempt, and how do you find that</b> circumstance? In a case <b>where he said:</b> My intention is that <b>as soon it,</b> the object, <b>goes out into the public domain it will</b> immediately <b>come to rest.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And they disagree with regard to this: Rabbi Yehuda maintains</b> that <b>we say: An object in airspace is considered at rest, and</b> therefore <b>his intention was fulfilled.</b> As soon as the object enters the airspace of the public domain it is considered to have come to rest. <b>And the Rabbis maintain</b> that <b>we do not say: An object in airspace is considered at rest, and</b> therefore <b>his intention was not fulfilled</b> and he is exempt. <b>However, Rabbi Yehuda does not hold</b> one <b>liable</b> for <b>a subcategory</b> of labor performed together with <b>a primary category</b> of labor.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this explanation: <b>It could not enter your mind</b> to say so, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda adds even lining up</b> the threads of the warp <b>and beating</b> the threads of the woof to the list of primary categories of labor. The Rabbis <b>said to him: Lining up</b> is a subcategory <b>subsumed under</b> the primary category of <b>stretching</b> the threads of the warp within the loom, and <b>beating is subsumed under</b> the primary category of <b>weaving. Is this not</b> referring to a case where <b>one performed both</b> lining up and beating <b>together, and learn from it</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> one <b>liable</b> for both <b>a subcategory</b> and <b>a primary category</b> of labor when they are performed together?

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>And from where</b> do you draw that conclusion? <b>Perhaps</b> it is <b>actually</b> referring to a case where <b>one performed this</b> action <b>alone and this</b> action <b>alone, and Rabbi Yehuda does not deem</b> one <b>liable for a subcategory</b> of labor performed together with <b>a primary category</b> of labor. <b>And</b> Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis <b>disagree with regard to this. Rabbi Yehuda maintains</b> as follows: <b>These</b> actions of lining up and beating <b>are</b> additional <b>primary categories</b> of labor, <b>and the Rabbis maintain</b> as follows: <b>These are subcategories.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Know</b> that this is so, <b>as</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: Rabbi Yehuda adds.</b> The Gemara explains this quote from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that Rabbi Yehuda meant that these are <b>primary categories</b> of labor, <b>what</b> is the meaning of: <b>He adds?</b> It means <b>he adds primary categories</b> of labor. <b>However, if you say</b> that he meant that these are <b>subcategories, what</b> is the meaning of: <b>He adds? It was also stated</b> that it was <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef who both said: Rabbi Yehuda deemed</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring <b>only one</b> sin-offering.

### Part 10
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi: And according to what originally entered our mind</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda deemed</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings, how could he be liable for both carrying out from the private domain and for carrying four cubits in the public domain? <b>If one</b> only <b>wanted</b> the object to land <b>here</b> at the beginning of the public domain, <b>he did not want</b> it to land <b>here,</b> four cubits into the public domain. Conversely, <b>if one</b> only <b>wanted</b> the object to land <b>here,</b> four cubits into the public domain, <b>he did not want</b> it to land <b>here,</b> at the beginning of the public domain. Rav Ashi <b>said to</b> Ravina: It is possible in a case where <b>one says: Any place that it wants to</b> come to rest, let it come to <b>rest.</b> One indicated that his intention would be fulfilled wherever the thrown object lands.

### Part 11
Concerning throwing an object on Shabbat from one domain to another and within a single domain, the Gemara raises several issues with regard to intention when throwing. It is <b>obvious</b> that <b>one who intended to throw</b> an object <b>eight</b> cubits in a public domain <b>and</b> actually <b>threw</b> it only <b>four</b> cubits is liable <b>because</b> that case is similar to a case where <b>one wrote</b> the word <b><i>shem</i>,</b> the first two letters <b>of</b> the name <b>Shimon.</b> In the case of writing <i>shem</i>, the individual performed the prohibited labor of writing a two-letter word, even though he did not complete the word that he originally intended to write. The question is as follows: <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> if <b>one intended to throw</b> an object <b>four</b> cubits <b>and threw</b> it <b>eight? Do we say he did</b> indeed <b>carry</b> the object, <b>or perhaps</b> we say that ultimately the object <b>did not land where he wanted</b> it to land? <b>But</b> is <b>that not</b> precisely what <b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi,</b> as mentioned above? <b>And</b> Rav Ashi <b>said</b> in response that it is referring to a case <b>where one says: Any place that it wants to</b> come to rest, let it come to <b>rest.</b> In such a scenario one is liable, because he expressed the fact that he is contented with any labor that will be performed with the object.

### Part 12
Furthermore, the first case, which seems obvious, also requires clarification. <b>And that which you said,</b> that this is similar to a case where <b>one wrote</b> the word <b><i>shem</i>,</b> the first two letters <b>of</b> the name <b>Shimon, is</b> it in fact <b>similar? There, as long as</b> the letters of <b><i>shem</i>,</b> <i>shin</i> and <i>mem</i>, <b>are not written,</b> the name <b>Shimon cannot be written. Here,</b> where one intended to throw the object eight cubits and he threw it only four, is it true that <b>as long as it was not thrown four</b> cubits <b>it cannot be thrown eight?</b> An object can be thrown eight cubits without first landing after four cubits. The question remains unresolved.

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>one who throws</b> an object on Shabbat <b>from the public domain to the</b> other <b>public domain through the private domain, he is liable</b> if he throws an object a total of <b>four cubits</b> in both parts of the public domain.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC