
### Part 1
<b>However,</b> doing so is <b>prohibited. And one may not fasten</b> the pieces together forcefully, <b>and if he fastens</b> them, <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering</b> for performing a labor prohibited by Torah law. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: If it was loose</b> and could be assembled with ease, <b>it is permitted.</b> Rabbi Abba and Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya relied on this opinion.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>In the house of Rav Ḥama,</b> Rava’s grandfather, <b>there was a collapsible bed,</b> similar to a weaver’s loom, <b>and they would reassemble it on a Festival. One of the Sages said to Rava: What is your opinion?</b> Do you hold that this <b>is allowed</b> because <b>it is building in an atypical manner?</b> In other words, one is not performing the prohibited labor of building since it is was not performed in the standard manner? <b>Although there is no Torah prohibition, there is, in any case, a rabbinic prohibition.</b> Rava <b>said to him: I hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> who said that <b>if it were loose, it is permitted</b> even <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may place a vessel beneath the</b> oil <b>lamp</b> in order <b>to receive</b> burning <b>sparks</b> of oil that fall from the lamp so that they will not cause a fire. <b>And he may not place water into</b> the vessel <b>because he</b> thereby <b>extinguishes</b> the sparks.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: How is it permitted to position this vessel to receive the sparks, <b>doesn’t he</b> thereby <b>negate</b> the <b>vessel’s preparedness?</b> It is no longer prepared for any use on Shabbat as the sparks accord it set-aside status. The opinion that negating the preparedness of a vessel is prohibited has already been stated. <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: Sparks have no substance.</b> They burn immediately and do not leave behind any trace of oil in the vessel. Therefore, the vessel remains suitable to be moved.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> we also learned in the mishna that <b>one may not place water into</b> the vessel situated beneath the candle <b>because he</b> thereby <b>extinguishes</b> the sparks. The Gemara remarks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>we learned</b> an <b>unattributed</b> mishna <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who <b>said</b> that even an action that <b>causes extinguishing</b> indirectly <b>is prohibited?</b> The extinguishing in this case, where water was placed into a vessel, was not accomplished by means of a direct action. His action only caused it to extinguish indirectly.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this question in astonishment: <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it in that manner? <b>Say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei said</b> that indirectly causing extinguishing is prohibited <b>on Shabbat; on Shabbat eve did he say</b> this? <b>And if you say</b> that <b>here, too, it is</b> referring to a case where he placed water in the vessel <b>on Shabbat, wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may place a vessel underneath an</b> oil <b>lamp to receive sparks</b> that fall from the lamp <b>on Shabbat, and, needless to say,</b> placing it there is permitted <b>on Shabbat eve? And one may not put water into</b> the vessel <b>because he will</b> thereby <b>extinguish</b> the spark, even if he placed it there <b>on Shabbat eve, and, needless to say,</b> doing so is prohibited <b>on Shabbat</b> itself. Apparently, the prohibition in the mishna is not at all connected to Rabbi Yosei’s approach. <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said: Even if you say</b> that this mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, it is different here because,</b> in this case, he is not only causing the spark to extinguish. He is <b>hastening its extinguishing,</b> as the sparks are extinguished immediately when they fall into the water (Rabbeinu Ḥananel). In this matter even the Rabbis would prohibit doing so.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC