
### Part 1
<b>I make a feast for the Sages. Rava said: May I receive</b> my reward <b>because when a young Torah scholar comes before me for judgment, I do not put my head on the pillow until I seek</b> as many of <b>his merits</b> as possible, based on conditions and his claims. <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi said: I am disqualified to</b> sit in <b>judgment of a young Torah scholar. What is the reason</b> that I am disqualified? It is <b>because</b> the Torah scholar <b>is as beloved to me as my</b> own <b>self, and a person does not find fault in himself.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara now returns to the issue of delight in and deference to Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina would wrap himself</b> in his garment <b>and stand at nightfall on Shabbat eve,</b> and <b>say: Come and we will go out to greet Shabbat the queen. Rabbi Yannai put on his garment on Shabbat eve and said: Enter, O bride. Enter, O bride.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rabba bar Rav Naḥman. They brought</b> before <b>him three se’a of oiled biscuits.</b> He <b>said to them: Did you know I was coming</b> and prepared all of this in my honor? <b>They said to him: Are you</b> more <b>important to us than</b> Shabbat? The biscuits were prepared in deference to Shabbat.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Abba bought thirteen plain staters [<i>astirei peshitei</i>]</b> worth half a <i>zuz</i> <b>of meat from thirteen butchers</b> in deference to Shabbat, so that he would have various types of fine meat. <b>And he would place</b> the meats <b>at the door hinge</b> at the entrance to his house to hurry to bring another type of meat. <b>And</b> he <b>said to</b> the cooks, in order to rush them: <b>Hurry and prepare it, hurry and prepare it.</b> The Gemara also relates: <b>Rabbi Abbahu would sit on an ivory chair [<i>takhteka</i>] and fan the fire</b> cooking the food for Shabbat, in order to play a role in preparations for Shabbat. <b>Rav Anan would don a</b> simple <b>black garment</b> for the Shabbat preparations, <b>as the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> While wearing the <b>garments in which he cooked a pot</b> of food <b>for his master, one should not dilute a cup of wine for his Master.</b> One should wear a garment appropriate for the task at hand.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Safra</b> would <b>roast the head</b> of an animal to prepare it for Shabbat. <b>Rava salted</b> a <b><i>shibuta</i></b> fish in deference to Shabbat. <b>Rav Huna kindled lamps</b> in deference to Shabbat. <b>Rav Pappa spun the wicks</b> for the Shabbat lamp. <b>Rav Ḥisda cut the beets</b> in preparation for Shabbat. <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef cut wood. Rabbi Zeira prepared thin sticks</b> for kindling. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak</b> would <b>load</b> objects <b>on his shoulder and enter, load</b> objects <b>on his shoulder and exit. He said: If Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi happened to</b> visit <b>me, would I not load</b> objects <b>on my shoulder before them?</b> So too, it is fitting to do so in deference to Shabbat. <b>And some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> would <b>load</b> objects <b>on their shoulders and enter, load</b> objects <b>on their shoulders and exit. They said: If Rabbi Yoḥanan happened</b> to come <b>to</b> visit <b>us, would we not load</b> objects <b>on our shoulders before him?</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates with regard to <b>Yosef who cherishes Shabbat: There was a gentile in his neighborhood whose property was extremely plentiful. The astrologers said to</b> the gentile with regard to <b>all his property: Yosef who cherishes Shabbat will consume it.</b> The gentile <b>went and sold all of his property,</b> and with the money he received <b>he bought a pearl,</b> and he <b>placed it in his hat. When he was crossing a river</b> in <b>a ferry, the wind blew</b> his hat <b>and cast it into the water,</b> and <b>a fish swallowed it.</b> The fish <b>was</b> caught and <b>removed</b> from the water and <b>it was brought</b> to shore adjacent to <b>nightfall on Shabbat eve.</b> The fishermen <b>said: Who buys</b> fish at a time <b>like this?</b> The townspeople <b>said to</b> the fishermen: <b>Go bring it to Yosef who cherishes Shabbat, as he regularly purchases</b> delicacies in deference to Shabbat. <b>They brought it to him</b> and <b>he purchased it. He ripped</b> the fish open and <b>found a pearl inside it. He sold it for thirteen vessels filled with golden dinars</b> (<i>Tosafot</i>). <b>This elderly man</b> who <b>encountered him and said: One who lends</b> to <b>Shabbat, Shabbat repays him.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>raised a dilemma before Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei:</b> With regard to <b>the wealthy of Eretz Yisrael, by what</b> virtue <b>do they merit</b> their wealth? He <b>said to him: Because they tithe, as it is stated: “A tithe you shall tithe [<i>asser te’asser</i>]</b> from all the crops of your seed that come out of the field each year” (Deuteronomy 14:22). The Sages interpreted this homiletically: <b>Take a tithe [<i>asser</i>] so that you will become wealthy [<i>titasher</i>].</b> He asked: With regard to <b>the wealthy of Babylonia,</b> who are not obligated to tithe, <b>by what</b> virtue <b>do they merit</b> their wealth? He <b>said to him: Because they honor the Torah</b> and the Sages in Babylonia.

### Part 7
With regard to <b>the wealthy of other countries,</b> where there are no Sages, <b>by what</b> virtue <b>do they merit</b> their wealth? He <b>said to him: Because they honor Shabbat, as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: One time I was hosted at</b> the home of <b>a homeowner in Laodicea and</b> they <b>brought before him a table of gold</b> that was so heavy it required <b>sixteen people to carry it, and</b> there were <b>sixteen chains of silver attached to it, and</b> there were <b>bowls and cups and pitchers and flasks attached to it, and</b> there were <b>all sorts of food, and delicacies, and fragrant spices on it. And when they placed it</b> there <b>they</b> would <b>say: “The earth and all that fills it is God’s,</b> the world and all that inhabit it” (Psalms 24:1). <b>And when they removed it they</b> would <b>say: “The heavens are God’s heavens, but the earth He gave to mankind”</b> (Psalms 115:16). <b>I said to him: My son, what did you</b> do to <b>merit this? He said to me: I was a slaughterer, and</b> when I would come across parts <b>from every animal</b> that I slaughtered that was <b>fine, I would say: This will be for Shabbat. I said to him: Happy are you that you merited</b> this, <b>and blessed is God, Who has afforded you this merit.</b>

### Part 8
The Roman <b>emperor said to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya: Why does the fragrance of a cooked Shabbat dish diffuse?</b> He <b>said to him: We have a certain spice called dill [<i>shevet</i>], which we place in</b> the cooked dishes <b>and its fragrance diffuses.</b> The emperor <b>said to him: Give us</b> some <b>of it.</b> He <b>said to him: For anyone who observes Shabbat,</b> the spice <b>is effective, and for one who does not observe Shabbat, it is not effective.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Exilarch said to Rav Hamnuna: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written, “The holy one of God is honored”</b> (Isaiah 58:13)? Rav Hamnuna <b>said to him: That is Yom Kippur, when there is no eating or drinking,</b> and so the <b>Torah said: Honor it with a clean garment.</b> And with regard to that which is stated about Shabbat, <b>“And you shall honor it,” Rav said: To</b> honor Shabbat, <b>make</b> the Shabbat feast <b>earlier</b> than on other days, in order to show that one delights in eating it. <b>And Shmuel said: To</b> honor Shabbat, <b>make</b> the Shabbat feast <b>later,</b> so that one’s appetite will be greater. <b>The sons of Rav Pappa bar Abba said to Rav Pappa:</b> People <b>like us, for whom meat and wine is found</b> on our table <b>every day, in what</b> manner <b>can we change it</b> on Shabbat? He <b>said to them: If you are accustomed to</b> eating your meal <b>early, make it later</b> on Shabbat; <b>if you are accustomed to making it late, make it earlier</b> on Shabbat. This difference will underscore the uniqueness of Shabbat. The Gemara relates: <b>In the summer, Rav Sheshet would seat the Sages</b> who attended his lecture in a place <b>where the sun would reach; in the winter, he would seat the Sages</b> in a place <b>where the shade would reach.</b> He did this <b>so</b> that <b>they would stand quickly</b> after the lecture ended and not engage in discussion, which would detract from the time devoted to delighting in Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Zeira</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC