
### Part 1
<b>who proceed wholeheartedly</b> and with integrity, <b>it is written: “The integrity of the upright will guide them”</b> (Proverbs 11:3), whereas <b>about those people who walk in deceit, it is written</b> at the end of the same verse: <b>“And the perverseness of the faithless will destroy them.”</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥamani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You have ravished my heart, my sister, my bride; you have ravished my heart with one of your eyes,</b> with one bead of your necklace” (Song of Songs 4:9)? <b>At first</b> when you, the Jewish people, merely accepted the Torah upon yourselves it was <b>with one of your eyes;</b> however, <b>when you</b> actually <b>perform</b> the mitzvot it will be <b>with both of your eyes. Ulla said</b> with regard to the sin of the Golden Calf: <b>Insolent is the bride who is promiscuous under her wedding canopy. Rav Mari, son of the daughter of Shmuel, said: What verse</b> alludes to this? <b>“While the king was still at his table my spikenard</b> gave off its fragrance” (Song of Songs 1:12). Its pleasant odor dissipated, leaving only an offensive odor. <b>Rav said:</b> Nevertheless, it is apparent from the verse that <b>the affection</b> of the Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>is still upon us, as it is written</b> euphemistically as “<b>gave off</b> its fragrance,” <b>and</b> the verse <b>did not write, it reeked.</b> And <b>the Sages taught: About</b> those who <b>are insulted and do not insult, who hear their shame and do not respond, who act out of love and are joyful in suffering, the verse says: “And they that love Him are as the sun going forth in its might”</b> (Judges 5:31).

### Part 3
With regard to the revelation at Sinai, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The Lord gives the word; the women that proclaim the tidings are a great host”</b> (Psalms 68:12)? It means that <b>each and every utterance that emerged from the mouth of the Almighty divided into seventy languages,</b> a great host. And, similarly, <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> with regard to the verse: “Behold, is My word not like fire, declares the Lord, <b>and like a hammer that shatters a rock?”</b> (Jeremiah 23:29). <b>Just as this hammer breaks</b> a stone <b>into several fragments, so too, each and every utterance that emerged from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, divided into seventy languages.</b> The Gemara continues in praise of the Torah. <b>Rav Ḥananel bar Pappa said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Listen, for I will speak royal things,</b> and my lips will open with upright statements” (Proverbs 8:6)? <b>Why are matters of Torah likened to a king? To teach you</b> that <b>just as this king has</b> the power <b>to kill and to grant life, so too, matters of Torah have</b> the power <b>to kill and to grant life.</b>

### Part 4
And <b>that is</b> what <b>Rava said: To those who are right-handed in</b> their approach to Torah, and engage in its study with strength, good will, and sanctity, Torah is <b>a drug of life,</b> and <b>to those who are left-handed in</b> their approach to Torah, it is <b>a drug of death. Alternatively,</b> why are matters of Torah referred to as <b>royal?</b> Because <b>to each and every utterance that emerged from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, two crowns are tied. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “My beloved is to me like a bundle of myrrh that lies between my breasts”</b> (Song of Songs 1:13)? <b>The Congregation of Israel said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, even though my beloved,</b> God, <b>causes me suffering and bitterness, He</b> still <b>lies between my breasts.</b> And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi interpreted the verse: <b>“My beloved is to me like a cluster [<i>eshkol</i>] of henna [<i>hakofer</i>] in the vineyards of [<i>karmei</i>] Ein Gedi”</b> (Song of Songs 1:14). <b>He, Whom everything [<i>shehakol</i>] is His, forgives [<i>mekhapper</i>] me for the sin of the kid [<i>gedi</i>],</b> i.e., the calf, <b>that I collected [<i>shekaramti</i>] for myself.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>From where</b> is it <b>inferred that</b> the word in <b>this</b> verse, <b><i>karmei</i>, is a term of gathering? Mar Zutra, son of Rav Naḥman, said</b> that it is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A launderer’s chair upon which one gathers [<i>koremim</i>] the garments.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “His cheeks are as a bed of spices,</b> as banks of sweet herbs, his lips are lilies dripping with flowing myrrh” (Song of Songs 5:13)? It is interpreted homiletically: From <b>each and every utterance that emerged from</b> His cheeks, i.e., <b>the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, the entire world was filled with fragrant spices. And since</b> the world <b>was</b> already <b>filled by the first utterance, where</b> was there room for the spices of <b>the second utterance</b> to <b>go? The Holy One, Blessed be He, brought forth wind from His treasuries and made the</b> spices <b>pass one at a time,</b> leaving room for the consequences of the next utterance. <b>As it is stated: “His lips are lilies [<i>shoshanim</i>] dripping with flowing myrrh.”</b> Each and every utterance resulted in flowing myrrh. <b>Do not read</b> the word in the verse as <b><i>shoshanim</i>; rather,</b> read it as <b><i>sheshonim</i>,</b> meaning repeat. Each repeat utterance produced its own fragrance.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> From <b>each and every utterance that emerged from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, the souls of the Jewish people left</b> their bodies, <b>as it is stated: “My soul departed when he spoke”</b> (Song of Songs 5:6). <b>And since their souls left</b> their bodies <b>from the first utterance, how did they receive the second utterance?</b> Rather, God <b>rained the dew</b> upon them <b>that, in the future, will revive the dead, and He revived them, as it is stated: “You, God, poured down a bountiful rain; when Your inheritance was weary You sustained it”</b> (Psalms 68:10). <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> With <b>each and every utterance that emerged from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, the Jewish people retreated</b> in fear <b>twelve <i>mil</i>, and the ministering angels walked them</b> back toward the mountain, <b>as it is stated: “The hosts of angels will scatter [<i>yidodun</i>]”</b> (Psalms 68:13). <b>Do not read</b> the word as <b><i>yidodun</i>,</b> meaning scattered; <b>rather,</b> read it as <b><i>yedadun</i>,</b> they walked them.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When Moses ascended on High</b> to receive the Torah, <b>the ministering angels said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, what is one born of a woman</b> doing here <b>among us?</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to them: He came to receive the Torah.</b> The angels <b>said before Him:</b> The Torah is a <b>hidden treasure that was concealed by you 974 generations before the creation of the world,</b> and <b>you seek to give it to flesh and blood?</b> As it is stated: “The word which He commanded to a thousand generations” (Psalms 105:8). Since the Torah, the word of God, was given to the twenty-sixth generation after Adam, the first man, the remaining 974 generations must have preceded the creation of the world. <b>“What is man that You are mindful of him and the son of man that You think of him?”</b> (Psalms 8:5). Rather, <b>“God our Lord, how glorious is Your name in all the earth that Your majesty is placed above the heavens”</b> (Psalms 8:2). The rightful place of God’s majesty, the Torah, is in the heavens.

### Part 8
<b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Provide them</b> with <b>an answer</b> as to why the Torah should be given to the people. Moses <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, I am afraid lest they burn me with the breath of their mouths.</b> God <b>said to him: Grasp My throne of glory</b> for strength and protection, <b>and provide them</b> with <b>an answer.</b> And from where is this derived? <b>As it is stated: “He causes him to grasp the front of the throne, and spreads His cloud over it”</b> (Job 26:9), <b>and Rabbi Naḥum said:</b> This verse <b>teaches that God spread the radiance of His presence and His cloud over</b> Moses. Moses <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, the Torah that You are giving me, what is written in it?</b> God said to him: <b>“I am the Lord your God Who brought you out of Egypt</b> from the house of bondage” (Exodus 20:2). Moses <b>said to</b> the angels: <b>Did you descend to Egypt? Were you enslaved to Pharaoh? Why should the Torah be yours? Again</b> Moses asked: <b>What</b> else <b>is written in it?</b> God said to him: <b>“You shall have no other gods</b> before Me” (Exodus 20:3). Moses said to the angels: <b>Do you dwell among the nations who worship</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC