
### Part 1
<b>A knot</b> with which one <b>ties</b> a strap <b>to the</b> camel’s <b>nose ring and a knot</b> with which one <b>ties</b> a rope <b>to the ring fixed to the bow of a ship,</b> with regard to <b>liability</b> to bring a sin-offering, there is <b>none; however, there is a</b> rabbinic <b>prohibition. And there are</b> knots <b>that are permitted</b> to <b>be</b> tied on Shabbat <b><i>ab initio</i>. And which are these?</b> The knot that a woman uses to <b>tie the opening of her robe.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: A woman may tie <b>the opening of her robe</b> on Shabbat. The Gemara states: This is <b>obvious,</b> as the knot is meant to be untied and is therefore not permanent. The Gemara explains: <b>It is only necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> in a case <b>where the robe has two laces</b> with which to tie the opening. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>one of them</b> may <b>become void</b> because the woman can remove the garment even with one string, leaving the one not untied a permanent knot, <b>it</b> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that neither knot is considered permanent.

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna: <b>And</b> a woman may tie the <b>strings of her hairnet</b> on Shabbat. The Gemara states: This is <b>obvious.</b> The Gemara clarifies the matter: <b>It was only necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> in a case <b>where</b> the hairnet is tied <b>loosely on her</b> head. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>she</b> sometimes <b>removes it</b> without untying it and the knots remain, <b>the mishna teaches us</b> that <b>a woman is protective of her hair</b> and avoids pulling it out, <b>and</b> therefore <b>she unties</b> the hairnet to avoid damaging her hair.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna: <b>And</b> it is permitted to tie the <b>straps of a shoe</b> or <b>a sandal</b> on Shabbat. <b>It was stated</b> with regard to <b>one who untied</b> the <b>straps of a shoe</b> or <b>a sandal: One</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> that one who did so on Shabbat is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering; and it was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>one is exempt</b> by Torah law, <b>and</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to untie those straps <i>ab initio</i>; <b>and it was taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>it is permitted</b> to untie these knots <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b> This is <b>difficult,</b> as there is a contradiction between one statement with regard to <b>a shoe</b> and another statement with regard to the straps of <b>a shoe;</b> and this is <b>difficult,</b> as there is a contradiction between one statement with regard to the straps of <b>a sandal</b> and another statement with regard to the straps of <b>a sandal.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: The apparent contradiction between one statement with regard to <b>a shoe</b> and the other statement with regard to <b>a shoe is not difficult,</b> as <b>that <i>baraita</i>, which teaches that one is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, is referring to a shoemaker’s</b> knot, which is permanent as it holds the shoe together. The <i>baraita</i> that states that <b>he is exempt</b> by Torah law <b>and</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> by rabbinic decree is referring <b>to</b> the shoe worn by <b>Sages,</b> as they often tie their shoes loosely so they can easily put on and remove their shoes. The <i>baraita</i> that teaches that it is <b>permitted</b> to tie shoes <b><i>ab initio</i> is referring to</b> such knots used by <b>the residents of</b> the city of <b>Meḥoza,</b> who are meticulous in their dress and who tie and untie their shoes every day.

### Part 6
Similarly, the contradiction between one statement with regard to the straps of <b>a sandal</b> and the other statement with regard to the straps of <b>a sandal is not difficult,</b> as <b>that</b> <i>baraita,</i> <b>which teaches</b> that one is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, is referring to Arab</b> sandals, for <b>which shoemakers tie</b> permanent knots. And the <i>baraita</i> that teaches that <b>he is exempt</b> by Torah law <b>and</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> by rabbinic decree <b>is referring to straps that they,</b> i.e., ordinary people, <b>tie.</b> The <i>baraita</i> that teaches that it is <b>permitted</b> to tie and untie the straps of a sandal <b><i>ab initio</i> is referring to a sandal</b> shared by <b>two</b> people <b>who</b> alternate <b>going out</b> at different times. They untie and retie the straps each time to ensure that the sandals will fit properly, <b>like</b> the sandals of <b>Rav Yehuda; as Rav Yehuda, brother of Rav Sala Ḥasida, had a pair of sandals,</b> and <b>sometimes he would go out</b> wearing them and <b>sometimes his child would go out</b> wearing them. Rav Yehuda <b>came before Abaye</b> and <b>said to him: What</b> is the ruling <b>in</b> a case <b>of this kind?</b> May I tie the straps on Shabbat? Abaye <b>said to</b> him: Doing so renders you <b>liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 7
Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> him: <b>Now,</b> even if your ruling in that case had been that one is <b>exempt</b> by Torah law <b>but</b> it is still <b>prohibited</b> by rabbinic law, it <b>would be difficult for me,</b> and <b>you say to me</b> that the ruling is that one is <b>liable to bring a sin-offering.</b> Abaye asked him: <b>What is the reason</b> for that difficulty? Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> him: <b>Because on weekdays too I sometimes go out</b> wearing them <b>and sometimes my child goes out</b> wearing them. Abaye <b>said to him: If so, it is permitted</b> to untie the straps <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya was walking after Rabbi Abbahu in a <i>karmelit</i></b> on Shabbat when <b>the strap of his sandal tore.</b> Rabbi Yirmeya <b>said to</b> Rabbi Abbahu: <b>What should I do to it?</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him: Take a moist reed fit for animal consumption and wrap it around</b> the sandal to fasten it. And the Gemara relates: <b>Abaye was standing before Rav Yosef</b> on Shabbat when <b>the strap</b> of <b>his</b> sandal <b>tore.</b> Abaye <b>said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>What should I do with it?</b> He <b>said to him: Leave it</b> and do not move it. Abaye said to him: <b>How is this</b> case <b>different from</b> that of <b>Rabbi Yirmeya?</b> He answered him: <b>There</b> the sandal would <b>not</b> have been <b>protected; here</b> it will be <b>protected.</b> Abaye said to him: <b>But it</b> remains <b>a utensil</b> and may therefore be moved on Shabbat, <b>as if I so desire, I can switch it from the right</b> foot <b>to the left</b> foot and wear it. Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> him: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan explains</b> the matter <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as will be explained, <b>conclude from it</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> Therefore, a torn sandal is not considered to be a utensil even if it were switched, i.e., turned around.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is that</b> opinion of Rabbi Yehuda? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A sandal</b> that was ritually impure, <b>whose two ears</b> that hold the straps <b>or whose two straps</b> (<i>ge’onim</i>) <b>broke, or whose entire sole was removed,</b> becomes <b>ritually pure</b> because it is no longer a utensil. However, if only <b>one of its ears or one of its straps</b> broke, <b>or</b> if only <b>most</b> but not all <b>of its sole was removed,</b> it remains <b>impure. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If the <b>inner</b> strap <b>broke</b> it remains <b>impure,</b> because the outer strap can still be used. If <b>the outer</b> strap <b>broke</b> it is rendered <b>pure. And Ulla, and some say Rabba bar bar Ḥana, said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Like</b> there is a <b>dispute with regard to ritual impurity, so too,</b> there is a <b>dispute with regard to Shabbat,</b> i.e., whether or not it is permitted to wear such a sandal on Shabbat. <b>However,</b> there is <b>no</b> dispute <b>with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And we discussed</b> this issue: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is the statement of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan? If you say</b> that it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and the <i>baraita</i> is explained as follows: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it is a utensil with regard to ritual impurity, it is also a utensil with regard to Shabbat, but</b> it is <b>not</b> considered <b>a utensil with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> However, <b>didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>If she removed the left</b> shoe, which was <b>on the right</b> foot of her brother-in-law, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid?</b> Apparently, a woman can perform <i>ḥalitza</i> even when the shoe is on the wrong foot, and it is not deemed unfit for <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion must be in <b>accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> and is saying the following: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that with regard to impurity it is not a utensil, with regard to Shabbat it is also not a utensil. However,</b> that is <b>not</b> the case <b>with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> for which <b>it is a utensil.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Say that we said</b> that if <b>she removed the left</b> shoe which was <b>on the right</b> foot, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid,</b> that applies only in a case <b>where it</b> is fit as <b>a utensil for its usual purpose,</b> i.e., it can be used as footwear. However, <b>here it is not</b> fit as <b>a utensil for its usual purpose, as Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> If <b>the outer</b> strap of the sandal <b>tore,</b> the sandal is rendered <b>ritually pure. Apparently,</b> according to Rabbi Yehuda, <b>it is not a utensil.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement is difficult according to both opinions. The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> his opinion is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda;</b> however, emend his statement and <b>say</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan said: <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i> as well. And this teaches us that when we say</b> that if <b>she removed the left</b> shoe that was <b>on the right</b> foot <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid,</b> that is only in a case <b>where</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC