
### Part 1
A woman <b>who applies eye shadow</b> is liable <b>due to dyeing;</b> one <b>who braids her hair and applies blush</b> is liable due to the prohibition against <b>building.</b> The Gemara asks about this: <b>And is that the</b> typical <b>manner of building?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> braiding one’s hair is considered building, <b>as Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya taught</b> that the verse states: <b>“And the Lord God built the side</b> that He took from Adam into a woman” (Genesis 2:22), which <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, braided Eve’s</b> hair <b>and brought her to Adam.</b> From where is it derived that this is the meaning of built? It is <b>because in the islands of the sea they call braiding building. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> With regard to a woman <b>who braids her hair</b> and <b>who applies eye shadow or blush</b> on Shabbat, if she did it <b>for herself, she is exempt;</b> if she did it <b>for another, she is liable.</b> This is because a woman cannot perform these actions for herself in as complete a fashion as she can for someone else. <b>And, so too, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar would say in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: A woman may not apply rouge to her face</b> on Shabbat <b>because</b> by doing so <b>she is dyeing,</b> which is one of the prohibited labors on Shabbat.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who milks</b> an animal, <b>and one who sets milk</b> to curdle, <b>and one who makes cheese,</b> in the measure of a <b>dried fig-bulk, and one who sweeps</b> the house, <b>and one who sprinkles</b> water on the floor, <b>and one who removes honeycombs,</b> if he did so <b>unwittingly on Shabbat,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> If he did so <b>intentionally on a Festival, he receives forty</b> lashes; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. And the Rabbis say: Both this,</b> on Shabbat <b>and that,</b> on a Festival, these actions <b>are only</b> prohibited <b>due to a rabbinic decree,</b> not by Torah law. Therefore, one is neither liable to bring a sin-offering nor to receive lashes for performing those actions.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Naḥman bar Gurya happened</b> to come <b>to Neharde’a.</b> The students <b>asked him: For what</b> prohibited labor <b>is one who milks liable?</b> He <b>said to them: For milking. For what</b> prohibited labor <b>is one who sets milk</b> to curdle <b>liable?</b> He <b>said to them: For setting milk</b> to curdle. <b>For what is a person who makes cheese liable?</b> He <b>said to them: For making cheese.</b> They <b>said to him: Your teacher was a reed cutter in a swamp</b> who did not know how to explain the mishna to his students. <b>He came</b> and <b>asked</b> those questions <b>in the study hall.</b> They <b>said to him: One who milks is liable for</b> performing the prohibited labor of <b>extracting,</b> which is a subcategory of threshing, on Shabbat. This is because when one extracts milk from a cow it is similar to the act of threshing, where one removes the desired content from its covering. <b>One who sets milk is liable for</b> the prohibited labor of <b>selecting</b> because part of the milk is separated and made into congealed milk. And <b>one who makes cheese is liable for building</b> because the cheese within the milk assumes a solid form, which is similar to the process of building.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> cited above taught: With regard to <b>one who sweeps</b> the house, and <b>one who sprinkles</b> water on the floor, <b>and one who removes honeycombs,</b> if he did so <b>unwittingly on Shabbat,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> If he did so <b>intentionally on a Festival, he receives forty</b> lashes; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Elazar said: What is the rationale for</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Eliezer?</b> His rationale is <b>as it is written:</b> “And he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand <b>and dipped it in the honeycomb [<i>yarat hadevash</i>]”</b> (i Samuel 14:27). The Gemara wonders: <b>What does a forest [<i>ya’ar</i>] have to do with honey [<i>devash</i>]? Rather,</b> it comes <b>to tell you: Just as</b> with regard to <b>a forest, one who picks from</b> a tree <b>on Shabbat is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too,</b> with regard to <b>a honeycomb, one who removes</b> honey <b>from it on Shabbat is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Ameimar permitted sprinkling water in</b> the city of <b>Meḥoza. He said: What is the reason</b> that <b>the Rabbis said</b> it is prohibited to sprinkle water? It was due to concern <b>lest one come to smooth out holes</b> in an unpaved floor. <b>Here,</b> in Meḥoza, <b>there are no holes</b> in the floor because all the houses have stone floors. The Gemara also relates: <b>Rava Tosfa’a,</b> an expert on the <i>Tosefta</i>, <b>found that Ravina was suffering</b> on Shabbat <b>from</b> the dusty <b>hot air</b> in the house. <b>And some say</b> that <b>Mar Kashisha, son</b> of <b>Rava, found that Rav Ashi was suffering from the</b> dusty <b>hot air.</b> Mar Kashisha <b>said to</b> Rav Ashi: <b>And does my Master not hold</b> in accordance with <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who wishes to sprinkle</b> water on the floor of <b>his house on Shabbat,</b> where it is otherwise prohibited, <b>brings a large basin full of water, and washes his face in this corner,</b> then moves the basin and washes <b>his hands in this corner, his feet in this corner, and it will eventuate that the</b> floor of the entire <b>house is sprinkled by itself</b> from the water that splashed in a backhanded manner? Rav Ashi <b>said to him: It did not enter my mind</b> to employ that method.

### Part 6
One of the Sages <b>taught: A wise woman sprinkles</b> water on the floor of <b>her house on Shabbat</b> by washing different vessels in different parts of the house. <b>And now that we hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that it is permitted to perform an unintentional act on Shabbat, <b>it is permitted</b> to sweep and sprinkle water on the floor of a house on Shabbat <b>even <i>ab initio</i>,</b> because one’s intention is not to smooth the holes in the floor.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who severs</b> a leaf or a fruit <b>from</b> a plant growing in <b>a perforated flowerpot</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable,</b> as a plant in a flowerpot with holes in it has the legal status of a plant connected to the ground. Picking from it is prohibited due to reaping. <b>And</b> one who picks from an <b>imperforated</b> pot <b>is exempt,</b> but it is prohibited to do so <i>ab initio</i>. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems</b> one who does so <b>exempt in</b> both <b>this,</b> the case of the perforated flowerpot, <b>and that,</b> the case of the imperforated flowerpot.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Abaye raised a contradiction before Rava, and some say <b>it was</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rav <b>who raised the contradiction before</b> Rav: <b>On the one hand,</b> we learned <b>in the mishna that</b> Rabbi Shimon deems <b>one</b> exempt in <b>both</b> this <b>case</b> and that <b>case.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Shimon equates <b>a</b> perforated <b>pot with</b> an imperforated <b>pot. And</b> they raised a contradiction: Rabbi Shimon says: The only difference between a perforated <b>pot</b> and an imperforated <b>pot</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC