
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who builds</b> on Shabbat, thereby violating a prohibition in a primary category of prohibited labor, <b>how much</b> must <b>he build</b> to <b>be liable</b> to bring a sin-offering? The Sages said: <b>One who builds</b> is liable for building <b>any amount. And one who chisels, or strikes with a hammer or with an adze,</b> or <b>one who drills</b> a hole <b>of any size</b> on Shabbat, <b>is liable. This is the principle: Anyone who performs a</b> prohibited <b>labor and his labor endures on Shabbat is liable. And so too, Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Even one who strikes an anvil with a sledgehammer during his labor</b> has performed a constructive act and <b>is liable, because he is as one who improves the labor</b> that he is performing.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>any</b> small <b>amount</b> of building, <b>for what</b> use <b>is it suited? Rabbi Yirmeya said: As a poor person digs a hole</b> in the floor of his house <b>in which to hide his coins.</b> Digging a hole in the floor of a house is an act of building. The <b>corresponding</b> situation <b>in the Tabernacle</b> was <b>as those who sewed curtains</b> in the Tabernacle <b>dug holes in which to hide their needles. Abaye said: Since</b> needles <b>rust</b> in the ground, <b>they did not do so.</b> The Gemara seeks a different example of small-scale building that is significant. <b>Rather,</b> an example is <b>that a poor person makes legs for a small stove to place a small pot on it.</b> The <b>corresponding</b> situation <b>in the Tabernacle</b> was with regard to <b>those who cooked herbs</b> used <b>to dye curtains, whose</b> dyeing <b>process was lacking</b> a small amount for completion. At that point, it was not worth the effort to cook a large quantity of dye, and so they would <b>make legs for a small stove upon which to place a small cauldron</b> to cook a small bit of dye to finish the job.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: There is no poverty in a place of wealth.</b> In the Tabernacle, as in any public project, actions are not performed on a small scale or in parsimonious quantities; they were performed generously. Those who cooked dyes in the Tabernacle had no use for small crucibles. <b>Rather,</b> an example of significant small-scale building is <b>a homeowner who has a</b> small <b>hole in his house and seals it.</b> The <b>corresponding</b> situation <b>in the Tabernacle</b> was with regard to <b>a beam that was set upon by a worm</b> that bore a hole into it; one <b>pours lead into</b> the hole <b>and seals it.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Shmuel said:</b> If <b>one sets a stone</b> in place on Shabbat, i.e., he takes a building stone and fixes it in place on the ground on Shabbat, <b>he is liable</b> for performing the prohibited labor of building. The Gemara <b>raises an objection to this</b> from that which the Sages taught with regard to building on Shabbat. In a case where <b>one puts down a stone and</b> another <b>one places the mortar, the one who places the mortar is liable</b> for building. Apparently, the prohibition of building is only violated when mortar is added. Merely setting a stone in place is not enough to establish liability.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>And according to your</b> line of <b>reasoning, say the latter clause</b> of that mishna where we learn that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: And even</b> if <b>one lifted</b> the stone <b>and placed it on a top row of stones [<i>dimos</i>], he is liable</b> even without securing it with mortar. <b>Rather,</b> apparently, <b>there are three</b> different kinds of <b>building: Bottom</b> row, <b>middle</b> row, <b>and upper</b> row. <b>The bottom</b> row <b>requires setting</b> the stones in place <b>and dirt</b> to hold it in place. <b>The middle</b> row <b>requires mortar as well. The upper</b> row suffices <b>with mere placement.</b>

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: <b>One who chisels</b> any amount is liable. The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>one who chisels, for which</b> primary category of prohibited labor <b>is he liable? Rav said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>building. And Shmuel said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>striking</b> a blow <b>with a hammer</b> to complete the production process of a vessel. They similarly disagreed with regard to <b>one who makes a hole in a chicken coop. Rav said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>building. And Shmuel said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>striking</b> a blow <b>with a hammer.</b> And similarly, with regard to <b>one who inserts a pin into the handle of a hoe</b> in order to secure the handle, <b>Rav said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>building. And Shmuel said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> the prohibited labor of <b>striking</b> a blow <b>with a hammer.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: It is <b>necessary</b> for the Gemara to teach us that Rav and Shmuel disagreed in each of these cases because one could not be inferred from the other. <b>As, had</b> the Gemara <b>told us</b> only <b>the first</b> case of chiseling, I would have said that it is specifically <b>in that</b> case that <b>Rav said</b> one is liable for building <b>because it is a</b> typical <b>manner of building; however,</b> with regard to <b>one who makes a hole in a chicken coop,</b> which <b>is not a</b> typical <b>manner of building, say</b> that Rav <b>agrees with Shmuel</b> that this is not subsumed under the rubric of the prohibited labor of building. <b>And had</b> the Gemara <b>told us</b> only <b>about this</b> case of making a hole in a chicken coop, I would have said that it is specifically <b>in that case</b> that <b>Rav said</b> one is liable for building, <b>because it is similar to building, as people do so for ventilation</b> in a chicken coop, just as they place windows in buildings.

### Part 8
<b>However,</b> inserting <b>a pin into the handle of a hoe,</b> which is <b>not a</b> typical <b>manner of building, say</b> that Rav <b>agrees with Shmuel</b> that it is not subsumed under the rubric of the prohibited labor of building. Conversely, <b>had</b> the Gemara <b>told us</b> only <b>about this case</b> of inserting a pin into the handle of a hoe, I would have said that it is only <b>in that</b> case that <b>Shmuel said</b> that the action is not subsumed under the rubric of the prohibited labor of building; <b>however, with regard to these</b> other <b>two</b> cases of chiseling and making a hole in the coop, <b>say</b> that Shmuel <b>agrees with Rav</b> that they are subsumed under the rubric of the prohibited labor of building. Therefore, <b>it was necessary</b> to cite all three disputes.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Natan bar Oshaya raised a dilemma before Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> With regard to <b>one who chisels, for which</b> primary category of prohibited labor <b>is he liable? He indicated with his hand</b> that he is liable <b>for striking</b> a blow <b>with a hammer.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>One who chisels and one who strikes</b> a blow <b>with a hammer,</b> indicating that they are two different prohibitions? The Gemara answers: Emend this and <b>say: One who chisels</b> is liable due to the prohibition of <b>striking</b> a blow <b>with a hammer.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof that will resolve this dilemma from that which we learned:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC