
### Part 1
<b>the snake came upon Eve,</b> i.e., when it seduced her to eat from the Tree of Knowledge, <b>it infected her with</b> moral <b>contamination,</b> and this contamination remained in all human beings. When the <b>Jewish people stood at Mount Sinai, their contamination ceased,</b> whereas <b>gentiles did not stand at Mount Sinai,</b> and <b>their contamination never ceased. Rav Aḥa, the son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: What</b> about <b>converts?</b> How do you explain the cessation of their moral contamination? Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Even though they</b> themselves <b>were not</b> at Mount Sinai, <b>their guardian angels were</b> present, <b>as it is written:</b> “It is not with you alone that I make this covenant and this oath, but <b>with he that stands here with us today before the Lord our God, and with he that is not here</b> with us today” (Deuteronomy 29:13–14), and this includes converts.

### Part 2
The Gemara points out that this opinion <b>disagrees with Rabbi Abba bar Kahana, as Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Until three generations</b> passed, the moral <b>contamination did not cease from our forefathers: Abraham fathered Ishmael,</b> who was of lowly moral stature; <b>Isaac fathered Esau;</b> finally, <b>Jacob fathered twelve tribes in whom there was no flaw.</b> Rabbi Abba bar Kahana holds that the moral contamination ceased in the Patriarchs long before the Revelation at Sinai.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may break a barrel</b> on Shabbat in order <b>to eat dried figs from it, provided he does not intend to make a vessel. And one may not perforate the plug of a barrel</b> to extract wine from it; rather, one must remove the plug entirely to avoid creating a new opening for the barrel. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And the Rabbis permit</b> puncturing the plug, but they too restrict this leniency and say that <b>one may not perforate</b> the plug of the barrel <b>on its side. And if it was</b> already <b>perforated, one may not apply wax to it</b> to seal the hole, <b>because</b> in doing so <b>he spreads</b> the wax evenly on the barrel and thereby violates the prohibited labor of smoothing. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: An incident</b> of that kind <b>came before Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai in</b> the city of <b>Arav, and he said: I am concerned for him,</b> because he may be liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering</b> as a result of this.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Oshaya said: They only taught</b> that it is permitted to break open a barrel when the figs were <b>pressed</b> together. This is because in that case it is permissible to use a utensil to separate the figs, that utensil may also be utilized to break open the barrel. <b>However,</b> if the figs were already <b>separated,</b> it is <b>not</b> permitted to handle a utensil for the sole purpose of breaking the barrel. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is it <b>not</b> permitted to break the barrel for <b>separated</b> figs?

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: A person may bring a barrel of wine and cut off</b> the <b>top</b> of the barrel <b>with a sword and place it before the guests on Shabbat without concern</b> that it is prohibited to move the sword or that doing so constitutes the creation of a new vessel, which is prohibited. Apparently, it is permitted to move a sword in order to open a barrel on Shabbat even if it is not needed to cut the contents of the barrel. The Gemara answers for Rabbi Oshaya: <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which cites the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> whereas <b>our mishna is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya,</b> who said that it is prohibited to move any utensil on Shabbat for any purpose other than that for which the utensil is designated.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And what forced Rabbi Oshaya to establish the mishna in accordance with</b> the minority opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya</b> and to say that it is referring only <b>to</b> the case of a <b>pressed</b> dried figs? <b>Let him establish</b> that the mishna is referring even <b>to separated</b> figs <b>and</b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. Rava said: The mishna</b> posed a <b>difficulty for him; why did</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach particularly</b> about <b>dried figs? Let him teach</b> a more general <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>fruit. Rather, learn from here that</b> the mishna is referring specifically to <b>pressed</b> dried figs, and it is because one requires a utensil to separate them that he may use it to open the barrel as well.

### Part 7
<b>It was taught in one</b> <i>baraita</i>: If one has sealed, wicker <b>baskets of dried figs or of dates, one may untie</b> the basket’s knot on Shabbat, and <b>unbraid</b> the basket <b>and cut</b> it open. <b>And it was taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may untie</b> the knot, <b>but one may not unbraid or cut</b> the basket. There is a contradiction between these two <i>baraitot</i>. The Gemara resolves this contradiction: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits all of these actions, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which prohibits unbraiding and cutting, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says: Even a large spoon and even a cloak and even a knife may only be taken</b> on Shabbat <b>for their</b> designated <b>use,</b> and it is therefore prohibited to take a knife to cut open baskets of fruit.

### Part 8
The students <b>raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether or not it is permitted <b>to perforate a barrel with a spear [<i>burtiya</i>] on Shabbat?</b> Is the assumption that <b>one intends to</b> make <b>an opening</b> in the barrel <b>and</b> it is therefore <b>prohibited, or perhaps</b> is the assumption that <b>one</b> merely <b>intends to</b> display <b>generosity and it is permitted?</b> Rav Sheshet <b>said to them: He intends to</b> make <b>an opening</b> in the barrel <b>and it is prohibited.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on that which was taught in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: One may bring a barrel of wine</b> on Shabbat <b>and cut off its top with a sword.</b> This contradicts Rav Sheshet’s opinion that opening a barrel with a spear is prohibited? He answered them: <b>There,</b> in the case of the sword, since one essentially destroys the barrel by cutting off its top, <b>he certainly intends to</b> display <b>generosity</b> by breaking the barrel open in his guests’ honor. However, <b>here,</b> in the case of spearing a hole in the barrel, <b>if it were</b> true that <b>he intends</b> to display <b>generosity, let him open</b> the top of the barrel by removing its plug. By perforating the barrel, he indicates that he specifically wants there to be a small hole.

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna: <b>And one may not perforate the plug</b> of a barrel; this is the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, and the Rabbis permit it. <b>Rav Huna said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is only with regard to a case where one seeks to make a perforation <b>on top</b> of the plug; <b>however,</b> if he seeks to perforate it <b>from the side, everyone agrees that it is prohibited,</b> because people sometimes puncture a barrel beneath the plug in this way. <b>And that is</b> what the mishna <b>is teaching: One may not perforate it on its side.</b> Whereas <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is with regard to a case where one seeks to perforate it <b>from the side; however,</b> if one seeks to perforate it <b>on top, everyone agrees that it is permitted, and</b> with regard to <b>that which</b> the mishna <b>is teaching: One may not perforate it on its side, there</b> it is referring to perforating <b>the barrel itself,</b> not the plug.

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not create a new hole</b> in a vessel <b>on Shabbat. And if one seeks to add</b> to and widen an already existing hole, <b>one may add</b> to it; <b>and some say</b> that <b>one may not</b> even <b>add</b> to an already existing hole. <b>And</b> all opinions, even those who generally prohibit creating new holes, agree <b>that one may perforate</b> the seal over <b>an old hole,</b> even <b><i>ab initio</i>. And</b> with regard to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> the Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about perforating the seal over an old hole that makes it permitted, whereas <b>creating a new hole is not</b> permitted? Is it because in creating the new hole <b>he is creating an opening?</b> If so, by <b>adding</b> to an already existing hole <b>he is also creating an opening.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rabba said:</b> Actually, even creating a new hole is not prohibited, because <b>by Torah law, any opening that is not made to</b> both <b>insert and to remove is not</b> considered <b>an opening,</b> and a hole that one perforates in a barrel is intended exclusively to remove the contents of the barrel. <b>And it was the Sages who issued a decree</b> that one may not perforate a vessel <b>because</b> it is similar to perforating <b>a chicken coop,</b> which is designated for use in both directions, e.g., <b>to let in air and to let out heat,</b> and it is therefore prohibited by Torah law. <b>And</b> therefore we learned that <b>if one seeks to add</b> to an existing hole <b>one may add</b> to it. There is no reason to prohibit this due to concern that one may do so in a chicken coop, because <b>one will certainly not come to add to</b> an already existing hole <b>in a chicken coop,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC