
### Part 1
<b>And the Sages</b> have <b>an accepted</b> tradition <b>that five</b> seeds <b>in</b> a <b>six-</b>handbreadth space <b>do not draw sustenance from one another.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> when <b>the Sages</b> have <b>an accepted</b> tradition it <b>is a</b> substantial <b>matter,</b> meaning that the tradition is reliable? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You shall not cross your neighbor’s border, which they of the old times have set</b> in your inheritance that you shall inherit” (Deuteronomy 19:14)? It means that <b>you shall not cross the border that the early</b> generations <b>set,</b> establishing the parameters necessary for each plant. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>The early</b> generations <b>set? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which was written: “These are the sons of Seir the Horite who inhabit the land,</b> Lotan and Shoval and Zibeon and Ana” (Genesis 36:20)? <b>And is everyone</b> else <b>inhabitants of the heavens,</b> that it was necessary for the verse to emphasize that these inhabit the land? <b>Rather,</b> it means <b>that they were experts in the settlement of the land, as they would say: This</b> tract of land that is the <b>full</b> length <b>of a rod</b> is fit <b>for olive</b> trees; <b>this full</b> length <b>of a rod</b> is fit <b>for grapes, this full</b> length <b>of a rod</b> is fit <b>for figs. And</b> the members of this tribe were called <b>Horites [<i>ḥori</i>]</b> since <b>they smelled [<i>heriḥu</i>] the earth</b> to determine what is fit to be grown there. The allusion is based on a transposition of the letters <i>ḥet</i> and <i>reish</i>. <b>And</b> in explanation of why the early inhabitants of Seir were called <b>Hivites [<i>ḥivi</i>]</b> (see Genesis 36:2), <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> Because <b>they would taste the earth like a snake [<i>ḥivya</i>]</b> and determine what should be grown there according to the taste. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that they were called <b>Horites [<i>ḥori</i>]</b> because <b>they became free [<i>benei ḥorin</i>] of their possessions</b> when the children of Esau drove them from their lands. Their primary name was actually Hivites.

### Part 3
With regard to the <i>halakha</i> itself, <b>Rav Asi said:</b> The <b>garden bed</b> in the mishna whose area is six by six handbreadths is one whose <b>internal</b> area <b>is six</b> by six handbreadths <b>excluding</b> the area of <b>its boundaries,</b> which must be added to the total area. <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The internal</b> area <b>of a garden bed is six</b> by six handbreadths. The Gemara asks: <b>How much</b> is the size of <b>its boundaries?</b> The Gemara answers, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The <b>width</b> of the border <b>is like the width of a foot.</b> And <b>Rabbi Zeira said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa</b> who <b>said: What is the reason</b> for the statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? As it is written: “And you water it with your foot like a garden of herbs”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:10), meaning that <b>just as</b> one’s <b>foot is a handbreadth</b> wide, <b>so too, the boundary</b> between garden beds where one walks to water plants <b>is also a handbreadth</b> wide.

### Part 4
<b>Rav said:</b> When we learned in the mishna that one may plant five kinds of seeds within <b>a garden bed</b> without violating the prohibition of diverse kinds, <b>we learned this</b> with regard to a garden bed <b>in a desolate area</b> not surrounded by other plants. However, if the garden bed is among other garden beds, it is prohibited to plant that many species there because seeds from the different beds will intermingle. The Gemara asks: If the mishna is dealing with a solitary garden bed, <b>isn’t there space</b> in <b>the corners,</b> where more species of seeds could be planted without encountering the prohibition of diverse seeds? <b>The school</b> of <b>Rav taught in the name of Rav:</b> Rav’s statement is referring to a case <b>where one fills</b> the <b>corners</b> of the flowerbed with the five species of seeds, leaving no room in the corners for other varieties. The Gemara asks: <b>And let him plant on the outside and not fill up the inside,</b> to increase the different seed types instead of filling up the corners.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC