
### Part 1
<b>for</b> neglecting to separate <b>tithes. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, says:</b> <i>Askara</i> comes as punishment for <b>slander. Rava said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who said it: <b>What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? <b>“But the king shall rejoice in God; every one that swears by Him shall glory; for the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped”</b> (Psalms 63:12). The punishment for lying is that the mouth will be stopped. <i>Askara</i> affects the mouth along with other parts of the body.

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> those who were sitting in the study hall: Did <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, say</b> that <i>askara</i> comes as punishment only <b>for slander, or perhaps he said</b> it was <b>also for slander? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When our Sages entered the vineyard in Yavne, Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Shimon were there, and a question was asked before them</b> with regard to <b>this plague</b> of <i>askara</i>: <b>Why does it begin in the intestines and end in the mouth? Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ila’i,</b> who was <b>the head of the speakers in every place, responded and said: Even though the kidneys advise, and the heart understands, and the tongue shapes</b> the voice that emerges from the mouth, still, <b>the mouth completes</b> the formation of the voice. Therefore, the disease begins in the same place that slander begins and it ends in the mouth. <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, responded and said:</b> This disease ends in the mouth <b>because one eats with it non-kosher things.</b> They immediately wondered about this: <b>Does it enter your mind</b> to say that <i>askara</i> is caused by eating <b>non-kosher food?</b> Are those who eat non-kosher food so numerous? <b>Rather,</b> it comes as a punishment <b>for eating</b> foods <b>that were not</b> ritually <b>prepared,</b> i.e., were not tithed. <b>Rabbi Shimon responded and said:</b> This disease comes as a punishment <b>for the sin of dereliction in</b> the study of <b>Torah.</b>

### Part 3
<b>They said to him: Women will prove</b> that dereliction in the study of Torah is not the cause, as they are not obligated to study Torah and, nevertheless, they contract <i>askara</i>. He answered them: They are punished because <b>they cause their husbands to be idle</b> from the study of Torah. They said to him: <b>Gentiles will prove</b> that this is not the cause, as they also contract <i>askara</i> even though they are not obligated to study Torah. He answered them: They are also punished because <b>they cause Israel to be idle</b> from the study of Torah. They said to him: <b>Children will prove</b> that this is not the cause, for they are not at all obligated to study Torah and they also suffer from <i>askara</i>. He answered them: They are punished because <b>they cause their fathers to be idle</b> from the study of Torah. They said to him: <b>School children will prove</b> that this is not the cause, as they study Torah and, nevertheless, they suffer from <i>askara</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>There</b>, it must be understood <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Guryon,</b> as <b>Rabbi Guryon said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rav Yosef, son of Rabbi Shemaya,</b> who said it: <b>At a time when</b> there are <b>righteous people in the generation,</b> the <b>righteous are seized</b>, i.e., they die or suffer, <b>for</b> the sins of <b>the generation. If there are no righteous people in the generation, school children,</b> who are also without sin, <b>are seized for</b> the sins of <b>the generation</b>. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Ze’iri said, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Nezira said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? <b>“If you know not, you fairest among women, go your way forth by the footsteps of the flock</b> and feed your kids, beside the shepherds’ tents [<i>mishkenot</i>]<b>” (</b>Song of Songs 1:8). <b>And we say</b> in explanation of this verse: They are the <b>lambs that are taken as collateral [<i>hamemushkanin</i>],</b> which is etymologically similar to the word <i>mishkenot</i>, <b>in place of the shepherds.</b> If the shepherds and leaders of the generation corrupt the multitudes, young children die because of their sins. With regard to the dilemma, <b>conclude from it</b> that Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, <b>said</b> that the illness of <i>askara</i> <b>also</b> results from <b>slander,</b> as the <i>baraita</i> provides an additional cause of the illness. The Gemara comments: Indeed, <b>conclude from it.</b>

### Part 5
In this <i>baraita</i> Rabbi Yehuda is described as head of the speakers in every place. The Gemara asks: <b>And why did they call him head of the speakers in every place?</b> The Gemara relates that this resulted due to an incident that took place <b>when Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Shimon were sitting, and Yehuda, son of converts, sat beside them. Rabbi Yehuda opened and said: How pleasant are the actions of this nation,</b> the Romans, as <b>they established marketplaces, established bridges,</b> and <b>established bathhouses. Rabbi Yosei was silent. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai responded and said: Everything that they established, they established only for their own purposes. They established marketplaces, to place prostitutes in them; bathhouses, to pamper themselves;</b> and <b>bridges, to collect taxes from</b> all who pass over <b>them. Yehuda, son of converts, went and related their statements</b> to his household, <b>and</b> those statements continued to spread until <b>they were heard by the monarchy. They</b> ruled and <b>said: Yehuda, who elevated</b> the Roman regime, <b>shall be elevated</b> and appointed as head of the Sages, the head of the speakers in every place. <b>Yosei, who remained silent, shall be exiled</b> from his home in Judea as punishment, and sent <b>to</b> the city of <b>Tzippori</b> in the Galilee. <b>And Shimon, who denounced</b> the government, <b>shall be killed.</b>

### Part 6
Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai <b>and his son,</b> Rabbi Elazar, <b>went</b> and <b>hid in the study hall. Every day</b> Rabbi Shimon’s <b>wife would bring them bread and a jug of water and they would eat. When the decree intensified,</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>said to his son: Women are easily impressionable</b> and, therefore, there is room for concern <b>lest</b> the authorities <b>torture her and she reveal our</b> whereabouts. <b>They went and they hid in a cave. A miracle occurred</b> and <b>a carob</b> tree <b>was created for them as well as a spring of water. They would remove their clothes and sit</b> covered <b>in sand up to their necks</b>. <b>They would study</b> Torah <b>all day</b> in that manner. <b>At the time of prayer, they would dress, cover themselves, and pray, and they would again remove their clothes afterward so that they would not become tattered. They sat in the cave for twelve years. Elijah</b> the Prophet <b>came and stood at the entrance to the cave</b> and <b>said: Who will inform bar Yoḥai that</b> the <b>emperor died and his decree has been abrogated?</b>

### Part 7
<b>They emerged</b> from the cave, and <b>saw people who were plowing and sowing.</b> Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai <b>said:</b> These people <b>abandon eternal life</b> of Torah study <b>and engage in temporal life</b> for their own sustenance. The Gemara relates that <b>every place that</b> Rabbi Shimon and his son Rabbi Elazar <b>directed their eyes was immediately burned. A Divine Voice emerged and said to them:</b> Did <b>you emerge</b> from the cave in order <b>to destroy My world? Return to your cave. They again went</b> and <b>sat</b> there <b>for twelve months. They said: The judgment of the wicked in Gehenna lasts</b> for <b>twelve months.</b> Surely their sin was atoned in that time. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said</b> to them: <b>Emerge from your cave. They emerged. Everywhere that Rabbi Elazar would strike, Rabbi Shimon would heal.</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>said to</b> Rabbi Elazar: <b>My son, you and I suffice for the</b> entire <b>world,</b> as the two of us are engaged in the proper study of Torah.

### Part 8
<b>As the sun was setting on Shabbat eve, they saw an elderly man who was holding two bundles of myrtle branches and running at twilight. They said to him: Why do you have these? He said to them: In honor of Shabbat.</b> They said to him: <b>And let one suffice.</b> He answered them: <b>One</b> is <b>corresponding to: “Remember</b> the Shabbat day, to keep it holy” (Exodus 20:8), <b>and</b> one is <b>corresponding to: “Observe</b> the Shabbat day, to keep it holy” (Deuteronomy 5:12). Rabbi Shimon <b>said to his son: See how beloved the mitzvot are to Israel. Their minds were</b> put <b>at ease</b> and they were no longer as upset that people were not engaged in Torah study.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Pineḥas ben Ya’ir,</b> Rabbi Shimon’s <b>son-in-law</b>, <b>heard and went out to</b> greet <b>him. He brought him into the bathhouse and</b> began <b>tending to his flesh. He saw that</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>had cracks in</b> the skin on <b>his body. He was crying, and the tears fell from his eyes and caused</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>pain.</b> Rabbi Pineḥas <b>said to</b> Rabbi Shimon, his father-in-law: <b>Woe is me, that I have seen you like this.</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him: Happy are you that you have seen me like this, as had you not seen me like this, you would not have found in me this</b> prominence in Torah, <b>as</b> the Gemara relates: <b>At first, when Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai would raise a difficulty, Rabbi Pineḥas ben Ya’ir would respond</b> to his question with <b>twelve answers. Ultimately, when Rabbi Pineḥas ben Ya’ir would raise a difficulty</b>, <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai would respond</b> with <b>twenty-four answers.</b>

### Part 10
Rabbi Shimon <b>said: Since a miracle transpired</b> for me, <b>I will go</b> and <b>repair something</b> for the sake of others in gratitude for God’s kindness, <b>as it is written: “And Jacob came whole</b> to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-aram; and he graced the countenance of the city” (Genesis 33:18). <b>Rav said,</b> the meaning of: And Jacob came whole, is: <b>Whole in his body, whole in his money, whole in his Torah.</b> And what did he do? <b>And he graced the countenance of the city;</b> he performed gracious acts to benefit the city. <b>Rav said:</b> Jacob <b>established a currency for them. And Shmuel said: He established marketplaces for them. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He established bathhouses for them.</b> In any event, clearly one for whom a miracle transpires should perform an act of kindness for his neighbors as a sign of gratitude. <b>He said: Is there something that needs repair? They said to him: There is a place where there is uncertainty with regard to ritual impurity</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC