
### Part 1
<b>they should not become impure from their outer</b> side. <b>Why,</b> then, <b>did we learn</b> this in a mishna? With regard to <b>earthenware vessels and vessels made from natron</b> [<b><i>neter</i></b>], the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>their impurity are equal</b> in that <b>they become impure</b> if a primary source of impurity enters their airspace, <b>and,</b> once impure, <b>they render</b> food that enters their airspace <b>impure from their air</b> space. <b>And they become impure from behind,</b> i.e., if a primary source of impurity enters into the bottom of the vessel, where there is an empty space and a receptacle, the vessel becomes impure. However, earthenware vessels <b>do not become impure from their outer</b> side, i.e., if a primary source of impurity came into contact with the outer side of the vessel, the inside of the vessel does not become impure. <b>And the breaking</b> of earthenware vessels <b>renders them pure.</b> By inference, specifically <b>natron vessels and earthenware vessels are those whose</b> <i>halakhot</i> of <b>impurity are equal,</b> as is their status. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>other matters</b> that is <b>not</b> the case. Why, then, were glass vessels not listed together with those vessels? The Gemara answers: <b>Since if</b> the glass vessels <b>broke they have</b> the capacity to be <b>repaired,</b> as the glass can be liquefied and recast into a new vessel, the Sages <b>equated them to metal vessels</b> that can also be liquefied and recast.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But if so,</b> if glass vessels were truly equated with metal vessels, then broken glass vessels that were liquefied and recast <b>should reassume their previous impurity, like metal vessels. As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Metal vessels,</b> both <b>their flat</b> vessels, which have no airspace, <b>and their receptacles,</b> which have airspace, <b>are</b> all <b>impure</b> if they came into contact with a primary source of ritual impurity. If <b>they broke, they</b> thereby <b>became purified.</b> However, if <b>one remade</b> the broken vessels into new <b>vessels, they reassume their previous impurity. While, with regard to glass vessels, we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Wooden vessels and leather vessels and bone vessels and glass vessels, their flat</b> vessels <b>are pure</b> when they come into contact with impurity, <b>and</b> only <b>their receptacles are impure.</b> If <b>they broke, they</b> thereby <b>became purified.</b> However, if <b>he remade</b> the broken vessels into new <b>vessels, they</b> can <b>become impure from that point,</b> when they were recast, <b>forward.</b> By inference: <b>From that point forward, yes,</b> they become impure; <b>retroactively, no,</b> they do not reassume their previous impurity. Apparently, there is no <i>halakha</i> of previous impurity as far as glass vessels are concerned.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>The</b> entire <b>impurity of glass vessels is</b> by <b>rabbinic decree, and previous impurity,</b> which takes effect on recast metal vessels, <b>is by rabbinic decree. With regard to impurity by Torah law, the</b> Sages <b>imposed</b> a decree of previous <b>impurity. With regard to impurity by rabbinic law, the</b> Sages <b>did not impose</b> a decree of previous <b>impurity.</b> The Sages did not impose the decree of previous impurity, which is by rabbinic decree, on glass vessels whose fundamental impurity is itself only by rabbinic decree.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks further: <b>Their flat</b> vessels <b>should in any case become impure.</b> Since the impurity of <b>flat metal vessels is by Torah law,</b> isn’t it appropriate, therefore, to decree this impurity on flat glass vessels by rabbinic decree? The Gemara answers: <b>The Sages made a distinction with regard to</b> glass vessels, <b>in order to prevent burning <i>teruma</i> and consecrated items for</b> coming into contact with <b>them.</b> Through this distinction between glass vessels and metal vessels, everyone will understand that the impurity of glass vessels is not by Torah law. They will not come to burn <i>teruma</i> and consecrated items that came into contact with impure glass vessels; rather, their legal status will remain in abeyance.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC