
### Part 1
He explains his objection: <b>And just as a lamp, which</b> is <b>made for this</b> purpose, for lighting, <b>when he did not light it, he is permitted to move it, a bed, which is not made for that</b> purpose, for placing money on it, <b>all the more so</b> moving it would be permitted. <b>Rather, if it was stated, it was stated as follows: Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: A bed that one designated for money</b> to be placed upon <b>it,</b> if <b>one left money upon it</b> one day, it becomes designated for that purpose and <b>it is prohibited to move it</b> on Shabbat. If <b>one did not leave money upon it, it is permitted to move it</b> on Shabbat. A bed, which <b>one did not designate for money</b> to be placed upon it, if <b>there is money upon it</b> on Shabbat itself, <b>it is prohibited to move it</b> on Shabbat. If <b>there is not money on it, it is permitted to move it. And that is</b> only <b>when there was not</b> money <b>on it during</b> the <b>twilight</b> period between Shabbat eve and Shabbat. If there was money on it at that time, the bed itself becomes set aside due to prohibition for the entire Shabbat, even if the money fell off the bed in the course of the day.

### Part 2
<b>Ulla said: Rabbi Eliezer raised an objection</b> to Rav’s statement from that which we learned in a mishna. This mishna deals primarily with the laws of ritual impurity and discusses the relationship between a wagon and its undercarriage [<i>mukheni</i>], the system of wheels and the frame at the base of the wagon. And the Sages said: The wagon’s <b>undercarriage, when it is detachable</b> from the wagon, it is <b>not</b> considered <b>connected to it</b> and they are considered independent units as far as the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity are concerned. <b>And it is not measured with it.</b> This refers to calculating the volume of forty <i>se’a</i>, as a vessel with a volume larger than forty <i>se’a</i> does not have the legal status of a vessel and cannot become ritually impure. <b>And</b> the undercarriage likewise <b>does not protect</b> together <b>with</b> the wagon <b>in a tent</b> over <b>the corpse.</b> A large wagon is considered a tent in and of itself and the vessels inside the wagon do not become impure if the wagon is over a corpse. However, the undercarriage is not included with the wagon in this regard. If a hole in the wagon is sealed by the undercarriage, it is not considered sealed with regard to preventing ritual impurity. <b>And,</b> likewise, <b>one may not pull</b> the wagon <b>on Shabbat when there is money upon it.</b>

### Part 3
By inference: <b>If there is not money on it,</b> one is <b>permitted</b> to move the wagon <b>even though there was</b> money <b>on it at twilight.</b> In this mishna, the prohibition is contingent exclusively on whether or not there is money on the wagon at that time. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who is not of</b> the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside. And Rav holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> Since according to Rabbi Yehuda there is a prohibition of set-aside, the wagon became set aside from use during the twilight period and remains prohibited for the entire Shabbat.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC