
### Part 1
In the mishna at the end of the previous chapter we learned that the measure that determines liability for carrying out foods is calculated without their seeds [<i>garinin</i>]. Is the correct version <b><i>garinin</i></b> with an <i>alef</i> <b>or <i>garinin</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>? <b>Rava bar Ulla said:</b> It is with an <i>ayin</i>, since it stems from the same root as: <b>“And it shall be subtracted [<i>venigra</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>] <b>from your valuation”</b> (Leviticus 27:18).

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Do we describe dimming coals as <b><i>omemot</i></b> with an <i>alef</i> <b>or <i>omemot</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>? <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said:</b> It is written with an <i>ayin</i>, as it is stated: <b>“The cedars in the garden of God could not hide it [<i>amamuhu</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>]” (Ezekiel 31:8).

### Part 3
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to closing the eyes of the dead, <b>did we learn</b> in the mishna <b><i>me’amtzin</i></b> with an <i>alef</i>, <b>or <i>me’amtzin</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It is written with an <i>ayin</i> as it is stated: <b>“And closes [<i>ve’otzem</i></b> with an <i>ayin</i>] <b>his eyes from seeing evil”</b> (Isaiah 33:15).

### Part 4
With regard to carrying out milk, <b>the Sages taught:</b> One who carries out <b>the milk of an animal</b> on Shabbat is liable only for a measure <b>equivalent to</b> that which is <b>swallowed</b> in one gulp. The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>a woman’s milk and the white of an egg</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on</b> the part of <b>an eye bandage</b> upon which the ointment is placed directly <b>on the wound.</b> And the aforementioned <b>eye bandage</b> must be <b>sufficiently</b> large to use it <b>to rub</b> both his eyes <b>with water. Rav Ashi raised a dilemma:</b> Is the measure that determines liability for the bandage <b>equivalent to</b> that with which water can be <b>rubbed</b> on both eyes, <b>or</b> is it <b>equivalent to</b> that which can be <b>held and rubbed?</b> Is the part of the bandage held in his hand when applying the bandage to his eyes also taken into account? No resolution was found for this dilemma. Therefore, <b>let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>honey</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on a sore</b> caused by chafing. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: The precise measure is <b>equivalent to</b> that which is <b>placed on the opening of a sore,</b> i.e., on the wound itself. <b>Rav Ashi raised a dilemma:</b> Does the term <b>on a sore</b> mean the measure of honey spread <b>on the opening of the entire sore; or, perhaps</b> it means the measure spread <b>on the primary protuberance</b> of the <b>sore, to the exclusion of the surrounding</b> area upon which he does <b>not</b> spread honey? No resolution was found for this dilemma either. Therefore, <b>let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 6
On the subject of sores, the Gemara cites a statement referring to one of the methods for healing a sore. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: Everything that the Holy One, Blessed be He, created in His world, He did not create anything for naught. He created a snail</b> as a remedy <b>for a sore; He created a fly</b> to be crushed and spread as a remedy <b>on a wasp</b> sting; He created a <b>mosquito</b> as a remedy <b>for a snake</b> bite; <b>and</b> He created the <b>snake</b> itself as a remedy <b>for a</b> skin <b>rash; and</b> He created <b>a gecko</b> as a remedy <b>for a scorpion</b> bite. The Gemara explains: <b>How does</b> one <b>implement</b> the remedy? <b>He brings</b> two geckos, <b>one black and one white, cooks them, and spreads</b> the resulting ointment on the affected area.

### Part 7
With regard to these creatures, the Gemara cites that which <b>our Sages taught: There are five dreads,</b> i.e., <b>dread</b> that <b>the weak</b> cast <b>over</b> the <b>mighty: The dread of the <i>mafgia</i>,</b> a small creature, <b>over the lion; the dread of the mosquito over the elephant; the dread of the gecko over the scorpion; the dread of the swallow over the eagle; the dread of the <i>kilbit</i>,</b> a small fish, <b>over a whale. Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: What</b> is <b>the verse</b> that alludes to these matters? As it is written: <b>“He that causes destruction [<i>shod</i>] to flash upon the mighty,</b> so that destruction comes upon the fortress” (Amos 5:9), which is interpreted as: He who lifts the downtrodden [<i>shadud</i>] over the mighty.

### Part 8
On the topic of the nature of the world, the Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Zeira found Rav Yehuda, who was standing at the entrance of his father-in-law’s house, and observed that he was in an</b> especially <b>cheerful mood. And</b> Rabbi Zeira understood that <b>were he to ask</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>about anything in the</b> entire <b>world, he would tell him</b> the answer. He therefore posed questions to him on a variety of topics unrelated to <i>halakha</i>. He asked: <b>Why do goats walk in front</b> of the flock <b>and then ewes</b> follow? <b>He said to him:</b> It <b>is</b> just <b>as</b> it was <b>in the creation of the world, which at first was dark and then light</b> followed. Goats, which are typically black, precede the ewes, which are typically white. And he asked: <b>Why are</b> the genitals of <b>these</b> ewes <b>covered</b> with a tail, <b>whereas these</b> goats <b>are exposed?</b> He answered: <b>These</b> ewes, whose wool <b>we</b> use to <b>cover ourselves,</b> are rewarded in that they are <b>covered; and those</b> goats, whose hair <b>we do not</b> use to <b>cover ourselves,</b> are <b>exposed.</b> And he asked: <b>Why is the camel’s tail short?</b> He answered: <b>Because</b> a camel <b>eats thorns,</b> and a long tail would become entangled in the thorns. And he asked: <b>Why is the ox’s tail long?</b> He answered: <b>Because</b> the ox <b>lives in a swamp and must fend off mosquitoes.</b>

### Part 9
He continued to ask: <b>Why is the grasshopper’s antenna soft?</b> He answered: <b>Because</b> it <b>lives in the plains</b> among the grass, <b>and if</b> the antenna <b>were hard it would break and</b> the <b>grasshopper would go blind.</b> When the grasshopper loses its antenna it is unable to move, <b>as Shmuel said: One who seeks to blind a grasshopper should remove its antenna.</b> And he asked: <b>Why does the chicken’s</b> lower <b>eyelid cover the upper one?</b> He answered: <b>Because</b> a chicken <b>lives on rafters</b> in houses, <b>and if the smoke</b> from the houses <b>were to enter</b> its eyes without the protection of the eyelid, it <b>would go blind.</b> He asked further: Why is a door called <b><i>dasha</i></b> in Aramaic? He said to him: It is an acronym for <b><i>derekh sham</i>,</b> which means through there. Why is a stair called <b><i>darga</i>?</b> He said to him: It is an acronym for <b><i>derekh gag</i>,</b> which means the way to the roof. Why are spices called <b><i>mitkolita</i>?</b> He said to him: It is an acronym for <b><i>matai tikhleh da</i>,</b> which means when will this be finished. Since spices are used sparingly, they last a long time. Why is a house called <b><i>beita</i>?</b> He said to him: It is an acronym for <b><i>bo ve’eitiv ba</i>,</b> which means come and I will sit in it. Why is a small house called <b><i>bikta</i>?</b> He said to him: It is an acronym for <b><i>bei akta</i>,</b> which means a narrow house.

### Part 10
A barrel is called <b><i>kufta</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>kuf vetiv</i>,</b> which means turn it over and sit. Bricks are called <b><i>livnei</i>,</b> which is an allusion to <b><i>livnei benei</i>,</b> which means for the children of children. A fence made of thorns is called <b><i>hutza</i></b> and Rav Yehuda said that it is merely a <b><i>ḥatzitza</i>,</b> which means partition, as opposed to a true fence. A jug used for drawing water is called a <b><i>ḥatzba</i> because it hews [<i>ḥotzev</i>] water from the river.</b> A small jug is called <b><i>kuza</i>,</b> alluding to <b><i>kazeh</i>,</b> which means: Give me one like that. Myrtle branches with which people dance at a wedding are called <b><i>shutita</i>,</b> an allusion to <b><i>shetuta</i>,</b> which means madness, as the frenzied dancing appears to be madness. The large vessel used for washing is called <b><i>meshikhla</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>mashei kula</i>,</b> which means: It washes all. A small vessel used for washing is called <b><i>mashkhilta</i>,</b> and Rav Yehuda explained that it is an acronym for <b><i>mashya kalta</i>,</b> which means: It washes the bride. A mortar is called <b><i>asita</i>,</b> alluding to <b><i>ḥasirta</i>,</b> which means lacking, since it has a large cavity. The pestle that is inserted into the mortar for pounding its contents is called <b><i>bukhna</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>bo ve’akkena</i>,</b> which means: Come and I will strike it.

### Part 11
An outer garment is called <b><i>levusha</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>lo busha</i>,</b> which means no shame, as one who is clothed is no longer ashamed. A broad outer garment is called <b><i>gelima</i>,</b> an allusion to the fact that, by wearing it, one <b>is transformed into</b> an amorphous <b>golem-like</b> figure, as his limbs are indistinguishable. A beautiful coat is termed <b><i>golta</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>geli ve’eitiv</i>,</b> which means reveal, remove the coat, and only then I will sit, so that the coat will not get dirty. A bed is called <b><i>purya</i>,</b> an allusion to the fact that people <b><i>parin veravin</i>,</b> which means procreate, <b>upon it.</b> An empty pit is called <b><i>bor zinka</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>bor ze naki</i>,</b> which means that this pit is empty of water. The head covering of Torah scholars is called <b><i>sudara</i>,</b> an acronym for <i>sod yareh</i>, which is a reference to the verse: <b>“The counsel of the Lord is with them who fear Him [<i>sod Hashem lire’av</i>]”</b> (Psalms 25:14). A palace is called <b><i>apadna</i>,</b> which is an acronym for <b><i>apitḥa dein</i>,</b> meaning: To this entrance all come. The Gemara cites an additional <i>baraita</i> related to the nature of the creatures. There are <b>three</b> creatures <b>that grow mightier with age, and they are</b> the <b>fish, and</b> the <b>snake, and the pig.</b>

### Part 12
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on a small limb. The school of Rabbi Yannai said</b> it should be explained as follows: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on</b> a <b>small limb of a day-old child.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on a small limb and a day-old child. Does this not</b> mean: <b>A small limb</b> of <b>an adult and a large limb of a day-old child?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>The school of Rabbi Yannai</b> could have <b>said to you: No, this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on a small limb,</b> and the small limb in question is that of a <b>day-old child.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as it was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on a small limb and a day-old child;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar. Rabbi Natan says: Equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to spread on a small limb. Is it not that they disagree about</b> the following? <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar holds:</b> It refers to <b>a small limb of a small</b> child, and <b>Rabbi Natan holds:</b> The measure for liability is equivalent to that which is used to spread on <b>a small limb</b> of <b>an adult or a large limb</b> of <b>a child, but</b> for a measure equivalent to that which is used to spread on <b>a small limb of a day-old child, no,</b> one is exempt. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, everyone agrees</b> that for carrying out oil in a measure equivalent to that which is used to spread on <b>a small limb of a day-old child, no,</b> one is exempt,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC