
### Part 1
<b>and</b> the opinion of the school <b>of Rabbi Yannai</b> is <b>not</b> accepted. <b>And here,</b> in this <i>baraita</i>, <b>they disagree about this: Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar holds: A small limb</b> of <b>an adult and a large limb</b> of <b>a day-old child are equal to one another, and Rabbi Natan holds:</b> For carrying out oil in a measure equivalent to that which is used to spread on <b>a small limb</b> of <b>an adult, yes,</b> one is liable; however, <b>a large limb</b> of <b>a day-old child, no,</b> he is exempt. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> conclusion <b>was</b> reached <b>in this</b> matter? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says</b> explicitly: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>oil</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to</b> spread on <b>a small limb of a day-old child.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the <i>mishna</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>water</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to rub</b> and spread on <b>an eye bandage. Abaye said: Now, since,</b> with regard to <b>any substance that is</b> utilized for both <b>common and uncommon</b> uses, <b>the Sages,</b> in their ruling, <b>followed the common</b> usage even <b>as a leniency,</b> i.e., one is liable only for carrying out the larger measure. However, when a substance has different uses and one is <b>common and</b> the other is <b>common</b> as well, <b>the Sages,</b> in their ruling, <b>followed the common</b> use that leads <b>to a stringency,</b> i.e., one is liable for carrying out even the smaller amount.

### Part 3
Proof for this principle can be seen in the following examples. <b>Wine, its</b> use for <b>drinking is common</b> and <b>its</b> use for <b>healing is uncommon. The Sages,</b> in establishing the measure that determines liability for carrying out wine, <b>followed its</b> use for <b>drinking, which</b> is <b>common,</b> which led <b>to a leniency.</b> The amount of wine that one typically drinks is greater than the amount of wine used for healing. <b>Milk, its consumption is common</b> and <b>its</b> use for <b>healing is uncommon. The Sages,</b> in establishing the measure that determines liability for carrying out milk, <b>followed its consumption, which</b> is <b>common, as a leniency. Honey, its consumption is common</b> and <b>its</b> use for <b>healing is</b> also <b>common. The Sages,</b> in establishing the measure that determines liability for carrying out honey, <b>followed its</b> use for <b>healing,</b> the smaller amount, <b>as a stringency.</b>

### Part 4
<b>However, water, since its drinking is common</b> and <b>its</b> use for <b>healing is uncommon, what is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages followed its</b> use for <b>healing as a stringency?</b> Based on the above principle, the Sages should have determined the measure based on its use for drinking. <b>Abaye said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in the Galilee</b> where they typically drink wine. There, water is used as commonly for healing as it is for drinking (<i>Tosafot</i>). <b>Rava said: Even</b> if you <b>say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>in the rest of the places</b> as well as in the Galilee, the use of water in treating the eye is common, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, as Shmuel said: All liquids</b> placed on the eye effect a <b>cure and cloud</b> the vision, <b>except for water which cures and does not cloud</b> the vision.

### Part 5
We learned in the <i>mishna</i>: <b>And</b> the measure that determines liability for <b>all other liquids</b> is <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>blood and all types of liquids</b> on Shabbat is <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> The measure that determines liability for <b>blood</b> is less than that. The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>blood</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to apply</b> to <b>one eye, as one applies</b> blood <b>to</b> heal <b>a wart on the eye.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> type of blood effects this cure? <b>The blood of a wild chicken. Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>blood</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to apply</b> to <b>one eye, as one applies</b> blood <b>to</b> heal <b>a cataract. And what</b> type of blood effects this cure? <b>The blood of a bat. And a mnemonic</b> to ensure that <b>you</b> do not confuse these cures: <b>Inside for inside, outside for outside.</b> The blood of a bat, which lives in inhabited areas, for the cataract, which is inside the eye; the blood of a wild chicken, which lives outside inhabited areas, for the wart, which is external to the eye.

### Part 6
The Gemara cites a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>In what</b> case <b>are these matters,</b> the measures for the substances in the mishna, <b>stated?</b> They were stated <b>with regard to one who carries them out</b> from one domain to another without ascribing special significance to them. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>one who stores</b> them, thereby ascribing significance to them, the ruling is that <b>he is liable</b> for carrying out <b>any measure. Rabbi Shimon says: In what</b> case <b>are these matters stated?</b> They were stated <b>with regard to one who stores</b> those amounts. <b>However, if one</b> merely <b>carries them out, he is liable only</b> if he carries out <b>a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. <b>And the Rabbis agree with Rabbi Shimon with regard to one who carries out waste water to the public domain that</b> even when one merely carries it out, <b>the measure</b> that determines liability <b>is a quarter of</b> a <i>log</i>.

### Part 7
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>In what</b> case <b>are these matters,</b> the measures for the substances in the mishna, <b>stated?</b> They were stated <b>with regard to one who carries them out</b> from one domain to another without ascribing special significance to them. <b>However, with regard to one who stores them,</b> he is liable for <b>any amount.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>Isn’t</b> the <b>one who stores</b> also the <b>one who carries out?</b> One is not liable for merely storing. He is liable only for carrying out the stored item. <b>Abaye said: With what are we dealing here?</b> With the case of <b>a student whose teacher said to him: Go and clear for me space for a meal,</b> and <b>he went and cleared</b> space <b>for him</b> and removed the items to another domain. If he cleared <b>an item</b> that is <b>significant to all, he is liable for</b> carrying <b>it</b> out. If he cleared <b>an item that is not significant to all,</b> then, <b>if his teacher had stored it, he is liable for</b> carrying <b>it</b> out, <b>and if</b> his teacher <b>had not</b> stored it, <b>he is not liable</b> for carrying it out, since the student is fulfilling his teacher’s wishes.

### Part 8
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>And the Rabbis agree with Rabbi Shimon with regard to one who carries out waste water to the public domain, that the measure</b> that determines liability <b>is a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> use <b>is waste water fit? Rabbi Yirmeya said: It</b> is used <b>to knead clay.</b> The Gemara asks: If that is its purpose, why is such a large amount required? <b>Was it not taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>clay</b> on Shabbat is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make an opening for</b> the bellows to be placed in <b>a crucible,</b> which is a much smaller measure? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This,</b> where the measure for clay is equivalent to that which is used to make an opening for the bellows to be placed in <b>a crucible,</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> it was already <b>kneaded; that,</b> where the measure for waste water is a quarter of a <i>log</i> to knead clay, is referring to a case <b>where it is not</b> yet <b>kneaded, as a person does not go to the trouble of kneading clay</b> just <b>to make an opening for</b> the bellows to be placed in <b>a crucible.</b> When carrying out water to knead clay, a large amount is required; however, clay that was already prepared is fit for use for smaller objects as well.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who carries out a rope</b> is liable in a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to form an ear-shaped handle for a basket.</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>reed grass</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make a loop for hanging a sifter or a sieve. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The measure for liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to take the measure of a shoe for a child,</b> as the reed is used to measure the size of the foot. The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>paper</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to write a tax receipt. And one who carries out a tax receipt</b> itself on Shabbat <b>is liable.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC