
### Part 1
<b>on the inheritance of Jacob your father,</b> as the mouth of God has spoken” (Isaiah 58:13–14). The reward for delighting in Shabbat is specifically the portion of Jacob. <b>Not that of Abraham, about whom it is written, “Rise, walk through the land through its length</b> and its width because I have given it to you” (Genesis 13:17), i.e., only this land alone in its borders. <b>And not that of Isaac, about whom it is written,</b> “Dwell in this land and I will be with you and I will bless you <b>because I will give all of these lands to you and your offspring”</b> (Genesis 26:3), meaning these lands and no others. <b>Rather, that of Jacob, about whom it is written,</b> “And your offspring will be like the dust of the earth, <b>and you will spread out to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south,</b> and all of the families of the land will be blessed through you and your offspring” (Genesis 28:14). There are no boundaries for Jacob’s portion.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> One who delights in Shabbat <b>is rescued from the oppression of exile.</b> He derives it by means of a verbal analogy. <b>It is written here,</b> with regard to Shabbat: <b>“And I will cause you to ride on the heights [<i>bamotei</i>] of the world”</b> (Isaiah 58:14), <b>and it is written there:</b> “You are fortunate Israel, who is like you? A nation redeemed by God, the shield that aids you and the sword of your triumph. Your enemies will try to defeat you <b>and you will trample their high places [<i>bamoteimo</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 33:29). <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who delights in the Shabbat,</b> God <b>grants him his heart’s desires,</b> as <b>it is stated: “And you shall delight in God and He will grant you your heart’s desires”</b> (Psalms 37:4). <b>This delight</b> in God, which is mentioned in the verse, <b>I do not know what it is. When it says: “And you shall call the Shabbat delight,”</b> one <b>must say: It is the delight of Shabbat.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With what does one delight</b> in the day of Shabbat? <b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, said in the name of Rav: With a dish of beets, and large fish, and heads of garlic. Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi</b> said that <b>Rav said: Even</b> with regard to <b>a small item and one prepared it in deference to Shabbat, it is</b> a <b>delight.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the small item mentioned? <b>Rav Pappa said: Small fried fish.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who observes Shabbat in accordance with its <i>halakhot</i>, even</b> if he <b>worships idolatry as</b> in <b>the generation of Enosh,</b> God <b>forgives him</b> his sins, <b>as it is stated: “Fortunate is the man [enosh] who does this</b> and the person who holds strong to it, one who guards the Shabbat <b>from desecrating it [<i>meḥallelo</i>],</b> and guards his hand from doing any evil” (Isaiah 56:2). <b>Do not read</b> it as: <b>From desecrating it [<i>meḥallelo</i>], but rather: He is forgiven [<i>maḥul lo</i>].</b> With regard to the generation of Enosh it is written: “And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enosh. Then they began [<i>huḥal</i>] to call upon the Name of God” (Genesis 4:26), meaning to desecrate [<i>leḥallel</i>] His name.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: Had the Jewish people</b> properly <b>observed</b> the <b>first Shabbat</b> that was commanded them, <b>no nation or tongue would have</b> ever <b>ruled them, as it is stated: “And it happened on the seventh day, some people went out from the nation to collect</b> and they did not find” (Exodus 16:27). <b>And it is written after</b> they went out to collect manna: <b>“And Amalek came</b> and fought with Israel in Refidim” (Exodus 17:8). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: If only the Jewish people would keep two <i>Shabbatot</i> in accordance with their <i>halakhot</i>,</b> they would be <b>immediately redeemed,</b> as <b>it is stated: “So said God to the eunuchs who will keep My Shabbatot”</b> (Isaiah 56:4), <b>and it is written after</b> that: <b>“And I will bring them to My holy mountain</b> and will let them rejoice in My house of prayer” (Isaiah 56:7).

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who eat three meals on Shabbat.</b> Apropos this statement of Rabbi Yosei, the Gemara cites additional declarations. <b>Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who complete hallel every day.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>Is that so? Didn’t the Master say: One who reads <i>hallel</i> every day is</b> tantamount to <b>one who curses and blasphemes</b> God. He displays contempt for <i>hallel</i> by not reserving it for days on which miracles occurred. The Gemara answers: <b>When we say</b> this statement of Rabbi Yosei, we are referring to <b>the verses of praise [<i>pesukei dezimra</i>],</b> recited during the morning service, not to <i>hallel</i> (Psalms 113–118) recited on special days.

### Part 6
And furthermore, <b>Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who pray</b> the morning and afternoon prayers <b>with the reddening of the sun,</b> i.e., the morning prayer at sunrise and the afternoon prayer adjacent to nightfall. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is a mitzva to pray with the reddening of the sun. Rabbi Zeira said: What verse</b> alludes to this? <b>“They will fear You with the sun and before the moon, generation upon generation”</b> (Psalms 72:5). Fear of God, prayer, should be with the sun and before the moon.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who die from intestinal disease, as the Master said: Most righteous people die of intestinal disease.</b> It is a very harsh disease through which the sins of righteous people are cleansed before their death and also, as a result, they die with a clean body. <b>And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who die on the path to</b> perform <b>a mitzva. And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who accept Shabbat in Tiberias,</b> which is in a valley where day turns to evening earlier, <b>and among those who see Shabbat out in Tzippori,</b> which is located on a mountain top where the sun is visible for longer, and Shabbat ends later. <b>And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among those who seat</b> others <b>in the study hall,</b> i.e., who cause others to come sit and study, <b>and not among those who cause</b> others <b>to stand in the study hall,</b> i.e., who announce that it is time to leave the study hall and go to eat.

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be among the collectors of charity and not the distributors of charity.</b> One who collects charity collects fixed amounts, whereas distributors may inadvertently fail to give the poor person enough to cover his needs. <b>And Rabbi Yosei said: May my portion be with one whom</b> others <b>suspect</b> of sin <b>and there is no</b> basis for suspecting <b>him. Rav Pappa said: They suspected me, and there was no</b> basis for suspecting <b>me.</b>

### Part 9
Furthermore, <b>Rabbi Yosei said: I engaged in relations five times, and I planted five cedars in Eretz Yisrael. And who are</b> these cedars? The sons of Rabbi Yosei, who were great Sages of Israel: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Ḥalafta, son of Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Avtilas, son of Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Menaḥem, son of Rabbi Yosei.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t there Vardimas,</b> who was also Rabbi Yosei’s son? The Gemara answers: <b>Vardimas is the same as Menaḥem. And why did they call him Vardimas?</b> Because <b>his face was as</b> beautiful as <b>a rose [<i>vered</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> based on this statement that <b>Rabbi Yosei did not fulfill the mitzva of</b> his wife’s <b>conjugal rights,</b> but only had relations with her five times? <b>Rather, say</b> it this way: <b>I engaged in relations five times and I did so again,</b> and the Sages said that one who seeks to father male offspring should engage in relations and do so again.

### Part 10
Furthermore, <b>Rabbi Yosei said</b> that he always spoke euphemistically: <b>In all my days, I did not call my wife, my wife, nor my ox, my ox. Rather,</b> I called <b>my wife, my home,</b> because she is the essence of the home, <b>and my ox, my field,</b> because it is the primary force in the fields.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: In all my days,</b> due to modesty, <b>I never looked at my circumcision.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t they say to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>Why did they call you our holy Rabbi? He said to them:</b> It is because <b>in all my days I never looked at my circumcision.</b> If so, why wasn’t Rabbi Yosei also called our holy Rabbi? The Gemara replies: <b>In</b> the case of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>another matter</b> of modesty <b>was</b> present <b>in him, as he did not insert his hand below his belt</b> due to his great modesty. <b>And Rabbi Yosei said: In all my days, the walls of my house never saw the seams of my robe</b> due to modesty, as he would only undress under his bed sheets.

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Yosei said: In all my days I never violated the words of my friends. I know about myself that I am not a priest,</b> and nevertheless, <b>if my friends say to me: Go up to the platform</b> with the priests, <b>I go up. And Rabbi Yosei said: In all my days I never said something and then retreated</b> from it. Rabbi Yosei never said something positive or negative about a specific person and then denied it.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Naḥman said: May I receive</b> my reward <b>because I fulfilled</b> the obligation to eat <b>three meals on Shabbat</b> magnificently. <b>Rav Yehuda said: May I receive</b> my reward <b>because I fulfilled</b> the obligation of <b>consideration</b> during <b>prayer. Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: May I receive</b> my reward because <b>I never walked four cubits with my head uncovered. Rav Sheshet said: May I receive</b> my reward <b>because I fulfilled the mitzva of phylacteries</b> magnificently. <b>And Rav Naḥman said: May I receive</b> my reward <b>because I fulfilled the mitzva of ritual fringes</b> magnificently.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Yosef said to Rav Yosef, son of Rabba: In what</b> area <b>was your father,</b> Rabba, <b>especially vigilant?</b> He <b>said to him:</b> It was <b>in</b> the mitzva of <b>ritual fringes.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>One day he was climbing the stairs</b> when a <b>string</b> from his ritual fringes <b>was severed, and he would not descend until he placed</b> a new string <b>on</b> the garment. <b>And Abaye said: May I receive</b> my reward because <b>when I see a young Torah scholar who has completed a tractate</b> that <b>he</b> studied

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC