
### Part 1
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi said:</b> The Sages in the mishna disagree with regard to the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer: <b>Three walls and one post is an alley that is closed; three walls without a post</b> at all <b>is an open alley. And even according to Rabbi Eliezer, who said we need two posts,</b> one post being insufficient, <b>those words</b> were stated to permit one <b>to</b> move <b>food and drinks, but for</b> the purpose of moving <b>a Torah scroll, one post is sufficient.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may rescue food for three meals</b> from a fire on Shabbat. One may rescue food <b>that is suitable for a person for a person;</b> and one may rescue food <b>that is suitable for an animal for an animal. How so?</b> If <b>a fire ignited on Friday night</b> before the Shabbat evening meal, <b>one may rescue food for three meals.</b> If a fire ignited <b>in the morning,</b> after the Shabbat evening meal has been eaten and before the meal of Shabbat day, <b>one may</b> only <b>rescue food for two meals.</b> If a fire ignited <b>in</b> the <b>afternoon,</b> one may rescue <b>food for one meal. Rabbi Yosei says: One may always rescue food for three meals,</b> which is the measure that the Sages permitted without distinguishing between the times of day.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Now, since one is exerting</b> himself to move <b>permitted</b> objects, <b>let us rescue more.</b> Why was he allowed to rescue food for only three meals? <b>Rava said: Since a person is agitated about his property, if you permit him</b> to move more, <b>he will come to extinguish</b> the fire. <b>Abaye said to him: Rather, that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one’s barrel broke atop one’s roof</b> on Shabbat, <b>he may bring a vessel and place it under</b> the barrel to salvage its contents, <b>and</b> this is permitted <b>provided that he does not bring another vessel</b> and place it on the ground <b>to catch</b> the liquid that flows out of the barrel. Similarly, one may not bring <b>another vessel and attach</b> the vessel next to the roof so that the liquid from the barrel will pour into it. <b>There, what decree</b> applies to prohibit saving it in any other way? Rava said to him: <b>Here, too,</b> it is <b>a decree</b> issued due to the concern <b>lest one bring</b> the additional <b>vessel through the public domain,</b> which is prohibited.

### Part 4
Apropos this <i>baraita</i>, the Gemara discusses <b>the matter itself:</b> If <b>one’s barrel broke atop one’s roof</b> on Shabbat, <b>he may bring a vessel and place it under</b> the barrel to salvage its contents, <b>and</b> this is permitted <b>provided that he does not bring another vessel</b> and place it on the ground to <b>catch</b> the liquid, <b>another vessel and attach</b> the vessel next to the roof. If <b>guests happen</b> to come <b>to him</b> and he needs more to drink, <b>he</b> may <b>bring another vessel and catch</b> the liquid, and <b>he</b> may <b>bring another vessel and attach</b> it. <b>And one may not catch</b> the liquid <b>and then invite</b> guests; <b>rather,</b> one must first <b>invite</b> guests, <b>and afterward catch</b> the liquid. Until he invites guests, there is no need for the beverage, and he will be catching the liquid in a prohibited manner. <b>And one may not employ artifice in this</b> by inviting guests expressly for the purpose of rescuing his wine. <b>In the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda, they said:</b> One may even <b>employ artifice.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda and the Rabbis <b>disagree in the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>it and its offspring that fell into a pit</b> on a Festival, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: One may raise the first in order to slaughter it, and</b> then <b>slaughter it; and</b> with regard to <b>the second one, one may provide it sustenance in its place</b> in the pit <b>so that it will not die. Rabbi Yehoshua says: One may raise the first in order to slaughter it, and</b> then reconsider and <b>not slaughter it, and one may employ artifice</b> and say that he reconsidered and wants to slaughter the other, <b>and raise the second. If he</b> so <b>desires, he slaughters this</b> one; <b>if he</b> so <b>desires, he slaughters that</b> one.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this: <b>From what</b> does that conclusion ensue? <b>Perhaps Rabbi Eliezer only stated</b> that he may not raise the second animal <b>there,</b> in a case <b>where it is possible</b> to save the animal by <b>feeding</b> it in the pit; <b>however, here,</b> in the case of the barrel, <b>where it is impossible to</b> save it by <b>feeding</b> it in the pit, <b>no,</b> he would permit doing so. Perhaps even he agrees that it is permitted to employ artifice in this case. <b>And</b> similarly, perhaps <b>Rabbi Yehoshua only said there</b> that one may employ artifice <b>because there is</b> an issue of the <b>suffering of living beings, but here, where there is no</b> issue of the <b>suffering of living beings,</b> perhaps he did <b>not</b> permit employing artifice.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: If <b>one rescued</b> sufficient <b>fine bread</b> for his needs, <b>he may not</b> then <b>rescue coarse bread [<i>hadra’a</i>],</b> bread made from flour and bran. However, if one rescued <b>coarse bread,</b> he may then <b>rescue fine bread. And one may rescue</b> bread <b>on Yom Kippur for</b> the purpose of <b>Shabbat; however,</b> one may <b>not</b> rescue bread <b>on Shabbat for</b> the purpose of <b>Yom Kippur. And, needless to say,</b> one may not rescue bread <b>on Shabbat for</b> the purpose of <b>a Festival, and</b> one may <b>not</b> rescue bread <b>on Shabbat for</b> the purpose of <b>the next Shabbat.</b>

### Part 8
And <b>the Sages taught:</b> If <b>one forgot bread in the oven and</b> did not remove it until <b>the day</b> of Shabbat <b>was sanctified, he may rescue</b> enough <b>food</b> for <b>three meals</b> from the oven. <b>And, one may say to others: Come and rescue</b> bread <b>for yourselves. And when one removes</b> the bread from the oven, <b>he may not remove</b> it in the usual manner <b>with a baker’s paddle, but</b> he removes it in an unusual manner, e.g., <b>with a knife.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t the school of Rabbi Yishmael teach</b> that it is stated: “And the seventh day is Shabbat for the Lord, your God, <b>you shall not perform any labor”</b> (Exodus 20:10), and the emphasis on the word labor <b>excludes blowing the shofar and removing bread, which is a skill and not a labor,</b> and which therefore is not prohibited on Shabbat. If by Torah law removing bread on Shabbat is permitted, why may one not remove it in the usual manner? The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, <b>as much as it is possible to alter</b> the manner in which one removes bread from the oven <b>one alters,</b> to emphasize that the day is Shabbat.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: A person should always rise early</b> on Friday in order <b>to</b> prepare all of the <b>expenditures for Shabbat, as it is written</b> with regard to the collection of the manna: <b>“And it shall be on the sixth day, and they will prepare that which they have brought”</b> (Exodus 16:5), indicating that the children of Israel would begin preparing the food for Shabbat <b>immediately</b> upon collecting the manna in the morning. Apropos manna, the Gemara mentions other matters derived from it. <b>Rabbi Abba said: On Shabbat a person is obligated to break</b> bread in his meal <b>over two loaves</b> of bread, <b>as it is written:</b> “And it happened on the sixth day, they collected <b>double the bread,</b> two <i>omer</i> for each one” (Exodus 16:22).

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi said: I saw that Rav Kahana took two</b> loaves in his hand <b>and broke one,</b> not both at once. <b>He said</b> in explanation that <b>it is written:</b> “They <b>collected</b> double the bread,” meaning that one collects and holds two loaves together, but need not break both. <b>Rabbi Zeira would break</b> off a piece that would suffice for <b>his entire meal. Ravina said to Rav Ashi: Doesn’t that appear like gluttony?</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Since</b> on <b>every</b> other <b>day he does not do</b> this <b>and now he is doing</b> so, <b>it does not appear like gluttony. Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi, when the bread from the <i>eiruv</i> would happen</b> to become available <b>to them, they would begin</b> and recite the blessing over <b>it.</b> They <b>said</b> in explanation: <b>Since one mitzva was performed with it, let an additional mitzva be performed with it.</b>

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna that one may rescue food for three meals on Shabbat. <b>How so?</b> If <b>a fire ignited</b> before the meal on Shabbat evening, one rescues food for three meals; if a fire ignited Shabbat morning, he rescues food for two meals; if a fire ignited in the afternoon, he rescues food for one meal. With regard to meals on Shabbat, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How many meals is a person obligated to eat on Shabbat? Three. Rabbi Ḥidka says: Four. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And both of them derived</b> their opinions <b>from one verse: “And Moses said: Eat it today, for today is Shabbat for God, today you will not find it in the field”</b> (Exodus 16:25). <b>Rabbi Ḥidka holds: These three</b> mentions of the word <b>today</b> allude to the number of meals on Shabbat <b>besides the evening</b> meal, as Moses spoke on Shabbat morning. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that these three mentions <b>include the evening</b> meal. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If a <b>fire ignited on Shabbat evening</b>,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC