
### Part 1
<b>they brought beds for them</b> to sit on, whereas <b>for Rav Ḥanan bar Rava, they did not bring</b> one <b>for him.</b> Rav Ḥanan was insulted and got angry at his host. <b>He found</b> Rabbi Avin <b>teaching his son</b> the mishna and saying: <b>And</b> one may place a bowl <b>on top of the feces of a child due to the child</b> so that he will not touch it and dirty himself. Rav Ḥanan <b>said to him: Avin the fool is teaching his son folly; aren’t</b> the feces <b>themselves prepared</b> as food <b>for dogs?</b> An object that is fit for consumption by a dog may be carried, so why need one cover the feces if he can remove them? <b>And if you say</b> these feces <b>were not prepared for</b> that use <b>from yesterday,</b> that would not prohibit moving them. <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>rivers that flow and springs that gush,</b> they do not have specific Shabbat boundaries, but <b>they</b> may be used anywhere and their boundaries <b>are like the feet of all people</b> who draw from them. Even though the water was not within the boundaries when Shabbat began, since the nature of flowing water is to move from place to place, it is as if they were prepared for this purpose. So too, here, since a child will relieve himself in any place, it is as if it was prepared from before Shabbat.

### Part 2
Rabbi Avin asked: <b>And how, then, should I teach it to him?</b> Rav Ḥanan answered: <b>Say,</b> one may place a bowl <b>on top of chicken feces due to a child.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And derive</b> that <b>it</b> is permitted to remove the feces <b>because it is</b> like <b>a chamber pot of feces,</b> which may be moved out of the room because it is disgusting. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>a chamber pot of feces together with the vessel, yes,</b> it may be moved; but feces <b>itself, no,</b> it may not be moved. What about <b>that mouse that was found among the spices [<i>isperamaki</i>]</b> of <b>Rav Ashi, and he said to</b> his servants: <b>Take it by its tail and remove it?</b> Apparently, a disgusting object may be moved even without a vessel. Rather, we must say that the feces were <b>in the garbage</b> dump, and since the feces were not before the household members it was only permitted to conceal them, not to move them. The Gemara asks: <b>And what is a child doing in the garbage</b> dump in the public domain? It is not adjacent to the house; how would the child get there? The Gemara answers that the feces were not in the garbage dump but were <b>in the courtyard.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>In the courtyard, it is also</b> considered <b>a chamber pot of feces</b> and may be moved. Rather, it is referring to <b>a garbage</b> dump <b>that is in the courtyard,</b> to which the child sometimes has access. Feces in a place designated for garbage are no more disgusting than their surroundings, and therefore it is prohibited to move the feces.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> we also learned in the mishna that one may cover <b>a scorpion</b> with a bowl on Shabbat so <b>that it will not bite. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: All harmful creatures are killed on Shabbat. Rav Yosef raised an objection to this</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Five</b> creatures <b>may be killed</b> even <b>on Shabbat, and they are: The</b> poisonous <b>fly that is in the land of Egypt, and the hornet that is in Ninveh, and the scorpion that is in Ḥadyab, and the snake that is in Eretz Yisrael, and a mad dog in any place.</b> The Gemara clarifies this: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this <i>baraita</i>? <b>If you say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, didn’t he say</b> that <b>one is liable for a</b> prohibited <b>labor that is not needed for its own sake,</b> and it is therefore prohibited to kill even these creatures? <b>Rather, is it not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and these are those</b> creatures <b>that it is permitted</b> to kill; <b>others, no,</b> it is <b>not</b> permitted to kill?

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said: And who will say to us that this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is accurate? Perhaps it is corrupted,</b> and an objection cannot be raised from it. <b>Rav Yosef said: I taught</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>and raised an objection from it, and I will answer it</b> as follows: Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi permitted killing all harmful creatures on Shabbat <b>when they are running after him;</b> as in that case the danger is real, <b>and</b> therefore it is permitted to kill them according to <b>all opinions.</b>

### Part 6
The <b><i>tanna</i></b> who recited tannaitic literature <b>before Rava bar Rav Huna taught</b> a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who kills snakes and scorpions on Shabbat, the spirit of</b> the <b>pious is not pleased with him.</b> Rava bar Rav Huna <b>said to him: And</b> with regard to <b>those pious, the spirit of the Sages is not pleased with them,</b> as snakes and scorpions harm people. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this statement <b>disagrees</b> with the opinion of <b>Rav Huna,</b> for <b>Rav Huna saw a person killing a hornet</b> on Shabbat and <b>said to him: Have you finished killing all</b> the hornets? This indicates that he was not pleased with him.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One who <b>snakes and scorpions happened</b> before him, if he <b>killed them, it is clear that they happened</b> before <b>him</b> in order for him <b>to kill them.</b> If <b>he did not kill them it is clear that they happened</b> before <b>him</b> in order for them <b>to kill him, but a miracle from heaven transpired for him</b> and he was saved. <b>Ulla said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana</b> who said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This is referring to <b>when they were touching</b> and brushing up against him (Rabbeinu Ḥananel), as in that case if they cause him no harm, it is surely a miracle that saved him.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: One time, a</b> snake <b>fell into the study hall</b> on Shabbat, <b>and a Nabatean [<i>Nivati</i>] stood and killed it. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: One of its type killed it.</b>

### Part 9
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: When Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said: <b>One of its type killed it,</b> did he mean that <b>he acted properly or not? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from that which was related about <b>Rabbi Abba, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, and Rabbi Zeira,</b> who <b>were sitting in the courtyard of Rabbi Yannai’s house. A matter emerged from among them,</b> and <b>they raised a dilemma before Rabbi Yannai: What is</b> the ruling with regard <b>to killing snakes and scorpions on Shabbat? He said to them: I would kill a hornet, all the more so</b> would I kill <b>a snake or a scorpion,</b> as they are more dangerous and it is permitted to kill them. The Gemara rejects this: There is no conclusive proof from this, as <b>perhaps</b> it is only permitted when one steps on it <b>innocently</b> as he is walking, so that it does not appear to others that he intended to step on it. <b>As Rav Yehuda said:</b> With regard to <b>spittle</b> on Shabbat, one may <b>trample it innocently</b> and need not be concerned about the prohibitions of smoothing or leveling holes. <b>And Rav Sheshet said:</b> With regard to <b>a snake, one may trample it innocently. And Rav Ketina said:</b> With regard to <b>a scorpion, one may trample it innocently.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Abba bar Marta,</b> who <b>is Abba bar Manyomi, owed money to</b> members of the <b>Exilarch’s household. They brought him</b> to the house of the Exilarch on Shabbat and <b>they tormented him</b> to force him to pay. <b>There was spittle</b> there. <b>The Exilarch said to</b> the members of his household: <b>Bring me a vessel and place it over</b> the spittle so that people will not step on it. Abba bar Manyomi <b>said to them: You need not</b> do so, <b>as Rav Yehuda said as follows:</b> With regard to <b>spittle,</b> one may <b>trample it innocently.</b> The Exilarch <b>said to</b> the members of his household: <b>He is a Torah scholar, leave him</b> alone.

### Part 11
Apropos Rabbi Abba bar Kahana, the Gemara cites additional statements of his. <b>Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> With regard to the <b>candlesticks of the house of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>it is permitted to move them on Shabbat.</b> It was not clear what the nature of these candlesticks was, and <b>Rabbi Zeira said to him:</b> Is this referring <b>to</b> candlesticks that are small, which <b>are moved with one hand, or</b> even <b>to</b> those that are moved <b>with two hands?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC