
### Part 1
<b>the sun,</b> i.e., as long as the sun is shining on Friday. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: The</b> ancestral <b>house of</b> my <b>father,</b> the dynasty of <i>Nesi’im</i> from the house of Hillel, <b>was accustomed to give</b> its <b>white clothes to a gentile launderer</b> no fewer than <b>three days before Shabbat. And,</b> however, <b>these,</b> Beit Shammai, <b>and those,</b> Beit Hillel, <b>agree that,</b> <i>ab initio</i>, <b>one may load the beam of the olive press</b> on the olives on Shabbat eve while it is still day, so that the oil will continue to be squeezed out of the olives on Shabbat. So too, one may load the <b>circular wine press</b> to accelerate the process of producing wine from the grapes.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Before clarifying the matters themselves, the Gemara seeks to determine: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who holds that merely <b>adding water to ink</b> without any additional action <b>constitutes its soaking,</b> and one is liable for doing so on Shabbat, as he performed an act of kneading, one of the primary categories of labor? <b>Rav Yosef said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>one</b> person <b>adds the flour and</b> another <b>one adds the water</b> into one vessel, <b>the latter one is liable</b> for kneading the dough, which is a prohibited labor on Shabbat, even though he did not actually knead the dough; that is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: He is not liable</b> for the prohibited labor of kneading <b>until he</b> actually <b>kneads</b> the dough. According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, merely soaking the dough in water is considered a prohibited labor.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>And perhaps Rabbi Yosei only stated</b> that actual kneading is required to be liable for performing the prohibited labor of kneading <b>in</b> the case of <b>flour, which can be kneaded; however, ink, which cannot be kneaded, say</b> that its soaking is considered a full-fledged prohibited labor, and <b>he will</b> therefore <b>be liable,</b> even according to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei. The Gemara rejects this: <b>It should not enter your mind</b> to say so, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>one places the ashes and one adds the water, the latter one is liable,</b> although he did not knead them. That is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> He is not liable <b>until he</b> actually <b>kneads</b> them. Apparently, according to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, he is only liable for committing the prohibited labor of kneading on Shabbat if he actually kneads the mixture, as he stated his <i>halakha</i> even with regard to ashes, which cannot be kneaded.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps, what is</b> the meaning of <b>ashes [<i>efer</i>]</b> mentioned here? Perhaps it is <b>soil [<i>afar</i>], which can be kneaded.</b> In that case he is not liable until he actually kneads the mixture. However, with regard to ashes, which cannot be kneaded, Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, also holds that even if he did not actually knead the mixture he is liable. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Wasn’t</b> the dispute <b>taught</b> in one <i>baraita</i> with regard to <b>ashes, and wasn’t it taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> with regard to <b>soil?</b> In both cases, Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, disagreed. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Were they taught next to each other?</b> Had both of these <i>baraitot</i> been taught together, it would have been truly possible to arrive at the conclusion that Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, disagrees both in the case of ashes and in the case of soil. However, since the <i>baraita</i> that speaks about ashes was taught elsewhere by a different <i>amora</i> who cited it in the name of Rabbi Yosei, the difference in language does not prove that Rabbi Yosei disagrees in both cases.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may open</b> a canal that passes adjacent to a garden <b>on Shabbat eve at nightfall,</b> so that <b>water</b> will flow <b>into a garden</b> and the garden <b>continuously fills</b> with water <b>all day long</b> on Shabbat. <b>Similarly, one may place incense,</b> perfumed herbs placed on coals to produce a fragrance, on coals <b>beneath the clothes on Shabbat eve and</b> the clothes <b>may be continuously perfumed all day long. And,</b> similarly, <b>one may place sulfur beneath the</b> silver <b>vessels</b> on <b>Shabbat eve at nightfall</b> for the purpose of coloring the vessels, <b>and they may be continuously</b> exposed to <b>sulfur all day long. And one may place an eye salve [<i>kilor</i>] on the eye and a bandage [<i>ispelanit</i>]</b> smeared with cream <b>on a wound</b> on <b>Shabbat eve at nightfall, and</b> the wound <b>may continuously heal all day long</b> on Shabbat. <b>However, one may not place wheat kernels into the water mill unless</b> he does so in a way <b>so that they will be ground while it is still day</b> on Friday and not on Shabbat.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that the <i>baraita</i> prohibited a mill and permitted other prohibited labor? <b>Rabba said: Because it makes noise</b> and the public will hear the mill grinding on Shabbat. Although no prohibited labor is being performed, doing so displays contempt for Shabbat. Therefore, the Sages prohibited it. <b>Rav Yosef said to</b> Rabba: <b>And let the Master say</b> a better reason, <b>due to the</b> obligation to ensure the <b>resting of utensils.</b> Even the utensils of a Jewish person may not be used for prohibited labor on Shabbat. <b>As it was taught</b> in halakhic midrash, the <i>Mekhilta</i>: That which is stated: <b>“And in all that I said to you, take heed”</b> (Exodus 23:13), is an allusion to matters mentioned in the Oral Torah. It comes <b>to include the resting of utensils</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rather, Rav Yosef said:</b> The reason for the prohibition of the mill on Shabbat is <b>due to the resting of utensils.</b>

### Part 7
Since the obligation of resting utensils on Shabbat was mentioned, the Gemara says: <b>Now</b> that <b>you said</b> that <b>Beit Hillel also hold</b> that <b>resting utensils</b> on Shabbat is required <b>by Torah law,</b> with regard to <b>sulfur and incense</b> on coals that are placed under silver vessels and clothes, respectively, <b>what is the reason that</b> the Sages <b>permitted</b> this on Shabbat? Isn’t that performed on Shabbat in utensils? The Gemara answers: <b>Because</b> the utensil itself <b>does not perform an action</b> when the incense or sulfur is burning. With regard to the <b>bundles of flax, what is the reason that they permitted</b> placing them in the oven on Shabbat eve at nightfall to dry, even though the oven is performing a prohibited labor on Shabbat? <b>Because it does not perform an action;</b> rather, on the contrary, <b>it sits idle</b> in its place and the prohibited labor occurs on its own. However, with regard to <b>traps of an animal, and a bird, and a fish, which perform a</b> bona fide <b>action</b> of trapping, <b>what is the reason that they permitted</b> spreading them on Shabbat eve at nightfall? The Gemara explains: <b>There too,</b> it is referring <b>to a fish hook and nets [<i>kokrei</i>], which perform no action.</b> They stand in place, and the fish comes to them and is trapped. Indeed, a trap that performs an action is prohibited.

### Part 8
<b>And now that Rav Oshaya said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said: Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who states that the obligation of <b>resting utensils</b> on Shabbat <b>is by Torah law?</b> The <i>tanna</i> <b>is Beit Shammai and not Beit Hillel.</b> Consequently, according <b>to Beit Shammai, whether</b> the utensil <b>performs an action or whether it does not perform an action, it is prohibited. And</b> according <b>to Beit Hillel, even though it performs an action, it is</b> nevertheless <b>permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And now</b> that <b>you said</b> that according <b>to Beit Shammai even though</b> the utensil <b>does not perform an action it is prohibited, if so,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC