
### Part 1
that <b>rinsing one’s entire body</b> by pouring water on it rather than bathing in the standard fashion may <b>well</b> be done <b>even <i>ab initio</i></b>. The Gemara asks: According to <b>whose</b> opinion is our mishna? The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not rinse himself</b> on Shabbat, <b>neither with hot</b> water <b>nor with cold</b> water; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Shimon permits</b> rinsing one’s body even with hot water. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that there is a distinction: <b>With hot</b> water <b>it is prohibited</b> and <b>with cold</b> water <b>it is permitted.</b>

### Part 2
The mishna addressed the permissibility of drying oneself with a towel after bathing on Shabbat, and added the phrase: <b>And dried himself off even with ten towels.</b> The Gemara comments on the formulation of the mishna: <b>The first clause teaches us a novel</b> concept, <b>and the latter clause teaches us a novel</b> concept. The Gemara explains: <b>The first clause:</b> One who…dried himself even with ten towels may not carry them, <b>teaches us a novel</b> concept, <b>that</b> the prohibition applies <b>even</b> to <b>these</b> towels, <b>which do not have much water</b> absorbed <b>in them.</b> The reason for this is that <b>since he is one</b> person, <b>he</b> may <b>come to squeeze</b> them. <b>And the latter clause teaches us a novel</b> concept, that <b>even these</b> ten people may carry the towel that they have all used, despite the fact <b>that they have</b> absorbed <b>much water</b> and the towel is very wet. The reason for this is that <b>since they are many</b> people, <b>they remind each other</b> not to wring the towel.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may dry himself with a towel</b> on Shabbat <b>and leave it in the window</b> of the bathhouse; <b>and one may not give it to the bath attendants, because they are suspect in this matter</b> of wringing out towels. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: One may dry himself with a single towel and carry it in his hand into his home,</b> and there is no concern lest he wring out the water.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: What is the <i>halakha</i></b> with regard to carrying a towel home after using it to dry himself? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: There is Rabbi Shimon, there is Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>there is Shmuel,</b> and <b>there is Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> all of whom permit it.

### Part 5
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> rules leniently, <b>as we have</b> already <b>stated</b> that he permits bathing and drying oneself with a towel and then bringing it home. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi agrees, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: When we would study Torah with Rabbi Shimon in Tekoa, we would carry oil and towels from the courtyard to the roof and from the roof into an enclosure</b> similar to a courtyard <b>until we reached the spring in which we would bathe,</b> without passing through a public domain. In Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s opinion, it is permitted to carry a towel both before and after using it to dry oneself. <b>Shmuel</b> is also lenient, as <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> explicitly: <b>One may dry himself with a towel and carry it in his hand into his home. Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> is also lenient, as <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>one may dry himself with a towel and carry it in his hand into his house.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara challenges this last point: <b>And did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> really <b>say that? Didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan state</b> a principle that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with an unattributed mishna,</b> in which the name of the <i>tanna</i> who issued the rulings does not appear? <b>And we learned</b> explicitly in our mishna, which is unattributed, that if one bathed <b>and dried himself even with ten towels, he may not carry them in his hand.</b> The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yoḥanan’s version of the mishna does not teach this <i>halakha</i> unattributed; rather, it <b>teaches it in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>ben Ḥakhinai,</b> which is the opinion of an individual Sage that is not the accepted <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Bath attendants may bring women’s bathing garments [<i>balarei</i>] to the bathhouse</b> on Shabbat <b>as long as they cover their heads and the majority of their bodies with them,</b> so that they are being worn rather than carried. With regard to the <b>large scarf</b> that is worn draped over one’s shoulders, <b>one must tie its two ends</b> together <b>below</b> so that it will not fall. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This means that one must tie it <b>below the shoulders.</b> In a similar vein, <b>Rava said to the inhabitants of</b> his city, <b>Meḥoza: When you transport clothing for the soldiers</b> who are staying in the city, <b>extend them beneath your shoulders</b> so that you will wear them like a garment and not simply carry them.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna: <b>One may smear oil and rub</b> a person’s body by hand on Shabbat. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may smear oil</b> on <b>and rub</b> his <b>intestinal</b> area <b>on Shabbat,</b> and it is not a prohibited form of healing, <b>provided he does not do so in the manner in which he does during the week.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How</b> then <b>does one do</b> this on Shabbat? <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: One</b> first <b>smears oil and afterward rubs</b> the body. And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One smears oil and rubs simultaneously.</b>

### Part 9
The mishna taught: <b>However, one may not exert himself</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is prohibited to stand on the floor of</b> the therapeutic bathhouse of <b>Deyomset</b> on Shabbat, <b>because it warms and heals</b> even if one is not bathing or exerting himself. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: The entire period</b> that bathing in <b>Deyomset</b> is therapeutic <b>is twenty-one days; and <i>Shavuot</i> is included.</b> The Gemara <b>raises a dilemma: Is <i>Shavuot</i> on this side,</b> at the beginning, of the twenty-one-day period, <b>or on this side,</b> at the end, of the twenty-one days? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from that which <b>Shmuel said: All</b> medicinal <b>drinks are effective from Passover to <i>Shavuot</i>;</b> apparently, the waters of the Deyomset are therapeutic in the time period leading up to <i>Shavuot</i>. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps there,</b> with regard to medicinal drinks, <b>it is</b> so, because <b>the cooler the world, the better</b> these drinks heal; <b>however, here,</b> with regard to bathing, the therapeutic effect is <b>due to the heat,</b> and therefore <b>the warmer the world, the better.</b> The time period during which bathing is effective would only begin with <i>Shavuot</i>.

### Part 10
Apropos Deyomset, the Gemara cites that <b>Rabbi Ḥelbo said: The wine of Phrygia [<i>Perugaita</i>] and the water</b> of <b>the Deyomset deprived Israel</b> of the <b>ten</b> lost <b>tribes.</b> Because the members of these tribes were attracted to the pleasures of wine and bathing and did not occupy themselves with Torah, they were lost to the Jewish people.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates that once <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh happened</b> to come <b>there,</b> to Phrygia and Deyomset, and <b>he was drawn after them,</b> and <b>his</b> Torah <b>learning was forgotten. When he returned, he stood to read from a</b> Torah <b>scroll</b> and <b>was supposed to read</b> the verse: <b>“This month shall be for you [<i>haḥodesh hazeh lakhem</i>]”</b> (Exodus 12:2), but he had forgotten so much that he could barely remember how to read the Hebrew letters, and instead he read: <b>Have their hearts become deaf</b> [<b><i>haḥeresh haya libbam</i>],</b> interchanging the similar letters <i>reish</i> for <i>dalet</i>, <i>yod</i> for <i>zayin</i>, and <i>beit</i> for <i>khaf</i>. <b>The Sages</b> prayed and <b>asked for</b> God to have <b>mercy on him, and his learning was restored.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And that is</b> what <b>we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Nehorai says: Exile yourself to a place of Torah and do not say that it will follow you, as</b> if you are in a place of Torah, <b>your colleagues will establish it in your hands, and do not rely on your understanding</b> alone. <b>It was taught: Rabbi Nehorai was not his name, but rather Rabbi Neḥemya was his name; and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh was his name</b> and his statement was based on the personal experience of forgetting his Torah due to his failure to exile himself to a place of Torah. <b>And why was he called Rabbi Nehorai?</b> It was <b>because he would illuminate [<i>manhir</i>] the eyes of the Sages in <i>halakha</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The mishna taught: <b>However, one may not scrape</b> off the oil on Shabbat. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not scrape</b> his body <b>with a scraper on Shabbat. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: If one’s feet were dirty with mortar and excrement he may scrape</b> them <b>in the usual manner</b> with a scraper <b>and need not be concerned</b> about violating a prohibition. <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda’s mother made him a silver scraper</b> to use on Shabbat to distinguish it from a weekday.

### Part 14
The mishna also taught that <b>one may not enter a swampy river</b> full of mud on Shabbat. The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Due to the mud,</b> as it is likely that one will slip and fall and come to violate the prohibitions of bathing and wringing out his clothes.

### Part 15
We also learned in the mishna that <b>one may not make a drug to induce vomiting</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They only taught</b> that this is prohibited <b>with a drug,</b> which is considered a medicine; <b>however,</b> inducing vomiting <b>by hand is permitted. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says: Even during the week,</b> if one need not vomit for medical reasons, <b>it is prohibited</b> to induce vomiting <b>because</b> it causes <b>loss of food.</b>

### Part 16
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna that <b>one may not align a young</b> infant’s bones in order to straighten them on Shabbat. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>swaddling an infant</b> on Shabbat, one may <b>well</b> do so. The Gemara challenges this statement: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that <b>one may not align</b> an infant’s bones? The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> the mishna is referring to <b>the bones,</b> vertebrae, <b>of the spine, because</b> straightening them <b>appears like</b> the prohibited labor of <b>building.</b>

### Part 17
We also learned in the mishna that <b>one may not reset a break</b> in a bone on Shabbat. <b>Rav Ḥana of Baghdad said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC