
### Part 1
<b>he elevates its</b> status, as <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The letters <b><i>mem</i> and <i>samekh</i> that were in the tablets were standing miraculously.</b> Each letter was chiseled all the way through the tablets. In that case, the segment of the tablets at the center of the <i>samekh</i> and final <i>mem</i>, letters that are completely closed, should have fallen. Miraculously, they remained in place. Consequently, rendering an open <i>mem</i> closed elevates its status. <b>However,</b> if <b>one rendered a closed</b> letter <b>open, he diminishes its</b> status, as <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba</b> who said: <b>The prophets instituted</b> the difference between the open and closed forms of the letters <b><i>mem</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>tzadi</i>, <i>peh</i>, <i>kaf</i>.</b> Since the closed letters date back to the Ten Commandments, apparently the prophets introduced the open versions of the letters, which are therefore less significant.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this: <b>And is that reasonable? Isn’t it written: “These are the commandments</b> that the Lord commanded Moses to tell the children of Israel at Mount Sinai” (Leviticus 27:34). The word “these” underscores <b>that a prophet is not permitted to introduce any</b> new <b>element</b> related to the Torah and its mitzvot <b>from here on. Rather,</b> the prophets did not innovate these forms. Both the open and closed versions <b>existed</b> before then. However, people <b>did not know which</b> form appeared <b>in the middle of a word</b> and <b>which</b> form <b>at the end of a word. And the prophets came</b> and <b>instituted their</b> set positions. The Gemara asks: <b>And still</b> the question remains: Didn’t the Sages derive from the verse: <b>“These are the commandments,” that a prophet is not permitted to introduce any</b> new <b>element from here on?</b> How could they institute the position of the letters? <b>Rather,</b> over the course of time, the people <b>forgot their</b> positions in the words <b>and</b> the prophets <b>then reestablished their</b> positions. Apparently, closed letters are no more significant than the open ones.

### Part 3
The Gemara returns to discuss <b>the matter itself. Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The letters <b><i>mem</i> and <i>samekh</i> that were in the tablets were standing miraculously. And</b> furthermore, <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The <b>writing on the tablets was read from the inside,</b> from one side of the tablets, <b>and read from the outside,</b> the other side of the tablets, in reverse order. The Gemara cites words that appear elsewhere in the Bible: <b><i>Nevuv</i></b> was read as <b><i>bet</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>bet</i>, <i>nun</i>; <i>rahav</i></b> as <b><i>beit</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>reish</i>;</b> and <b><i>saru</i></b> as <b><i>vav</i>, <i>reish</i>, <i>samekh</i>.</b>

### Part 4
<b>The Sages said to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: Young students came</b> today <b>to the study hall and said things</b> the likes of <b>which were not said</b> even <b>in the days of Joshua bin Nun.</b> These children who only knew the Hebrew alphabet interpreted the letters homiletically.<br><b><i>Alef beit</i></b> means <b>learn</b> [<b><i>elaf</i></b>] the <b>wisdom</b> [<b><i>bina</i></b>] of the Torah.<br><b><i>Gimmel dalet</i></b> means <b>give to the poor</b> [<b><i>gemol dalim</i></b>]. <b>Why is the leg of the <i>gimmel</i> extended toward</b> the <b><i>dalet</i>? Because it is the manner of one who bestows loving-kindness to pursue the poor. And why</b> is the <b>leg of</b> the <b><i>dalet</i> extended toward</b> the <b><i>gimmel</i>?</b> It is so <b>that</b> a poor person <b>will make himself available to him</b> who wants to give him charity. <b>And why does the <i>dalet</i> face away from</b> the <b><i>gimmel</i>?</b> It is to teach <b>that one should give</b> charity <b>discreetly so that</b> the poor person <b>will not be embarrassed by him.</b>

### Part 5
The children continued to interpret the letters.<br><b><i>Heh vav</i>: That is</b> the principal <b>name of the Holy One, Blessed be He.</b><br><b><i>Zayin ḥet</i>, <i>tet yod</i>, <i>kaf lamed</i>: And if you do so, the Holy One, Blessed be He, feeds [<i>zan</i>] you, and shows you favor [<i>ḥan</i>], and bestows goodness [<i>meitiv</i>] upon you, and gives you an inheritance [<i>yerusha</i>], and ties a crown [<i>keter</i>] for you in the World to Come [<i>la’olam haba</i>].</b><br>The <b>open <i>mem</i> and closed <i>mem</i></b> indicate that the Torah contains <b>an open statement,</b> understood by all, and <b>an esoteric statement.</b><br>The <b>bent <i>nun</i></b> and the <b>straight <i>nun</i></b> at the end of a word refer to <b>a faithful person who is bent [<i>ne’eman kafuf</i>]</b> and is modest now, who will ultimately become a <b>well-known faithful person [<i>ne’eman pashut</i>].</b>

### Part 6
<b><i>Samekh ayin</i>: Support the poor [<i>semokh aniyyim</i>]</b> to prevent them from falling further. <b>Another version: Make mnemonic</b> signs <b>[<i>simanim aseh</i>]</b> to remember <b>the Torah and acquire it.</b><br>The <b>bent <i>peh</i></b> and the <b>straight <i>peh</i>:</b> Sometimes one needs to have <b>an open mouth [<i>peh patuaḥ</i>]</b> and speak, and sometimes one needs to have <b>a closed mouth [<i>peh satum</i>].</b><br>The <b>bent <i>tzadi</i></b> and the <b>straight <i>tzadi</i></b> indicate that <b>a righteous</b> person who is <b>bent</b> and humble <b>[<i>tzaddik kafuf</i>]</b> now will ultimately become <b>a well-known righteous</b> person <b>[<i>tzaddik pashut</i>]</b> whose righteousness is apparent to all. The Gemara asks: <b>That is identical</b> to the interpretation of the bent and straight <i>nun</i>: <b><i>Ne’eman kafuf</i>, <i>ne’eman pashut</i>.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>The verse added</b> the <b>bending</b> of the righteous person <b>to the bending of</b> the faithful person. <b>From here</b> it is derived <b>that the Torah was given in</b> an atmosphere of <b>gravity.</b> One must receive the Torah with a sense of awe and extreme humility.

### Part 7
The children continued:<br><b><i>Kuf</i>: Holy [<i>kadosh</i>],</b> referring to God.<br><b><i>Reish</i>: A wicked person [<i>rasha</i>]. Why is the <i>kuf</i> facing away from</b> the <b><i>reish</i>?</b> This question was phrased euphemistically, as it is the <i>reish</i> that is facing away from the <i>kuf</i>. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: I am unable look at a wicked person,</b> i.e., the wicked person does not want to look toward God. <b>And why is the crown of</b> the letter <b><i>kuf</i> turned toward</b> the <b><i>reish</i>? The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: If</b> the wicked person <b>repents</b> his evil ways <b>I will tie a crown for him like My own. And why is the leg of</b> the <b><i>kuf</i> suspended</b> and not connected to the roof of the letter? <b>Because if</b> the wicked person <b>repents he can enter</b> through this opening if he so desires.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Let him enter through that</b> opening, as the <i>kuf</i> is open on both sides at the bottom. The Gemara answers: This <b>supports</b> the statement of <b>Reish Lakish, as Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of <b>that which is written: “If it concerns the scorners, He scorns them, and unto the humble He gives grace”</b> (Proverbs 3:34)? One who <b>comes</b> in order <b>to become impure,</b> i.e., to sin, <b>they,</b> in Heaven, <b>provide him with an opening</b> to do so, and he is not prevented from sinning. However, if he <b>comes</b> in order <b>to become purified,</b> not only is he allowed to do so, but <b>they,</b> in Heaven, <b>assist him.</b>

### Part 9
They further taught:<br><b><i>Shin</i>: Falsehood [<i>sheker</i>]. <i>Tav</i>: Truth [<i>emet</i>].</b><br><b>Why are the letters of</b> the word <b><i>sheker</i> adjacent</b> to one another in the alphabet, while <b>the letters of <i>emet</i> are distant</b> from one another? That is because while <b>falsehood is</b> easily <b>found, truth is found</b> only with great difficulty. <b>And why do</b> the letters that comprise the word <b><i>sheker</i></b> all <b>stand on one foot, and</b> the letters that comprise the word <b><i>emet</i></b> stand on bases that are wide like <b>bricks?</b> Because the <b>truth stands</b> eternal and <b>falsehood does not stand</b> eternal.

### Part 10
The Gemara cites another midrash that also deals with the letters of the alphabet. This one uses a code in which the first letter is paired with the last letter, the second letter with the penultimate one, and so on <b>[<i>alef tav</i>, <i>beit shin</i>].</b> <i>Alef tav</i>, God said: If <b>he despised Me [<i>oti ti’ev</i>]</b> would <b>I desire [<i>etaveh</i>] him? <i>Beit shin</i>:</b> If <b>he does not desire</b> to worship <b>Me [<i>bi</i>],</b> shall <b>My name [<i>shemi</i>] rest upon him? <i>Gimmel reish</i>:</b> He <b>defiled his body [<i>gufo</i>];</b> shall <b>I have mercy [<i>araḥem</i>] on him?</b> The word comprised of the letters <i>gimmel</i> and <i>reish</i> in Aramaic means licentiousness. <b><i>Dalet kuf</i>:</b> He <b>locked My doors [<i>daltotai</i>],</b> shall <b>I not cut off his horns [<i>karnav</i>]? To this point,</b> the Gemara interpreted the letters as referring to <b>the attribute of the wicked.</b>

### Part 11
<b>However,</b> with regard to <b>the attribute of the righteous</b> it is taught differently. <b><i>Alef tav</i>, <i>beit shin</i>: If you have shame [<i>ata bosh</i>], <i>gimmel reish</i>, <i>dalet kuf</i>: If you do so,</b> you will <b>reside [<i>gur</i>] in</b> the <b>heavens [<i>bedok</i>],</b> as the verse says: “Who stretches out the Heavens like a curtain [<i>dok</i>]” (Isaiah 40:22). <b><i>Heh tzadi</i>, <i>vav peh</i>: There is a partition [<i>ḥatzitza havei</i>] between you and anger [<i>af</i>]. <i>Zayin ayin</i>, <i>ḥet samekh</i>, <i>tet nun</i>: And you will not be shaken [<i>mizdaze’a</i>] by the Satan. <i>Yod mem</i>, <i>kaf lamed</i>: The minister of Gehenna said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe,</b> send the righteous as well into the <b>sea</b> to which <b>all</b> go <b>[<i>yam kol</i>],</b> Gehenna.

### Part 12
The interpretation of the alphabet continues with other combinations of letters. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: <i>Alef ḥet samekh</i>, <i>bet tet ayin</i>, <i>gimmel yod peh</i>: I have mercy on them [<i>Ani ḥas aleihem</i>] because they spurned [<i>ba’atu</i>] adultery [<i>gif</i>].</b> The Gemara continues with this combination of the letters: <b><i>Dalet kaf tzadi</i>: They are pure [<i>dakkim</i>], they are honest [<i>kenim</i>], they are righteous [<i>tzaddikim</i>]. <i>Heh lamed kuf</i>: You have no portion [<i>ḥelek</i>] with them,</b> based on the interchange of the letters <i>ḥet</i> and <i>heh</i>. <b><i>Vav mem reish zayin nun</i>, <i>shin tav</i>:</b> The minister of <b>Gehenna said [<i>amar</i>],</b> based on <i>vav mem reish</i>, <b>before Him: Master of the Universe, my Master [<i>Mari</i>], sustain me [<i>zaneini</i>] with the seed of Seth [<i>Shet</i>],</b> which refers to all humankind, including the Jewish people.

### Part 13
The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to him</b> using another configuration of the alphabet: <b><i>Alef lamed</i>, <i>beit mem</i>: Not with them [<i>al bam</i>],</b> i.e., you will have no portion of them. <b><i>Gimmel nun</i>, <i>dalet samekh</i>: To where will I lead them?</b> I will lead them <b>to the garden of myrtle [<i>gan hadas</i>],</b> i.e., the Garden of Eden. <b><i>Heh ayin</i>, <i>vav peh</i>:</b> The minister of <b>Gehenna said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, I am tired [<i>ayef anokhi</i>]</b> and thirsty and need people to care for me. The Holy One, Blessed be He, responded: <b><i>Zayin tzadi</i>, <i>ḥet kuf</i>: These are the descendants [<i>zaro</i>] of Isaac [<i>Yitzḥak</i>]. <i>Tet reish</i>, <i>yod shin</i>, <i>kaf tav</i>: Wait [<i>tar</i>], I have groups</b> upon <b>groups [<i>yesh li kittot kittot</i>] of</b> other <b>nations that I will give you</b> instead.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC