
### Part 1
<b>idols</b> that you require this special warning? <b>Again</b> Moses asked: <b>What</b> else <b>is written in it?</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to him: <b>“Remember the Shabbat day to sanctify it”</b> (Exodus 20:8). Moses asked the angels: <b>Do you perform labor that you require rest</b> from it? <b>Again</b> Moses asked: <b>What</b> else <b>is written in it? “Do not take</b> the name of the Lord your God in vain” (Exodus 20:7), meaning that it is prohibited to swear falsely. Moses asked the angels: <b>Do you</b> conduct <b>business with one another</b> that may lead you to swear falsely? <b>Again</b> Moses asked: <b>What</b> else <b>is written in it?</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to him: <b>“Honor your father and your mother”</b> (Exodus 20:12). Moses asked the angels: <b>Do you have a father or a mother</b> that would render the commandment to honor them relevant to you? <b>Again</b> Moses asked: <b>What</b> else <b>is written in it?</b> God said to him: <b>“You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal”</b> (Exodus 20:13) Moses asked the angels: <b>Is there jealousy among you,</b> or <b>is there an evil inclination within you</b> that would render these commandments relevant? <b>Immediately they agreed with the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> that He made the right decision to give the Torah to the people, and <b>as it is stated: “God our Lord, how glorious is Your name in all the earth”</b> (Psalms 8:10), <b>while “that Your majesty is placed above the heavens” is not written</b> because the angels agreed with God that it is appropriate to give the Torah to the people on earth.

### Part 2
<b>Immediately, each and every one</b> of the angels <b>became an admirer</b> of Moses <b>and passed something to him, as it is stated: “You ascended on high, you took a captive, you took gifts on account of man,</b> and even among the rebellious also that the Lord God might dwell there” (Psalms 68:19). The meaning of the verse is: <b>In reward for</b> the fact <b>that they called you man,</b> you are not an angel and the Torah is applicable to you, <b>you took gifts</b> from the angels. And <b>even the Angel of Death gave him something,</b> as Moses told Aaron how to stop the plague, <b>as it is stated: “And he placed the incense, and he atoned for the people”</b> (Numbers 17:12). <b>And</b> the verse <b>says: “And he stood between the dead and the living,</b> and the plague was stopped” (Numbers 17:13). <b>If</b> it were <b>not that</b> the Angel of Death <b>told him</b> this remedy, <b>would he have known</b> it?

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When Moses descended from</b> standing <b>before the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> with the Torah, <b>Satan came and said before Him: Master of the Universe, where is the Torah?</b><br><b>He said to him: I have given it to the earth. He went to the earth,</b> and <b>said to it: Where is the Torah?</b> It <b>said to him:</b> I do not know, as only: <b>“God understands its way,</b> and He knows its place” (Job 28:23).<br><b>He went to the sea</b> and asked: Where is the Torah? <b>And</b> the sea <b>said to him: “It is not with me.”</b><br><b>He went to the depths</b> and asked: Where is the Torah? And the depths <b>said to him: “It is not within me.”</b> And from where is it derived that the sea and the depths answered him this way? <b>As it is stated: “The depth said: It is not within me, and the sea said: It is not with me”</b> (Job 28:14). <b>“Destruction and death said: We heard a rumor of it with our ears”</b> (Job 28:22).<br>Satan <b>returned and said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, I searched</b> for the Torah <b>throughout all the earth and did not find it.</b> He <b>said to him: Go to</b> Moses, <b>son of Amram.</b>

### Part 4
<b>He went to Moses</b> and <b>said to him: The Torah that the Holy One, Blessed be He, gave you, where is it?</b> Moses evaded the question and <b>said to him: And what am I that the Holy One, Blessed be He, would have given me the Torah?</b> I am unworthy. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Moses, are you a fabricator?</b> Moses <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, You have a hidden treasure in which You delight every day,</b> as it is stated: “And I was His delight every day, playing before Him at every moment” (Proverbs 8:30). <b>Should I take credit for myself</b> and say that You gave it to me? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Since you belittled yourself,</b> the Torah <b>will be called by your name, as it is stated: “Remember the Torah of Moses My servant</b> to whom I commanded at Horeb laws and statutes for all of Israel” (Malachi 3:22).

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When Moses ascended on High, he found the Holy One, Blessed be He, tying crowns to letters.</b> On the tops of certain letters there are ornamental crownlets. Moses said nothing, and God <b>said to him: Moses, is there no greeting in your city?</b> Do people not greet each other in your city? He <b>said before Him: Does a servant greet his master?</b> That would be disrespectful. He <b>said to him:</b> At least <b>you should have assisted Me</b> and wished Me success in My work. <b>Immediately</b> he <b>said to Him: “And now, may the power of the Lord be great as you have spoken”</b> (Numbers 14:17).

### Part 6
And <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And the people saw that Moses delayed [<i>boshesh</i>]</b> to come down from the mount” (Exodus 32:1)? <b>Do not read</b> the word in the verse as <b><i>boshesh</i>; rather,</b> read it as <b><i>ba’u shesh</i>, six</b> hours <b>have arrived. When Moses ascended on High, he told</b> <b>the Jewish people: In forty days, at the beginning of six</b> hours, <b>I will come. After forty days, Satan came and brought confusion to the world</b> by means of a storm, and it was impossible to ascertain the time. Satan <b>said to</b> the Jews: <b>Where is your teacher Moses?</b> They <b>said to him: He ascended on High.</b> He <b>said to them: Six</b> hours <b>have arrived</b> and he has not yet come. Surely he won’t. <b>And they paid him no attention.</b> Satan said to them: Moses <b>died. And they paid him no attention.</b> Ultimately, <b>he showed them an image of his</b> death-<b>bed</b> and an image of Moses’ corpse in a cloud. <b>And that is what</b> the Jewish people <b>said to Aaron: “For this Moses, the man</b> who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him” (Exodus 32:1).

### Part 7
<b>One of the Sages said to Rav Kahana: Did you hear what</b> is the reason that the mountain was called <b>Mount Sinai?</b> Rav Kahana <b>said to him:</b> It is because it is <b>a mountain upon which miracles [<i>nissim</i>] were performed for the Jewish people.</b> The Sage said to him: If so, <b>it should have been</b> called <b>Mount Nisai,</b> the mountain of miracles. <b>Rather,</b> Rav Kahana said to him: It is <b>a mountain that was a good omen [<i>siman</i>] for the Jewish people.</b> The Sage said to him: If so, <b>it should have been</b> called <b>Har Simanai,</b> the mountain of omens. Rav Kahana <b>said to him: What is the reason</b> that <b>you do not frequent</b> the school where you can study <b>before Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son</b> of <b>Rav Yehoshua, who study <i>aggada</i>? As Rav Ḥisda and Rabba, son of Rav Huna, both said: What</b> is the reason it is called <b>Mount Sinai?</b> It is because it is <b>a mountain upon which hatred [<i>sina</i>] for the nations of the world descended</b> because they did not accept the Torah. <b>And that is what Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said:</b> The desert in which Israel remained for forty years <b>has five names.</b> Each name has a source and a rationale: <b>The Zin Desert,</b> because <b>the Jewish people were commanded [<i>nitztavu</i>] in it; the Kadesh Desert,</b> because <b>the Jewish people were sanctified [<i>nitkadshu</i>] in it. The Kedemot Desert,</b> because the <b>ancient</b> [<b><i>keduma</i></b>] Torah, which preceded the world, <b>was given in it. The Paran Desert,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC