
### Part 1
If the wall stood upon ground that <b>belonged to him and to the</b> house of <b>idolatry,</b> the area <b>is calculated as half and half</b> as far as moving into his property before rebuilding the wall, and one may build the wall four cubits from the middle of the wall. <b>Its stones and its wood and its dust</b> from the house of idolatry <b>transmit impurity like creeping animals,</b> and by rabbinic decree, one who touches them becomes impure like one who touches a creeping animal, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And you shall not bring an abomination into your house and become banned like it, <b>you shall utterly detest it [<i>shaketz teshaketzenu</i>]</b> and you shall utterly abhor it, for it is a banned object” (Deuteronomy 7:26). <i>Shaketz</i> is a term used with regard to creeping animals. <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> Idolatry transmits impurity <b>like a menstruating woman, as it is stated: “You will cast them away as you would a menstruating woman [<i>dava</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 30:22). <b>Just as a menstruating woman transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by carrying,</b> as one who moves a menstruating woman without touching her becomes impure, <b>so too, idolatry transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by carrying. Rabba said</b> in explanation of that which <b>the verse said: “You will cast them away”: Make them foreign to you like a stranger.</b> The end of the same verse: <b>“You will tell it, get out”</b> means that under <b>no</b> circumstances can you <b>say to it, come in.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And</b> to the essence of the dispute, <b>Rabba said: With regard to</b> impurity imparted <b>by carrying, everyone agrees</b> that idol worship <b>transmits impurity, as it is juxtaposed to a menstruating woman</b> in the verse. <b>Where they argue,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a very heavy stone.</b> There is a special law with regard to the ritual impurity of a <i>zav</i> and a menstruating woman. If they sit on an object, even if it is an object that cannot become ritually impure, and beneath that object is a vessel, even though the weight of the <i>zav</i> and the menstruating woman has no effect on the vessel, it becomes ritually impure. <b>Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that the impurity of idolatry is <b>like</b> the impurity of a <b>menstruating woman</b> in all respects; <b>just as a menstruating woman transmits impurity via a very heavy stone, so too, idolatry transmits impurity via a very heavy stone. And the Rabbis hold</b> that in this regard, the impurity of idolatry is <b>like</b> the impurity of <b>a creeping animal; just as a creeping animal does not transmit impurity via a very heavy stone, so too, idolatry does not transmit impurity via a very heavy stone.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Akiva,</b> who holds that the impurity of idolatry is similar to that of a menstruating woman in all respects, <b>for what <i>halakha</i> was it juxtaposed to a creeping animal?</b> The Gemara explains: In his opinion, it was not stated in reference to idolatry itself, but rather <b>to its accessories,</b> objects used for the purposes of idolatry. The Gemara asks further: <b>And according to the Rabbis, for what <i>halakha</i> was it juxtaposed to a menstruating woman? To</b> teach that it transmits impurity through <b>carrying. And</b> instead of juxtaposing idolatry to both a menstruating woman and to creeping animals, <b>let the Torah juxtapose it to an</b> animal <b>carcass,</b> which transmits impurity through carrying and does not transmit impurity via a very heavy stone, since according to the Rabbis the law is the same for idolatry. The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so.</b> In that sense, juxtaposition to an animal carcass would suffice. <b>However,</b> the juxtaposition to a menstruating woman teaches: <b>Just as a menstruating woman</b> does <b>not</b> transmit impurity through <b>limbs,</b> as if the limb of a menstruating woman is supported by a vessel, the vessel does not become ritually impure (Ra’avad), <b>so too, idolatry does not</b> transmit impurity through <b>limbs,</b> as a severed part of an idol does not transmit impurity. The Gemara is puzzled by this: <b>But that which Rav Ḥama bar Guria raised as a dilemma: Does idolatry have</b> the capacity to transmit impurity through <b>limbs or does it not</b> have the capacity to transmit impurity through <b>limbs? Resolve</b> the dilemma <b>from this, as according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, it does not</b> transmit impurity through <b>limbs.</b> And the Gemara replies: Although that is so, <b>Rav Ḥama bar Guria raised the dilemma in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> and the dilemma is unresolved.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> in another approach to this dispute, <b>Rabbi Elazar said: With regard to a very heavy stone, everyone agrees</b> that idolatry <b>does not transmit impurity</b> in that manner. <b>Where they disagree</b> is <b>with regard to</b> impurity imparted by <b>carrying. Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that the legal status of idolatry is <b>like</b> that of <b>a menstruating woman: Just as a menstruating woman transmits impurity through carrying, so too, idolatry transmits impurity through carrying. And the Rabbis hold</b> that the legal status of idolatry is <b>like</b> that of <b>a creeping animal: Just as a creeping animal does not transmit impurity through carrying, so too, idolatry does not transmit impurity through carrying.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Akiva’s</b> opinion, with regard <b>to what <i>halakha</i> was</b> idolatry <b>juxtaposed to a creeping animal?</b> The Gemara answers: With regard <b>to</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>its accessories</b> do not transmit impurity through carrying. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the Rabbis,</b> with regard <b>to what <i>halakha</i> was</b> idolatry <b>juxtaposed to a menstruating woman?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Just as a menstruating woman does not</b> transmit impurity <b>through</b> her <b>limbs, so too, idolatry does not</b> transmit impurity <b>through</b> its <b>limbs.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC