
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> We learned in the mishna that the primary categories of labor number forty-less-one. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I need</b> this <b>tally? Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The tally was included to teach <b>that if he performed all of</b> the prohibited labors <b>in</b> the course of <b>one lapse of awareness,</b> during which he was unaware of the prohibition involved, <b>he is liable for each and every one.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna, among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who sows, and one who plows.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Since, after all,</b> in terms of <b>plowing, one plows first</b> and only then sows, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> first <b>one who plows, and afterward let him teach one who sows.</b> The Gemara answers: The <b><i>tanna</i></b> ordered the mishna <b>based</b> on the practice <b>in Eretz Yisrael, where</b> they <b>sow first and then plow.</b> In Eretz Yisrael, the practice was to plow a second time after sowing to cover the seeds.

### Part 3
A <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught</b> with regard to the prohibited labor of sowing: <b>One who sows, and one who prunes</b> the branches of vines to accelerate their growth, <b>and one who plants, and one who bends</b> the branch of a vine or a tree into the ground so that it takes root while still attached to the trunk, <b>and one who grafts</b> the branch of one tree onto another have <b>all</b> performed <b>one</b> type of <b>labor,</b> as they all stimulate plant growth. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaching us?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>This teaches us</b> that <b>one who</b> unwittingly <b>performs numerous prohibited labors</b> subsumed under a <b>single</b> primary category <b>of labor,</b> like those listed in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>is liable to</b> bring <b>only one</b> sin-offering, since they are considered aspects of the same labor. <b>Rabbi Aḥa said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami said: One who prunes is liable for</b> the labor of <b>planting. And one who plants, and one who bends, and one who grafts is liable for</b> the labor of <b>sowing.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: Is that to say that one who bends and one who grafts a branch, <b>for sowing, yes,</b> he is liable; <b>for planting, no,</b> he is <b>not</b> liable? These labors, performed on trees, are more similar to planting. Rather, <b>say</b> as follows: One is liable <b>even for sowing,</b> as with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat there is no difference between sowing and planting.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Kahana said:</b> One who <b>prunes</b> a tree <b>and needs the wood</b> that he hewed from the tree for fuel or some other purpose <b>is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings: <b>One</b> sin-offering <b>due to</b> the labor of <b>reaping,</b> like anyone who severs an item from the ground for the purpose of harvesting the detached object, and <b>one</b> sin-offering <b>due to</b> the labor of <b>planting,</b> since he thereby stimulates growth of the plant. Similarly, <b>Rav Yosef said: One who reaps alfalfa is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings: <b>One due to reaping,</b> since he is cutting the plant for animal feed, <b>and one due to planting,</b> since cutting stimulates the growth of the alfalfa. Similarly, <b>Abaye said: One who cuts beet leaves is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings: <b>One due to reaping and one due to sowing.</b>

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who plows.</b> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the labor of plowing: <b>One who plows, and one who digs, and one who makes a furrow</b> in the ground have <b>all</b> performed <b>one</b> type of <b>labor. Rav Sheshet said: One who had a mound</b> of earth <b>and removed it in the house,</b> thereby evening the surface, <b>is liable due to</b> the labor of <b>building,</b> as he thereby engages in construction of the house. <b>In the field, he is liable due to</b> the labor of <b>plowing.</b> Similarly, <b>Rava said: One who had a hole and filled it, in the house he is liable due to</b> the labor of <b>building. In the field, he is liable due to</b> the labor of <b>plowing.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Abba said: One who digs a hole on Shabbat and</b> digs the hole <b>only</b> because he <b>needs its dirt is exempt for</b> that act, which is not the labor of digging prohibited on Shabbat by Torah law. <b>And even according to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who <b>said</b> that in general one who performs <b>labor that is not necessary for its own sake,</b> i.e., he performs the labor for a purpose other than the direct result of that action, <b>is liable for it;</b> that ruling <b>applies only</b> to a purpose that is <b>constructive.</b> However, <b>this</b> purpose is <b>destructive,</b> as one performs an act that unnecessarily mars the surface of the ground. Therefore, Rabbi Yehuda would agree that in this case he is exempt.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna, among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who reaps. It was taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i> with regard to the labor of reaping: <b>One who reaps,</b> and <b>one who picks</b> grapes, <b>and one who harvests</b> dates, <b>and one who collects</b> olives, <b>and one who gathers</b> figs have <b>all</b> performed <b>one</b> type of <b>labor,</b> as they all involve picking fruit. <b>Rav Pappa said: One who threw a clod</b> of earth <b>at a palm tree and severed dates is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings: <b>One due to severing,</b> which is a subcategory of the primary category of reaping; <b>and one for extracting,</b> which is a subcategory of the primary category of threshing, as he removes something edible, the date, from its cover, its cluster. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> In that case, one is exempt, since <b>that is not the</b> typical <b>manner of severing, and that is not the</b> typical <b>manner of extracting,</b> and one who performs a labor in an atypical manner is exempt.

### Part 8
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna, among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who gathers. Rava said: One who gathers salt from salt pools is liable due to</b> the labor of <b>gathering,</b> as he gathers a substance from the field into a pile. <b>Abaye said:</b> That is not so, as the prohibition of <b>gathering</b> by Torah law applies <b>only to</b> produce <b>that grows from the ground.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna, among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who threshes.</b> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who threshes, and one who beats</b> flax to remove it from the hard cover of its stalk, <b>and one who strikes</b> a cotton plant to remove the cotton seeds have <b>all</b> performed <b>one</b> type of <b>labor.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna, among those liable for performing primary categories of labor: <b>One who winnows, and one who selects, and one who grinds, and one who sifts.</b> The Gemara asks: The prohibited labor of <b>winnowing is the same as</b> the prohibited labor of <b>selecting,</b> which <b>is the same as</b> the prohibited labor of <b>sifting.</b> They are all identical in the manner in which they are performed and have the same objective: Separating food from the accompanying waste. Why was it necessary to list them all? An answer was provided by <b>Abaye and Rava, who both said</b> and established a principle: <b>Any manner</b> of labor <b>that was</b> performed <b>in the Tabernacle,</b> for the purposes of the Tabernacle,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC