
### Part 1
<b>in water. It is a leniency the Sages instituted in water</b> but not in other circumstances. <b>And why</b> were they lenient with regard to a hanging partition in water? <b>Isn’t there the passage of fish? Rather, learn from this</b> that <b>the passage of fish is not considered passage.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: If <b>boats</b> are <b>tied together,</b> one may carry an object from one to the other on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious,</b> since these boats are like a single domain. <b>Rava said: This</b> mishna <b>was necessary only to permit</b> carrying from one boat to another via <b>a small boat that is between them.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Safra said to him:</b> You, who are as great in this generation as <b>Moses, did you speak well? We learned</b> in the mishna that <b>one may carry</b> only <b>from one to the other,</b> not via a small boat. <b>Rather, Rav Safra said:</b> The mishna <b>was only necessary</b> to obligate one <b>to place an <i>eiruv</i>,</b> a joining of courtyards, between the two boats. Since the boats belong to different people, they must be joined to form a single domain in order to permit <b>carrying from one to the other, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>boats tied to one another, one places an <i>eiruv</i> and carries from one to the other.</b> If the ties between them <b>were severed,</b> the people on the boats <b>are prohibited</b> to carry from one to the other. If <b>they were then retied, whether unwittingly,</b> i.e., the one who retied them forgot that it was Shabbat, <b>whether intentionally, whether due to circumstances beyond one’s control, whether mistakenly,</b> the boats <b>are restored to their original permitted</b> status.

### Part 4
<b>And similarly,</b> in the case of <b>mats that are unfurled</b> to create a partition between two people <b>and the public domain, one places an <i>eiruv</i> and carries from one to the other.</b> If the mats <b>were furled,</b> the people on the boats <b>are prohibited</b> to carry from one to the other. If the mats <b>were then unfurled</b> again, <b>whether unwittingly, whether intentionally, whether due to circumstances beyond one’s control, whether mistakenly, they are restored to their original permitted</b> status. That is <b>because any partition that is established on Shabbat, whether unwittingly, whether intentionally, is considered a partition.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Naḥman say: They only taught</b> the principle that a partition established on Shabbat is considered a partition with regard <b>to throwing.</b> In that case, a partition creates a domain unto itself, and one who throws an object into it from another domain is liable. <b>However,</b> with regard <b>to carrying</b> within that domain, it is certainly <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When</b> that statement of <b>Rav Naḥman was stated, it was stated</b> with regard to an act performed <b>intentionally.</b> One who intentionally establishes a partition is penalized and is not permitted to benefit from it. In principle, though, that partition is considered a full-fledged partition.

### Part 6
<b>Shmuel said:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that one may carry from one ship to another if they are tied together applies <b>even</b> if they were <b>tied with a string</b> used to close the neckline of <b>a cloak.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> the string <b>is capable of holding</b> the ships together, it is <b>obvious</b> that carrying between the ships is permitted as they are tied together. However, <b>if</b> the string <b>is incapable of holding them, why</b> is it permitted?

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: <b>Actually,</b> it refers to a string that <b>can hold them, and Shmuel</b> said this <b>to exclude</b> this case <b>from his own statement. As we learned</b> in a mishna: If <b>one tied</b> a ship <b>with an item capable of holding it</b> and the end of that item was in a tent with a corpse, <b>it transmits impurity to</b> the ship. And if one tied it <b>with something that is incapable of holding it, it does not transmit impurity to</b> the ship. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> When the mishna refers to an item capable of holding it, it is referring to a case where <b>it is tied with an iron chain.</b> It was necessary for Shmuel to establish that although with regard to ritual impurity the <i>halakha</i> applies only to an iron chain, with regard to Shabbat the <i>halakha</i> applies to any item capable of holding the ships together. 

### Part 8
The reason that the <i>halakha</i> is different <b>with regard to impurity is as it is written:</b> “And whoever touches in the open field <b>one slain by sword,</b> or one who dies by himself, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days” (Numbers 19:16). The Sages derived from the phrase: One slain by sword that <b>a sword is like one slain,</b> i.e., a corpse. A metal instrument that comes into contact with a corpse assumes the same level of ritual impurity as the corpse itself, the ultimate primary source of ritual impurity. Therefore, it is only an iron chain in a tent with a corpse in it that can render a boat tied to the other end a primary source of ritual impurity. A string made of other materials cannot. <b>However, with regard to Shabbat, since</b> it is <b>capable of holding it</b> and it is <b>a mere distinctive sign</b> that is necessary, <b>even the string of a cloak</b> is sufficient.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC