
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that it is appropriate to say: <b>May the Omnipresent have compassion upon you and upon all the sick people of Israel. Rabbi Yosei says</b> that it is appropriate to say: <b>May the Omnipresent have compassion upon you among the sick people of Israel,</b> thereby including this sick person within the community of Israel. When <b>Shevna of Jerusalem</b> would visit a sick person on Shabbat, <b>upon entering, he would say</b> <i>shalom</i><b>. And when he exited he would say: It is Shabbat</b> when one is prohibited <b>to cry out, and healing is soon to come, and His compassion is abundant, and rest</b> on Shabbat <b>in peace.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>is</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: One who has a sick person in his house must include him among the sick people of Israel</b> in his prayer? <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion? <b>In accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Rabbi Ḥanina said: It was</b> only <b>with great difficulty that</b> the Sages <b>permitted to comfort the mourners and visit the sick on Shabbat,</b> as both the visitor and the comforter experience suffering on Shabbat. They permitted it only due to the mitzva involved in these activities. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: When we would follow Rabbi Elazar to inquire about</b> the health of <b>a sick person; sometimes he would say</b> in Hebrew: <b>May the Omnipresent remember you for peace</b>, <b>and sometimes he would say to him</b> in Aramaic: <b>May the all-Merciful remember you for peace.</b> He would say it in Aramaic when the sick person did not understand Hebrew (Rav Elazar Moshe Horovitz). The Gemara asks: <b>How did he do this,</b> pray in Aramaic? <b>Didn’t Rav Yehuda say: A person should never request</b> that <b>his needs</b> be met <b>in the Aramaic language</b>? <b>And,</b> similarly, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Anyone who requests</b> that <b>his needs</b> be met <b>in the Aramaic language</b>, <b>the ministering angels do not attend to him</b> to bring his prayer before God, <b>as the ministering angels are not familiar with the Aramaic language,</b> but only with the sacred tongue, Hebrew, exclusively. The Gemara responds: <b>A sick person is different.</b> He does not need the angels to bring his prayer before God because <b>the Divine Presence is with him.</b>

### Part 3
<b>As Rav Anan said</b> that <b>Rav said: From where is it derived that the Divine Presence cares for</b> and aids <b>the sick person? As it is stated: “God will support him on the bed of illness”</b> (Psalms 41:4). The Gemara comments: <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who enters to visit the sick person should sit neither on the bed nor on a chair; rather, he should wrap himself</b> in his prayer shawl with trepidation and awe, <b>and sit before</b> the sick person below him, <b>as the Divine Presence is above the head of the sick person, as it is stated: “God will support him on the bed of illness,”</b> and he must treat the Divine Presence with deference. On a similar note, <b>Rava said</b> that <b>Ravin said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the Holy One, Blessed be He, feeds the sick person</b> during his illness? <b>As it is stated: “God will support him on the bed of illness.”</b>

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna that <b>one may not read</b> a book <b>by candlelight</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabba said:</b> Since a decree was issued, there is no distinction whether or not the lamp was near enough to him to enable him to adjust the wick. The prohibition applies <b>even</b> if the lamp was <b>two statures</b> of a person <b>high, and even</b> as high as <b>two plow handles, and even</b> if it was as high as <b>ten houses one atop the other.</b> We learned in the mishna that one may not read, and the Gemara infers: <b>One may not read, but</b> for <b>two,</b> apparently, he may <b>well</b> do so. They will not violate any prohibition, as two people together will certainly not forget the Shabbat prohibition. The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>neither one nor two</b> are permitted to read by the light of the lamp? <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as there is room to distinguish between them and say that <b>here,</b> where two were permitted to read by candlelight, it is referring to a case where they are both engaged <b>in one matter</b> and will remind each other to refrain from adjusting the wick. <b>There,</b> where two were prohibited to read by candlelight it is referring to a case where they are engaged <b>in two</b> different <b>matters.</b> Since each is preoccupied with a different text, they will not pay attention and remind each other. <b>Rav Huna said: And with regard to a bonfire,</b> where everyone is sitting around it and not adjacent to it, <b>even</b> if they were <b>ten people, it is prohibited</b> to read by its light. When sitting around a bonfire, everyone sits at a distance from the others, and therefore they do not notice each other, and each is liable to adjust the firebrands to provide himself with more light.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said:</b> Even though they prohibited reading by candlelight due to a decree lest they adjust the wick, <b>if he is an important person, it is permitted,</b> as even on weekdays he is not accustomed to adjust a lamp that is dirty with oil. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which was taught in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may not read</b> a book on Shabbat <b>by the light of the lamp, lest he adjust it.</b> The <i>Tosefta</i> relates that <b>Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha said: I will read and will not adjust,</b> as I will certainly not forget that it is Shabbat. However, <b>once he read</b> a book by candlelight <b>and</b> he <b>sought to adjust</b> the wick. <b>He said: How great are the words of the Sages, who would say</b> that <b>one may not read by candlelight,</b> as even a person like me sought to adjust the wick. <b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> That was not the way it happened. Rather, <b>he read and</b> actually <b>adjusted</b> the wick, <b>and he wrote</b> afterward <b>in his notebook [<i>pinkas</i>]: I, Yishmael ben Elisha, read and adjusted a lamp on Shabbat. When the Temple will be rebuilt I will bring a fat sin-offering</b> as atonement for this sin. This proves that even an important person like Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha is liable to adjust the wick. <b>Rabbi Abba said: Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha is different, since with regard to the study of Torah, he comports himself like a simple man</b> with no air of importance, but generally, an important person would not dirty his hands and adjust the wick.

### Part 6
On this subject, the Gemara cites two apparently contradictory <i>baraitot</i>. <b>It was taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> that a <b>servant may examine cups and bowls by candlelight</b> to check if they are clean. <b>And it was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>he may not examine</b> them. The Gemara explains: This is <b>not difficult.</b> Rather, <b>here,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that prohibited examining the cups, is referring <b>to a regularly</b> employed <b>servant</b> who fears his master and examines the dishes meticulously. Therefore, there is concern lest he come to adjust the wick. While <b>there,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that permitted examining the cups, is referring <b>to a servant who is not regularly</b> employed, does not fear his master, and therefore will not check meticulously. There is no concern lest he come to adjust the wick. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are both referring <b>to a regularly</b> employed <b>servant. And</b> this is <b>not difficult,</b> as they are not referring to the same kind of lamp. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which prohibited examining the dishes, is referring <b>to an oil lamp,</b> where there is room for concern lest he adjust it. <b>And that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permitted examining the dishes, is referring <b>to a naphtha</b> [<b><i>nafta</i></b>] <b>lamp.</b> Since the naphtha lamp is dirty, the servant certainly will not touch it while checking the cups and dishes.

### Part 7
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the ruling with regard to <b>a servant who is not regularly</b> employed in terms of examining cups and dishes by the light of <b>an oil lamp?</b> Is he permitted to examine the cups by candlelight, or not? From the perspective of his being a servant not regularly employed, it should be permitted. On the other hand, because it is an oil lamp it should be prohibited. <b>Rav said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that it is permitted, <b>and,</b> however, <i>ab initio</i> <b>a</b> public <b>ruling is not issued to that effect</b> so that they will not come to sin. However, one who knows the <i>halakha</i> that it is permitted may practice accordingly. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba said: That <i>halakha</i> is</b> that it is permitted <b>and a</b> public <b>ruling is issued to that effect.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba happened to</b> come to <b>the house of Rav Asi</b> on Shabbat. Rabbi Yirmeya’s <b>servant stood and examined the cups by the light of a lamp</b> [<b><i>sheraga</i></b>], as he was not a regularly employed servant in the house of Rav Asi. Rav Asi’s <b>wife said to</b> Rav Asi: But <b>the Master,</b> you, <b>does not do so.</b> You prohibit doing so. Why is the servant of Rabbi Yirmeya examining the cups? <b>He said to her: Leave him, he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>his master.</b>

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna that <b>in truth they said</b> that <b>the attendant</b> sees where in the book the children under his supervision are reading, but he himself should not read. The Gemara asked: <b>Didn’t you say in the first clause</b> of the mishna that the attendant <b>sees? Doesn’t</b> that mean that he sees in order <b>to read?</b> How can that part of the mishna conclude by saying that he may not read? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it does not mean that the attendant is permitted to actually read; rather, he is only permitted <b>to</b> look and <b>arrange the beginning of his sections</b> of the Torah that <b>he</b> must read the next day. <b>And so too, Rabba bar Shmuel said: However, he may arrange the beginning of his sections</b> that he must read the next day. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> may he <b>not</b> read <b>the entire section?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC