
### Part 1
<b>that this is not its place,</b> as the previous portion does not discuss the nation’s travels. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: It is not for that</b> reason that signs were inserted. <b>Rather,</b> the signs are there <b>because</b> this portion <b>is considered a book unto itself.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>According to whose</b> opinion is <b>that</b> which <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said,</b> that with regard to the verse: “With wisdom she built her house, <b>she carved its seven pillars”</b> (Proverbs 9:1), <b>these are the seven books of the Torah? According to whose</b> opinion? It is <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, as by his count there are seven books of the Torah: Genesis; Exodus; Leviticus; Numbers until: “And when the Ark traveled”; the portion: “And when the Ark traveled,” which is considered its own book; the remainder of Numbers; and Deuteronomy.

### Part 3
<b>Who is</b> the <b>tanna who disagrees with Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>It is Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: In the future, this portion will be uprooted from here,</b> where it appears, <b>and will be written in its</b> proper <b>place. And why was it written here,</b> even though it discusses the travels of the children of Israel, and the portion before it does not? It is <b>in order to demarcate between the first punishment and the second punishment. What is the second punishment</b> that appears immediately afterward? It is the verse: <b>“And the people complained</b> wickedly in God’s ears, and God heard and became angry, and the fire of God burned in them and it consumed the edge of the camp” (Numbers 11:1). What is <b>the first punishment?</b> It is the verse: <b>“And they traveled from the mountain of God [<i>mehar Hashem</i>]</b> for three days” (Numbers 10:33), <b>and Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: That they turned from after God [<i>me’aḥarei Hashem</i>]</b> and hurriedly fled Mount Sinai. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if so, <b>where is</b> the proper <b>place</b> for this paragraph? <b>Rav Ashi said: In</b> the portion of the <b>flags,</b> where there is a description of the manner in which the Jewish people traveled through the desert.

### Part 4
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>the blank folios</b> of parchment <b>of a Torah scroll,</b> does <b>one rescue them from the fire</b> on Shabbat, <b>or</b> does <b>one not rescue them from the fire? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this from that which we learned: With regard to <b>a Torah scroll that is worn, if there is</b> enough <b>in it to compile eighty-five</b> complete <b>letters as in the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled,” one rescues</b> it from the fire, <b>and if not one does not rescue</b> it. If even the blank folios are rescued, <b>why</b> would one not rescue a Torah scroll with fewer than the requisite number of letters? <b>Derive</b> that this scroll may be rescued <b>due to its blank folios. The Gemara</b> answers: A Torah scroll that is <b>worn is different,</b> because at that point its sanctity is negated, and its blank folios are not sacred. Therefore, one may rescue the scroll only if it contains eighty-five letters.

### Part 5
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a different resolution from that which was taught in another <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a Torah scroll that was erased, if there is</b> enough <b>in it to compile eighty-five</b> complete <b>letters as in the portion of: “And when the Ark traveled,” one rescues</b> it from the fire, <b>and if not, one does not rescue</b> it. <b>And why</b> is that so? <b>Derive</b> that this scroll may be rescued <b>due to its blank folios,</b> as the erased section is surely no less significant than the blank folios of the scroll. The Gemara answers: That is not so. In a case where <b>the place of the writing</b> is erased <b>it is not a dilemma for me, as it is sacred due to</b> the <b>writing.</b> If the <b>writing is gone, its sanctity is gone. When it is a dilemma for me is</b> with regard to the blank portions that are <b>above and below, that are between</b> one <b>section and</b> another <b>section, that are between</b> one <b>page and</b> another <b>page, that are at the beginning of the scroll,</b> and <b>that are at the end of the scroll.</b> The Gemara asks again: <b>Derive</b> that this scroll may be rescued <b>due to that</b> area that is blank, whose sanctity remains. The Gemara replies: There, it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the blank area <b>was cut and thrown</b> out, and all that remains is the place of the writing.

### Part 6
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a different resolution from what we learned in a mishna: The Sages decreed that <b>the blank folios</b> that are <b>above and below, that are between</b> one <b>section and</b> another <b>section, that are between</b> one <b>page and</b> another <b>page, that are at the beginning of the scroll,</b> and <b>that are at the end of the scroll render the hands</b> that touch them <b>ritually impure.</b> Apparently, the blank folios have the sanctity of a Torah scroll. The Gemara replies: That is not a proof, as <b>perhaps</b> when it is <b>part of the Torah scroll, it is different,</b> and in those circumstances the sanctity of the Torah extends to the blank portions. When they stand alone they have no sanctity.

### Part 7
Therefore, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> a different resolution from that which was taught in another <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the blank folios and the</b> Torah <b>scrolls of heretics, one does not rescue them from the fire; rather, they burn in their place, they and the names</b> of God contained therein. <b>What,</b> is this <b>not</b> referring to the <b>blank folios</b> of <b>a Torah scroll?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is referring to the <b>blank folios</b> of <b>the scrolls of heretics.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>Now,</b> with regard to <b>the scrolls of heretics themselves, one does not rescue</b> them; is it <b>necessary</b> to say that one does not rescue their <b>blank folios?</b> Rather, <b>this is what it is saying: And the scrolls of heretics are like blank folios.</b>

### Part 8
Apropos the scrolls of heretics, the Gemara analyzes <b>the matter itself.</b> With regard to <b>the blank folios and the</b> Torah <b>scrolls of</b> the <b>heretics, one does not rescue them from the fire. Rabbi Yosei says: During the week, one cuts the names</b> of God contained <b>therein and buries them, and burns the rest. Rabbi Tarfon said</b> in the form of an oath: <b>I will bury my sons</b> if I fail to do the following, <b>that if</b> these books <b>come into my possession I will burn them and the names</b> contained <b>therein. As even</b> if <b>a person is pursuing him</b> with the intent <b>to kill him, and a snake is hurrying to bite him, one enters a house of idolatry and does not enter the houses of these</b> heretics. The reason is <b>that these</b> heretics <b>are aware</b> of the greatness of the Creator manifest in the Torah and its mitzvot, <b>and</b> nevertheless, they <b>deny</b> the existence of God; <b>whereas these</b> idolators <b>are not aware, and</b> that is the reason that they <b>deny</b> the existence of God. <b>And with regard to the</b> heretics, <b>the verse says: “And behind the door and the doorpost you place your memory”</b> (Isaiah 57:8). Although they remember the word of God, they treat it contemptuously, as if casting it behind the door.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yishmael said:</b> The fact that the names of God in the scrolls of heretics may be burned can be derived through an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>Just as to make peace between a husband and his wife,</b> the <b>Torah says: My name that was written in sanctity shall be erased in the water</b> in the framework of the ordeal of the <i>sota</i>; <b>these,</b> the heretics, <b>who impose jealousy, and hatred, and conflict between the Jewish people and their Father in Heaven, all the more so</b> it is proper to erase God’s names because of them. <b>And with regard to</b> heretics, <b>David said: “For I hate those who hate You, God, and I fight those who rise against You. I hate them with the utmost hatred, they have become enemies to me”</b> (Psalms 139:21–22). <b>And just as they,</b> the scrolls of heretics, <b>are not rescued from the fire, neither are they rescued from a rockslide, nor from water, nor from</b> any other <b>matter that destroys them.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Yosef bar Ḥanin raised a dilemma before Rabbi Abbahu:</b> With regard to <b>these books of the house of Abidan,</b> does <b>one rescue them from the fire or</b> does <b>one not rescue</b> them? There were sacred Jewish texts in that house, which were used in debates and discussions on matters of faith. Rabbi Abbahu did not give him a clear answer but said <b>yes and no, and</b> the matter was <b>uncertain to him. Rav would not go to the house of Abidan</b> for conversation, <b>and all the more so</b> he would not go <b>to the house of Nitzrefei,</b> the Persian fire-temple. <b>Shmuel, to the house of Nitzrefei he did not go,</b> but <b>to the house of Abidan he did go.</b> The gentile scholars <b>said to Rava: Why did you not come to the house of Abidan?</b> He evaded their question with an excuse and <b>said to them: There is a certain palm tree on the road, and</b> that makes the path <b>difficult for me.</b> They said to him: <b>We will uproot it.</b> He said to them: Nevertheless, the resulting pit in <b>its place</b> will be <b>difficult for me. Mar bar Yosef said: I am</b> one <b>of them,</b> we are friends, <b>and I do not fear them.</b> Still, <b>one time he went</b> and argued with them and <b>they sought to endanger his</b> life. <b>Rabbi Meir would call</b> the Christian writing, the Evangelion, the <b>wicked folio [<i>aven gilyon</i>]; Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> called it the <b>sinful folio [<i>avon gilyon</i>].</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Imma Shalom,</b> the <b>wife</b> of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, was Rabban Gamliel’s sister. There was</b> a Christian <b>philosopher [<i>pilosofa</i>] in their neighborhood</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC