
### Part 1
Is it <b>because Jupiter is</b> situated <b>in the west</b> that you cannot have children? <b>I will restore</b> it <b>and establish</b> it <b>in the east. And that is</b> the meaning of <b>that which is written</b> with regard to Abraham: <b>“Who has raised up one from the east, he will call justice [<i>tzedek</i>] to his steps [<i>leraglo</i>].</b> He gives nations before him, and makes him rule over kings; his sword makes them as the dust, his bow as the driven stubble” (Isaiah 41:2). God established Jupiter [<i>tzedek</i>] in the east on behalf of [<i>leraglo</i>] Abraham.

### Part 2
<b>And from</b> that which transpired to <b>Shmuel,</b> one can <b>also</b> conclude that <b>there is no constellation for the Jewish people.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>Shmuel and</b> the gentile sage <b>Ablet were sitting, and</b> they saw <b>these people were going to the lake. Ablet said to Shmuel: This person will go and he will not return,</b> because <b>a snake will bite him and he will die. Shmuel said to him: If he is a Jew, he will go and come back. As they were sitting</b> for a while, the person they discussed <b>went</b> away <b>and</b> then <b>returned.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Ablet stood up, threw down</b> the person’s <b>burden, and inside he found a snake cut and cast in two pieces. Shmuel said to him: What did you do</b> to merit being saved from death? The person <b>said to him: Every day we all take bread</b> together <b>and eat</b> from the bread. <b>Today, there was one of us who did not have bread,</b> and when it came time to gather the bread, <b>he was embarrassed</b> because he did not have any to give. <b>I said to</b> the others: <b>I will go and take</b> the bread. <b>When I came to</b> the person who did not have bread, <b>I rendered myself as one who was taking from him so that he would not be embarrassed.</b> Shmuel <b>said to him: You performed a mitzva. Shmuel went out and taught</b> based on this incident that even though it is written: <b>“And charity will save from death”</b> (Proverbs 10:2), it does <b>not</b> only mean that it will save a person <b>from an unusual death but</b> even <b>from death itself.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And from</b> that which transpired to <b>Rabbi Akiva as well</b> it can be derived that <b>there is no constellation for the Jewish people, as Rabbi Akiva had a daughter, and Chaldean</b> astrologers <b>told him</b> that <b>on the same day that she enters the wedding canopy, a snake will bite her and she will die. She was very worried about this. On that day,</b> her wedding day, <b>she took</b> the ornamental <b>pin</b> from her hair <b>and stuck it</b> into a hole <b>in the wall</b> for safekeeping, and <b>it happened</b> that it <b>entered</b> directly <b>into the eye of the snake. In the morning, when she took</b> the pin, <b>the snake was pulled and came out with it.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Her father</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to her: What did you do</b> to merit being saved from the snake? She told him: <b>In the evening a poor person came and knocked on the door, and everyone was preoccupied with the feast and nobody heard him. I stood</b> and <b>took the portion that you had given me</b> and <b>gave it to him.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to her: You performed a mitzva,</b> and you were saved in its merit. <b>Rabbi Akiva went out and taught</b> based on this incident that even though it is written: <b>“And charity will save from death”</b> (Proverbs 10:2), it does <b>not</b> mean that it will save a person only <b>from an unusual death, but</b> even <b>from death itself.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And from</b> that which transpired to <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak as well</b> it can be derived that <b>there is no constellation for the Jewish people, As Chaldean</b> astrologers <b>told Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak’s mother: Your son will be a thief. She did not allow him</b> to <b>uncover his head. She said to</b> her son: <b>Cover your head so that the fear of Heaven will be upon you, and pray for</b> Divine <b>mercy. He did not know why she said</b> this <b>to him. One day he was sitting and studying beneath a palm tree</b> that did not belong to him, and <b>the cloak fell off of his head. He lifted his eyes</b> and <b>saw the palm tree. He was overcome by impulse</b> and <b>he climbed up and detached a bunch of dates with his teeth.</b> Apparently, he had an inborn inclination to steal, but was able to overcome that inclination with proper education and prayer.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may cut the pumpkins before an animal</b> on Shabbat, as long as they were picked prior to Shabbat. <b>And</b> likewise one may cut <b>an</b> animal <b>carcass before the dogs</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If it was not</b> already <b>a carcass,</b> i.e., it was not dead, <b>prior to Shabbat, it is prohibited</b> to cut it or even move it on Shabbat <b>because it is not prepared</b> for use on Shabbat.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> A dispute between the <i>amora’im</i> with regard to the prohibition of set-aside on Shabbat <b>was stated. <i>Ayin</i>, <i>reish</i>, <i>lamed</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>zayin</i></b> is a <b>mnemonic</b> for the names of the <i>amora’im</i> who stated the following <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Ulla said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that there is a prohibition of set-aside on Shabbat. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And Rav also holds</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> From where is it ascertained that this is Rav’s opinion? <b>From that which</b> was taught with regard to <b>the mats that are</b> on <b>ships; Rav prohibited</b> moving them on Shabbat due to the prohibition of set-aside, <b>and Shmuel permitted</b> moving them. <b>And Levi also holds</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as</b> can be seen from his practice when <b>they would bring a</b> slaughtered animal with regard to which there was concern that it was <b>an animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>], before Levi on a Festival. He would</b> examine it <b>only when he was sitting</b> near <b>a garbage</b> dump, <b>as he said: Perhaps it would not be</b> determined to be <b>kosher and</b> it would <b>not be suited even for dogs,</b> and then it would be prohibited to move the carcass. Apparently, he holds that it is prohibited to move a carcass that was not prepared for use before Shabbat.

### Part 10
<b>And Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the prohibition of set-aside does not apply on Shabbat. <b>And Ze’eiri also holds</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>an animal that died</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may not move it from its place</b> on Shabbat. <b>And Ze’eiri explained:</b> This prohibition only applies <b>to a consecrated animal,</b> as consecrated items may not be fed to dogs in deference to their sanctity; therefore, it is set-aside and may not be moved on Shabbat. <b>However, in</b> the case of <b>a non-sacred</b> animal, one may <b>well</b> move it and use it because it does not have set-aside status. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan also said</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> really <b>say that? Didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with an unattributed mishna, and we learned</b> in a mishna:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC