
### Part 1
<b>as there is honey</b> in the beehive during the summer. However, <b>during the rainy season in which there is not honey</b> in the beehive, <b>what can be said</b> according to Rabbi Yitzḥak to explain why it is permitted to cover the beehive at that time? The Gemara answers: This <i>halakha</i> <b>is only applicable</b> in order to permit covering the beehive for <b>those two honeycombs</b> that remain in the hive even during the rainy season so that the bees can feed off of them. The Gemara asks: <b>Aren’t</b> these honeycombs <b>set aside</b> for the bees alone? The Gemara responds: This is a case <b>where one thought of them</b> before Shabbat and, in his mind, prepared them to be eaten. The Gemara asks: By inference, if <b>one did not think about them, what</b> would be the ruling? It would be <b>prohibited</b> to cover the beehive.

### Part 2
<b>If so, this</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>who taught</b> in that same <i>baraita</i>: <b>As long as he does not intend to trap</b> the bees, <b>let him distinguish and teach with regard to</b> that same <i>halakha</i> <b>itself: In what case are these matters stated,</b> that one is permitted to cover the hive? It is in a case <b>where he thought of them</b> before Shabbat. <b>However, if he did not think of them,</b> it is <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us</b> a novel understanding. <b>Even though he thought of them</b> before Shabbat, it is only permitted <b>as long as he did not intend to trap</b> them.

### Part 3
With regard to the matter itself, the Gemara asks: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>If</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, he does not hold</b> that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside.</b> Consequently, there is no distinction between the different beehives. <b>If</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, when</b> he <b>does not have intention</b> to trap the bees, <b>what</b> of it? <b>Doesn’t</b> Rabbi Yehuda hold that even an <b>unintentional act is prohibited?</b> The Gemara replies: <b>Actually,</b> this <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. What</b> does: <b>And as long as one does not intend to trap</b> the bees, mean? It means <b>that one should not make</b> the mat <b>like a trap.</b> He must <b>leave space so that</b> the bees <b>will not get trapped on their own.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> that it can be resolved differently: <b>Did</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach: In the summer and in the rainy season?</b> Actually, <b>it taught: In the sun due to the sun and in the rain due to the rain.</b> That can be interpreted as follows: <b>In the days of Nisan and in the days of Tishrei, as</b> then <b>there is sun</b> shining <b>and there is</b> also <b>cold</b> weather; <b>and there is rain and there is honey</b> in the beehives.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Sheshet said to</b> the Sages: <b>Go out and tell Rabbi Yitzḥak</b> in Eretz Yisrael: <b>Rav Huna already explained your <i>halakha</i> in Babylonia.</b> There is nothing novel in the principle that you established that a vessel may only be moved for the sake of something that may be moved, <b>as Rav Huna said: One may make a partition for the dead for</b> the benefit of <b>a living person, and one may not make a partition for the dead for</b> the benefit of the <b>dead person.</b> It is prohibited to move objects for the sake of a corpse because it is prohibited to move the corpse itself on Shabbat.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the practical application of this <i>halakha</i>? As <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda said, and likewise</b> the Sage, <b>Sheila Mari taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A corpse that is laid out in the sun</b> and there is concern that it will putrefy and smell, what can be done? <b>Two people come and sit beside it.</b> After a while, when <b>they</b> feel <b>hot from beneath</b> them, <b>this</b> one <b>brings a bed and sits on it and that</b> one <b>brings a bed and sits on it</b> on either side of the corpse, as they are permitted to carry the beds for their own use. When <b>they</b> feel <b>hot from above</b> them, <b>they bring a mat and spread it over their</b> heads. Then, <b>this</b> one <b>stands his bed up</b> so the mat will remain resting atop it <b>and slips away and leaves, and that</b> one <b>stands his bed up and slips away and leaves, and a partition is then created</b> over the corpse as if <b>on its own</b> without erecting it directly for the sake of the corpse. Apparently, the Sages did not permit carrying a mat to cover a corpse for the sake of the corpse. They only permitted doing so in an indirect manner for the benefit of the living.

### Part 7
Incidental to the mention of <i>halakhot</i> related to a corpse on Shabbat, the Gemara cites an amoraic dispute in which <b>it was stated: A corpse that was laid out in the sun, Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One turns it over from bed to bed</b> until it reaches the shade. <b>Rav Hanina bar Shelamiyya said in the name</b> of <b>Rav: One places a loaf</b> of bread <b>or an infant on</b> the corpse <b>and moves it.</b> The corpse becomes a base for an object that one is permitted to move on Shabbat and, consequently, one may move the corpse due to the permitted object. The Gemara adds: In a case <b>where there is a loaf or an infant, everyone agrees that it is permitted</b> to use that method to move the corpse. <b>Where they argue</b> is in a case <b>where he does not have</b> a loaf or an infant. <b>One Sage,</b> Rav, <b>holds: Moving</b> an object <b>in an atypical manner is considered</b> a bona fide act of <b>moving.</b> Therefore, one may not move the corpse by passing it from bed to bed. <b>And the</b> other <b>Sage,</b> Shmuel, <b>holds</b> that moving an object in an atypical manner <b>is not considered moving.</b> Therefore, it is permitted to move a corpse by passing it from bed to bed.

### Part 8
With regard to this dispute between Rav and Shmuel, the Gemara remarks: <b>Let us say</b> that this dispute is <b>parallel</b> to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>. The Rabbis said: <b>One may not rescue a corpse from a fire</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Lakish said: I heard that one may rescue a corpse from a fire.</b> The Gemara seeks to clarify the matter: <b>What are the circumstances? If there is a loaf or an infant</b> available, <b>what is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of the first <i>tanna,</i></b> who prohibited rescuing the corpse from the fire? <b>If there is not</b> a loaf or an infant, <b>what is the reason</b> of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Lakish</b> who permits rescuing the corpse from the fire? <b>Rather, is it not</b> that <b>they disagree over moving</b> an object <b>in an atypical manner? As</b> this <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b>moving</b> an object <b>in an atypical manner is considered moving.</b> Therefore, it is prohibited to rescue the corpse in that manner. <b>And this Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Lakish, <b>holds</b> that <b>moving</b> an object <b>in an atypical manner is not considered moving.</b> Therefore, it is permitted to rescue the corpse in this manner. The amoraic dispute deals with an issue already disputed by the <i>tanna’im</i>. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, everyone,</b> both <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>agrees that moving</b> an object <b>in an atypical manner is considered moving. Rather, this is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda ben Lakish: Since a person is agitated about his deceased</b> relative and is concerned about maintaining the dignity of the dead,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC