
### Part 1
Rabba’s statement is <b>according to this <i>tanna</i></b> in the <i>baraita</i>, who referred to those who violated a rabbinic decree as transgressors.

### Part 2
It was taught in a <i>Tosefta</i>: In <b>bathhouses in cities, one may stroll through them and,</b> even if he sweats while doing so, <b>need not be concerned. Rava said:</b> This applies <b>specifically</b> to bathhouses in <b>cities; but in villages, no,</b> it does not apply. <b>What is the reason</b> for this distinction? <b>Since</b> the bathhouses in the villages <b>are small, their heat is great,</b> and even merely walking through them will certainly cause one to sweat.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught: One may warm himself opposite a bonfire</b> on Shabbat <b>and emerge and rinse in cold</b> water <b>as long as he does not</b> first <b>rinse in cold</b> water <b>and</b> then <b>warm himself opposite the bonfire.</b> This is prohibited <b>because he</b> thereby <b>warms</b> the <b>water on his</b> body and renders it lukewarm. <b>The Sages</b> also <b>taught: A person</b> whose intestines are painful <b>may heat up a towel [<i>aluntit</i>] and place it on</b> his <b>intestines</b> even <b>on Shabbat.</b> This is permitted <b>as long as one does not bring a kettle of water and place it on his intestines on Shabbat,</b> lest the water spill and he come to wring it out (<i>Tosafot</i>), which is a prohibited labor on Shabbat. <b>And</b> placing a kettle directly on his intestines <b>is prohibited even on a weekday due to the danger</b> involved. If the water is extremely hot it could spill and scald him.

### Part 4
Similarly, <b>the Sages taught: One may bring a jug [<i>kiton</i>]</b> full of cold <b>water and place it opposite the bonfire</b> on Shabbat; <b>not so that</b> the water <b>will heat up,</b> as it is prohibited to cook on Shabbat, <b>rather to temper the cold,</b> as one is permitted to render water less cold on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: A woman may take a cruse of oil and place it opposite the bonfire; not so</b> the oil <b>will cook, rather, so it will warm</b> until it is lukewarm. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: A woman may smear</b> her <b>hand</b> with <b>oil, and heat it opposite the fire, and</b> afterward <b>smear her young son</b> with the heated oil, <b>and she need not be concerned</b> about cooking on Shabbat.

### Part 5
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to heating <b>oil</b> in this manner on Shabbat, <b>what is its</b> legal status <b>according to the first <i>tanna,</i></b> who permits doing so with water? Does he permit oil as well? <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both said</b> that the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is <b>to permit</b> doing so in the case of oil. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is <b>to prohibit</b> doing so. <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both said</b> that the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is <b>to permit</b> doing so. The Gemara explains the dispute in the mishna: <b>Oil, even though</b> it is heated to the point at which <b>the hand</b> spontaneously <b>recoils [<i>soledet</i>] from its</b> heat, <b>is permitted</b> to be heated in this manner. The reason is because the <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>oil is not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking.</b> Cooking oil to its boiling point requires a very high temperature; merely heating it is not considered cooking. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda came to say</b> that <b>oil is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking; however, warming it</b> to a lukewarm temperature <b>is not</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it.</b> Therefore, it is permitted to place a jar of oil near the fire in order to raise its temperature, though it is prohibited to heat it to the point of cooking. <b>And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel came to say</b> that <b>oil is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking, and warming it is</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it.</b> He permitted it only in the specific case of a woman who smeared her hand with oil, heated it, and smeared her son with it.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is <b>to prohibit</b> doing so. He explains the dispute in the following manner: According to the first <i>tanna</i>, with regard to <b>oil, even if</b> the heat is <b>not</b> so great that <b>the hand</b> spontaneously <b>recoils from it, it is prohibited</b> to heat it. <b>He holds</b> that <b>oil is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking, and warming it is</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it. And Rabbi Yehuda came to say,</b> leniently, that <b>warming it is not</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it. And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel came</b> to disagree with Rabbi Yehuda and <b>to say</b> that <b>oil is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking, and warming it is</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it.</b> The Gemara questions: According to this explanation, the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel is</b> identical to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>.</b> What is the difference between them? The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> in a case where this is done <b>in a backhanded</b> manner, i.e., not as it is typically done. According to the first <i>tanna,</i> it is totally prohibited to heat the oil, whereas according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, it is permitted to heat the oil in a backhanded manner.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is: With regard to <b>both oil and water,</b> heating either one to the point where the <b>hand</b> spontaneously <b>recoils from it is prohibited.</b> Heating either one to the point where the <b>hand does not</b> spontaneously <b>recoil from it is permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what are the circumstances</b> in which <b>a hand</b> spontaneously <b>recoils from it?</b> Not all hands are equal in their sensitivity to heat. The Sage, <b>Raḥava, said: Any</b> water that could cause <b>a baby’s stomach</b> to be <b>scalded</b> is considered water from which the hand spontaneously recoils.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said: One time I followed Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>into the bathhouse</b> on Shabbat to assist him, <b>and I sought to place a jar of oil in the bathtub for him,</b> to heat the oil somewhat before rubbing it on him. <b>And he said to me: Take</b> water from the bath <b>in a secondary vessel and place</b> the oil into it. The Gemara remarks: <b>Learn from this</b> comment of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>three</b> <i>halakhot</i>: <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>oil is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>cooking.</b> This explains why he prohibited placing it in the bathtub. <b>And learn from it</b> that <b>a secondary vessel</b> is not hot and <b>does not cook. And learn from it</b> with regard to oil that <b>warming it is</b> tantamount to <b>cooking it.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara is astonished by this story: <b>How did</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>do this?</b> How did he teach his student <i>halakha</i> in the bathhouse? <b>Didn’t Rabba bar bar Ḥana say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: In all places, it is permitted to contemplate</b> Torah matters <b>except for the bathhouse and the bathroom? And if you say</b> that <b>he spoke to him in a secular language, didn’t Abaye say: Secular matters are permitted to be spoken in the sacred language,</b> Hebrew, even in the bathhouse, and <b>sacred matters may not be spoken</b> in the bathhouse even <b>in a secular language?</b> The Gemara answers: It was permitted for Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi to conduct himself in that manner because he was <b>preventing</b> an individual <b>from</b> violating <b>a prohibition,</b> which <b>is different.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Know</b> that this is so, as <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> There was <b>an incident where a student of Rabbi Meir followed him into the bathhouse</b> on Shabbat <b>and sought to rinse</b> the <b>floor</b> in order to clean it. <b>And</b> Rabbi Meir <b>said to him: One may not rinse</b> the floor on Shabbat. The student asked if it was permitted <b>to smear</b> the <b>floor</b> with oil. <b>He said to him: One may not smear</b> the floor with oil. <b>Apparently, preventing</b> one <b>from</b> violating <b>a prohibition is different. Here too,</b> in the incident involving Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>preventing</b> one <b>from</b> violating <b>a prohibition is different</b> and permitted.

### Part 11
<b>Ravina said: Learn from it</b> that <b>one who cooks in the hot springs of Tiberias on Shabbat is liable, as the incident</b> with <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>was after the decree, and he said to</b> his student: <b>Take</b> hot water <b>in a secondary vessel and place</b> the oil into it. Had he cooked the oil in the hot water itself, he would have violated a Torah prohibition. Since the incident with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi took place after the Sages issued a decree to prohibit bathing in hot water on Shabbat, it must have taken place in a bath in the hot springs of Tiberias. The Gemara challenges this: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Ḥisda say</b> that <b>one who cooks in the Tiberias hot springs on Shabbat is not liable?</b> The Gemara answers: There is no contradiction. <b>What, too,</b> is the meaning of the term <b>liable that</b> Ravina <b>said?</b> It does not mean that one who cooked in the hot springs of Tiberias is liable to be stoned or to bring a sin-offering like one who violates a Torah prohibition. Rather, it means liable to receive <b>lashes</b> for <b>rebelliousness,</b> which one receives for intentionally violating rabbinic decrees.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: I saw Rabbi Abbahu floating in a bath</b> on Shabbat, <b>and I do not know if he lifted</b> his feet and was actually swimming in the water, or <b>if he did not lift</b> his feet. The Gemara questions Rabbi Zeira’s uncertainty. <b>It is obvious</b> that <b>he did not lift</b> his feet, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not float in a pool full of water</b> on Shabbat, <b>and even</b> if the pool <b>was in a courtyard,</b> where there is no room for concern lest he violate a prohibition. This is <b>not difficult; this</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring to a place

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC