
### Part 1
<b>and</b> the Temple <b>service overrides Shabbat,</b> as Shabbat offerings are sacrificed at their appointed time, and nevertheless <b>circumcision overrides</b> leprosy, i.e., if there were symptoms of leprosy on the foreskin of the baby, one circumcises the child even though he thereby violates the prohibition to cut off symptoms of leprosy; therefore, with regard to <b>Shabbat, which is overridden by the</b> Temple <b>service, is it not logical that circumcision,</b> which is so stringent that it overrides leprosy, <b>overrides</b> Shabbat as well? This was the <i>tanna’s</i> reasoning at the outset.

### Part 2
<b>And what</b> was the reason the <i>tanna</i> <b>said: Or perhaps,</b> and questioned his previous statement? <b>He reconsidered</b> and <b>said: And from where</b> do we know <b>that leprosy is</b> more <b>stringent</b> than Shabbat? <b>Perhaps Shabbat is</b> more <b>stringent, as it includes</b> the severe <b>punishments</b> of <i>karet</i> and execution by stoning, <b>and numerous warnings</b> pertaining to it throughout the Torah. <b>Alternatively, and from where</b> do we know that the reason the Temple service does not override the prohibition of leprosy is specifically <b>because leprosy is</b> more <b>stringent</b> than the Temple service? <b>Perhaps</b> the Temple service does not override the prohibition of leprosy <b>because a man</b> afflicted with leprosy <b>is unfit</b> to perform the Temple service and not due to the stringency of the prohibition to remove symptoms of leprosy from one’s body. <b>And</b> if so, <b>how do I establish</b> the verse: “And on the <b>eighth</b> day the flesh of his foreskin <b>shall be circumcised”</b> (Leviticus 12:3)? That it applies to days <b>other than Shabbat.</b> Consequently, the <i>tanna</i> cited additional proof from that which <b>the Torah states: “On the day,”</b> indicating that circumcision is performed <b>even on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught: Circumcision overrides leprosy.</b> The foreskin is cut even if it has symptoms of leprosy on it, despite the fact that there is a Torah prohibition to cut off symptoms of leprosy. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>both</b> when the circumcision takes place <b>at its</b> appointed <b>time,</b> on the eighth day, or <b>when it is not</b> performed <b>at its</b> appointed <b>time</b> but after the eighth day. However, circumcision <b>overrides a Festival only</b> when performed <b>at its</b> appointed <b>time.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: “And on the eighth day <b>the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised”</b> (Leviticus 12:3), since this verse is stated in general terms, it teaches that <b>even though there is a bright white</b> leprous <b>spot there, he should cut it. And how do I establish</b> the verse: <b>“Take care with regard to the plague of leprosy</b> to take great care and to perform in accordance with all that the priests, the Levites, instruct you; as I commanded them you shall take care to perform” (Deuteronomy 24:8)? Does usage of the term “take care” indicate that there is a negative mitzva that prohibits cutting off symptoms of leprosy? We establish this prohibition as applying <b>in other places, other than</b> the place of a <b>circumcision.</b>

### Part 5
The <i>tanna</i> asks: <b>Or</b> perhaps <b>that is not</b> the case; <b>rather,</b> this prohibition applies <b>even</b> in the place of <b>circumcision, and how do I validate</b> the verse: <b>“The flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised”?</b> It applies <b>when there is no bright white</b> leprous <b>spot</b> on the foreskin. So that we will not interpret the verse that way, <b>the verse states</b> the superfluous word <b>flesh.</b> It would have been sufficient to state: His foreskin shall be circumcised, but instead the verse stated: “The flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised,” indicating that the foreskin must be removed <b>even though there is a bright white spot there.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rava said: Initially, what</b> did <b>this <i>tanna</i></b> find <b>acceptable, and ultimately, what</b> did <b>he</b> find <b>difficult?</b> At first he assumed that the mitzva of circumcision is more stringent, but he ultimately rejected this assumption with no explanation.

### Part 7
Rather, <b>this is what he is saying:</b> Initially he held that the phrase: <b>The flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised</b> teaches that it is permitted to remove the foreskin <b>even though there is a bright white spot</b> there. <b>And how do I validate</b> the following verse: <b>Take care with regard to the plague of leprosy?</b> It applies <b>in other places, aside from</b> the place of <b>circumcision, but circumcision overrides leprosy. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>It is derived by</b> means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: Just as Shabbat</b> is <b>stringent</b> and nevertheless <b>circumcision overrides it, all the more so</b> that circumcision overrides <b>leprosy,</b> which is less stringent than Shabbat.

### Part 8
<b>And what</b> was the reason for the term <b>or perhaps that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying</b> to question his previous statement? <b>He reconsidered</b> and <b>said: From where</b> do we know <b>that Shabbat is</b> more <b>stringent? Perhaps leprosy is</b> more <b>stringent, as</b> leprosy <b>overrides the</b> Temple <b>service,</b> as stated earlier, <b>and the</b> Temple <b>service overrides Shabbat.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> the additional word <b>flesh,</b> to teach that the foreskin is removed <b>even though there is a bright white</b> leprous <b>spot there.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara cites <b>another version</b> of Rava’s comments. Initially the <i>tanna</i> thought that <b>circumcision overrides leprosy. What is the reason</b> for this? He relied on the principle <b>that a positive</b> mitzva <b>comes and overrides a negative</b> mitzva. <b>And what</b> was the reason the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: Or perhaps</b> to question his previous statement? <b>He reconsidered</b> and <b>said: Say that we say that a positive</b> mitzva <b>comes and overrides a negative</b> mitzva when there is <b>a negative</b> mitzva <b>alone.</b> However, <b>this</b> cutting off leprosy <b>is</b> prohibited by both <b>a positive</b> mitzva <b>and a negative</b> mitzva. <b>And how do I establish</b> the verse: <b>The flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised?</b> It applies only <b>when there is no bright white spot on</b> the foreskin. Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> the additional word <b>flesh</b> in order to emphasize that the foreskin is removed, <b>even though there is a bright white spot there.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara questions the derivation from the word flesh: This <b>works out well</b> with regard to the circumcision of <b>an adult</b> who has not yet been circumcised, <b>as</b> the word <b>flesh is written with regard to</b> adults in the verse: “And an uncircumcised male who will not circumcise the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from its people; My covenant he has broken” (Genesis 17:14). Similarly, it works out well with regard to <b>a minor</b> who is circumcised on the eighth day, as the superfluous word <b>flesh is also written</b> with regard to him. However, with regard to a person at an <b>intermediate</b> stage of life, i.e., a child who was not circumcised on the eighth day but has not yet reached majority, <b>from where do we derive</b> that his circumcision overrides leprosy? The Torah explicitly mandates his circumcision: “Circumcise for yourselves every male” (Genesis 17:10). However, that verse does not employ the term flesh.

### Part 11
<b>Abaye said: It is derived from a combination</b> of the two sources about the status of a child at the intermediate stage, from the common denominator between an eight-day-old and one who reached majority. <b>From an adult</b> alone, the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an intermediate child <b>cannot be derived, as</b> an adult <b>is punishable by <i>karet</i></b> if he fails to circumcise himself, but an intermediate child is not punishable by <i>karet</i>. Likewise, <b>from</b> the case of <b>an</b> eight-day-old <b>child,</b> the case of an intermediate child <b>cannot be derived; since</b> the <b>circumcision at its time</b> overrides Shabbat it may also override leprosy. However, the <b>common denominator</b> between an eight-day-old and an adult <b>is that they are circumcised and</b> their circumcision <b>overrides leprosy. So too, all who are circumcised,</b> including those in the intermediate stage, <b>override leprosy.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rava said: No verse is required</b> to teach that <b>circumcision at its</b> appointed <b>time overrides</b> leprosy, as it <b>is derived by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: Just as</b> circumcision <b>overrides Shabbat, which is</b> more <b>stringent than</b> leprosy, <b>all the more so</b> that circumcision overrides <b>leprosy.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rav Safra said to Rava: From where</b> do we know that <b>Shabbat is</b> more <b>stringent? Perhaps leprosy is</b> more <b>stringent, as</b> leprosy <b>overrides the</b> Temple <b>service, and the</b> Temple <b>service overrides Shabbat.</b> Rava answered: <b>There,</b> when leprosy overrides the Temple service, <b>it is not because leprosy is</b> more <b>stringent; rather,</b> it is <b>because the man</b> afflicted with leprosy <b>is unfit</b> for the Temple service. Rav Safra asked: <b>Why</b> is he unfit? <b>Let him cut off his bright white</b> leprous <b>spot and serve.</b> Rava answered: He would remain unfit to serve, as <b>he is lacking immersion.</b> In order to purify himself for service in the Temple, he must immerse himself and wait until the following day. In the meantime he is unfit.

### Part 14
Rav Safra raised a difficulty: <b>It works out well</b> if we are referring to <b>impure</b> symptoms of <b>leprosy,</b> as even one who removes them must immerse afterward. However, with regard to <b>pure</b> symptoms of <b>leprosy,</b> there is a prohibition to cut off the symptoms even though there is no impurity. They have the legal status of blemishes that invalidate a priest from serving until it is cured. Once the bright white spot is removed, he may immediately serve in the Temple without immersion. <b>What is there to say</b> in that case?

### Part 15
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi said</b> that this is the reason that leprosy overrides the Temple service: <b>Where do we say that a positive</b> mitzva <b>overrides a negative</b> mitzva? It is in cases <b>like circumcision in</b> a case of <b>leprosy,</b> or <b>alternatively, ritual fringes and diverse kinds</b> of wool and linen, <b>as at the time the negative</b> mitzva <b>is uprooted,</b> the <b>positive</b> mitzva <b>is fulfilled</b> in the very same action, e.g., when the ritual fringes are woolen and will be attached to a linen garment, a prohibited mixture is created. However, <b>here,</b> in the case of a person afflicted with pure symptoms of leprosy cutting off his symptoms to enable his involvement in the Temple service, it is different, <b>at the time the negative</b> mitzva <b>is uprooted,</b> the <b>positive</b> mitzva <b>is not</b> yet <b>fulfilled,</b> as cutting off the symptoms is only a preliminary action that enables him to serve. In that case, the positive mitzva does not override the negative one.

### Part 16
The Gemara points out that <b>this</b> disagreement between <b>Rava and Rav Safra</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC