### Part 1
<b>as you do not clean</b> yourselves <b>with an earthenware shard, and you do not kill lice on your garments, and you do not pull out a vegetable and eat it</b> before you untie <b>the bundle that was tied by the gardener?</b> This implies that all these actions carry with them the danger of witchcraft.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Huna said to his son Rabba: What is the reason that you are not</b> to be <b>found</b> among those who study <b>before Rav Ḥisda, whose <i>halakhot</i> are incisive?</b> Rabba <b>said to him:</b> For <b>what</b> purpose <b>should I go to him? When I go to him, he sits me down</b> and occupies me <b>in mundane matters</b> not related to Torah. For example, <b>he said to me: One who enters a bathroom should not sit down immediately and should not exert</b> himself <b>excessively</b> because <b>the rectum rests upon three teeth,</b> the muscles that hold it in place, and there is concern <b>lest the teeth of</b> the <b>rectum dislocate</b> through exertion <b>and he come to danger.</b> Rav Huna <b>said</b> to his son Rabba: <b>He is dealing with</b> matters crucial to <b>human life, and you say</b> that he is dealing <b>with mundane matters?</b> Now that I know what you meant, <b>all the more so go before him.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara continues to discuss these <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Rav Huna said:</b> One who relieves himself and needs to wipe and <b>has before him a stone and an earthenware</b> shard, <b>wipes with the stone and does not wipe with the earthenware</b> shard, since he might injure himself. <b>And Rav Ḥisda said: He wipes with the earthenware</b> shard <b>and does not wipe with the stone,</b> which is set-aside. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one had before him a stone and an earthenware</b> shard, <b>he wipes with the earthenware</b> shard <b>and does not wipe with the stone.</b> That is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Rav Huna. Rafram bar Pappa explained it before Rav Ḥisda in accordance</b> with the opinion <b>of Rav Huna:</b> It is not referring to earthenware shards, but to <b>the</b> smooth <b>rims of vessels,</b> which pose no danger.

### Part 4
<b>There were before him a stone and grasses.</b> With regard to the preferred method to wipe on Shabbat, what is the ruling? There is a dispute between <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rav Hamnuna. One said: He wipes with the stone and does not wipe with the grasses; and one said: He wipes with the grasses and does not wipe with the stone.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who wipes with something flammable, his lower teeth,</b> which hold the intestines in place, <b>fall out.</b> How then, may one clean himself with grasses? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult: This,</b> where it is permitted, is referring <b>to moist</b> grass; <b>that,</b> where it is prohibited, is referring <b>to dry</b> grass.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues to discuss this topic. With regard to <b>one who needs to defecate and does not do so,</b> there is a dispute between <b>Rav Ḥisda and Ravina. One said: An evil spirit dominates him; and one said: An odor of filth dominates him. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the one who said</b> that <b>an odor of filth dominates him, as it was taught: One who needs to defecate and eats is comparable to an oven that was heated on top of its ashes; and that is the onset of an odor of filth.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara continues to discuss the issue: <b>One who needed to defecate and is unable to do so, Rav Ḥisda said: He should stand and sit, stand and sit. Rav Ḥanan from Neharde’a said: He should move to the sides</b> and attempt to relieve himself in a different spot. <b>Rav Hamnuna said: He should manipulate with a stone in that place. And the Rabbis said: He should divert his thoughts</b> to other matters. <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: All the more so that when he diverts his thoughts he will not</b> be able to <b>defecate.</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him: He should divert his thoughts from other matters,</b> and focus exclusively on his effort to relieve himself. <b>Rav Yirmeya from Difti said: I saw a certain Arab who stood and sat, stood and sat, until</b> it <b>poured</b> out of him <b>like a pot.</b> Apparently, that advice is effective.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who wishes to enter</b> and partake of <b>a regular meal</b> that will last for some time, <b>should pace</b> a distance of <b>four cubits ten times, and some say, ten cubits four times,</b> in order to expedite the movement of the bowels, <b>and defecate, and enter, and sit in his place.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One who carries out a shard of <b>earthenware</b> on Shabbat is liable if it is in a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place between one pillar and another</b> when piled on the ground to separate them; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Meir says:</b> In a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to stoke a fire with it. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> In a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to hold a quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>in it. Rabbi Meir said: Although there is no proof for the matter,</b> there is a biblical <b>allusion to</b> my opinion, as it is stated: “And He shall break it as a potter’s vessel is broken, smashing it without sparing; <b>and there shall not be found among its pieces a shard to rake fire on the hearth”</b> (Isaiah 30:14). <b>Rabbi Yosei said to him:</b> Is there <b>proof from there?</b> The verse concludes: <b>“And to extract water from the cistern,”</b> indicating that earthenware is significant if it is large enough to hold water.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is <b>the measure</b> stated by <b>Rabbi Meir greater, or</b> is <b>the measure</b> stated by <b>Rabbi Yosei greater?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that <b>the measure</b> of <b>Rabbi Yosei is greater; however,</b> based on the <b>verse</b> it appears that <b>the measure</b> of <b>Rabbi Meir is greater. As, if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b>the measure</b> of <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> with regard to the shard of earthenware <b>is greater,</b> would the prophet first <b>curse him</b> by saying that <b>a small vessel</b> will not be found, <b>and then curse him</b> by saying that <b>a larger vessel</b> will not be found? <b>Abaye said: The mishna is also</b> referring to a large shard of earthenware required <b>to stoke the fire of a large conflagration.</b> Even in the mishna, Rabbi Meir’s measure is larger.

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yosei said to him:</b> Is there <b>proof from there?</b> He cites proof for his opinion from the conclusion of that same verse. The Gemara comments: <b>Rabbi Yosei spoke well to Rabbi Meir. And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Meir</b> address that proof? He explains that the verse <b>is stated</b> employing the style of: <b>There is no need.</b> It should be understood as follows: <b>There is no need</b> to say that <b>an item</b> that is <b>significant to people,</b> e.g., a large shard of earthenware to stoke a fire, <b>shall not be found, but even an item</b> that is <b>insignificant to people,</b> i.e., a shard to extract water, <b>shall not be found.</b> Therefore, the conclusion of the verse does not contradict Rabbi Meir’s opinion.

### Part 11
end of chapter

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Akiva said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that idolatry, e.g.,</b> a statue of a deity<b>, transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by carrying</b> even when the person who carries it does not come into contact with it<b>, just as</b> a <b>menstruating woman</b> does? <b>As it is stated: “</b>And you will defile the silver overlays of your statues<b>,</b> and the golden plating of your idols<b>, you will cast them away as you would a menstruating woman [<i>dava</i>], you will tell it, get out”</b> (Isaiah 30:22). <b>Just as a menstruating woman transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by carrying, so too, idolatry transmits impurity</b> imparted <b>by carrying.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Since the <i>halakhot</i> of idolatry and the impurity it causes are beyond the scope of tractate <i>Shabbat</i>, the fundamentals of this <i>halakha</i> are cited from tractate <i>Avoda Zara</i>. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there: One whose house was adjacent to</b> a house of <b>idolatry,</b> sharing a common wall, <b>and</b> the dividing wall <b>fell, it is prohibited to rebuild it</b> as he would thereby have built a wall for idol worship. <b>What should one do? He moves four cubits into his own</b> land <b>and builds</b> the wall there.