
### Part 1
<b>to a child.</b> Because the mouth of a <i>shofar</i> is bent, one can pour a little water at a time. If so, a <i>shofar</i> belonging <b>to the community is also suitable to feed</b> water <b>to a poor infant</b> whose sustenance is provided by the community. <b>And furthermore, that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Just as one may move the <i>shofar</i>, so too one may move</b> the <b>trumpets,</b> is contrary to that which was taught previously that there is a difference between moving the <i>shofar</i> and moving the trumpet. In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is that <i>baraita</i>? <b>Rather,</b> this is <b>not difficult,</b> as it can be explained that these three <i>baraitot</i> correspond to the three opinions with regard to these <i>halakhot</i>. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits moving the <i>shofar</i> but not the trumpet, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that the laws of set-aside apply to these items on Shabbat and one may not move a utensil whose only function is prohibited. Since a trumpet has no permitted use on Shabbat, it may not be moved. On the other hand, one is permitted to move a <i>shofar</i>, which can be used to feed a child. And <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits moving both a <i>shofar</i> and a trumpet, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the <i>halakhot</i> of set-aside do not apply to utensils of this kind on Shabbat. Whereas <b>this</b> other <i>baraita</i>, which prohibits moving both a <i>shofar</i> and a trumpet, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya,</b> who holds that one may not use a utensil whose primary function is prohibited on Shabbat, even for a permissible purpose.

### Part 2
However, this explanation raises a slight difficulty with regard to the statement that one may move neither a <i>shofar</i> nor a trumpet. There was no need to mention the trumpet. If one may not move a <i>shofar</i>, certainly he may not move a trumpet. However, it can be explained as follows: <b>What is</b> the <b><i>shofar</i></b> mentioned in this <i>baraita</i>? It refers to <b>trumpets, in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Rav Ḥisda, as Rav Ḥisda said: These three objects, their names changed since the Holy Temple was destroyed.</b> That which was called <b>trumpet</b> was called <b><i>shofar</i></b> in later generations, and that which was called <b><i>shofar</i></b> was called <b>trumpet</b> in later generations. The <i>baraita</i> that was cited employed the style that switches trumpet and <i>shofar</i>, and they were mentioned in that order. Incidentally, the Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical halakhic <b>difference</b> whether a <i>shofar</i> is called <i>shofar</i> or trumpet? The Gemara answers: It is significant with regard <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b><i>shofar</i> of Rosh HaShana.</b> On Rosh HaShana one fulfills his obligation only by sounding a <i>shofar</i>. If one comes today and asks what instrument he should use to sound the requisite blasts, he should be told to use a trumpet.

### Part 3
The second object whose name was changed: That which was called <b>willow [<i>arava</i>]</b> was called in later generations <b><i>tzaftzafa</i>,</b> and that which was called <b><i>tzaftzafa</i> was</b> called <b>willow.</b> Here too the Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical halakhic <b>difference</b> that emerges from the name change? The Gemara answers: With regard <b>to</b> the mitzva of the four species, referred to by the name of one of the species, as taking the <b>palm branch,</b> as one of the four species is a willow branch, not a <i>tzaftzafa</i>.

### Part 4
The third item whose name was changed: A large table that was originally called <b><i>petora</i></b> was called in later generations by the name previously used for a small table, <b><i>petorata</i>.</b> And a <b><i>petorata</i></b> was called <b><i>petora</i>.</b> And the Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical halakhic <b>difference</b> that emerges from the change of name? The Gemara answers: With regard <b>to</b> the laws of <b>buying and selling.</b> A person who orders a <i>petora</i> should know that he ordered a small table and not a large one.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said: We too shall speak</b> and comment on changes in the meaning of terms in our generation. What was called <b><i>huvlila</i>,</b> the first stomach of animals that chew their cud, is, in recent generations, called <b><i>bei kasei</i>,</b> the name of the animal’s second stomach. Similarly, what was once called in the past <b><i>bei kasei</i></b> is called <b><i>huvlila</i></b> in recent generations. <b>What is the</b> practical halakhic <b>difference</b> that emerges from this change of names? <b>With regard to a needle that is found in the thick</b> wall <b>of the second stomach.</b> In the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>tereifot</i>, one is prohibited to eat animals with a life expectancy of less than a year. It was established that if a needle punctured the wall of the second stomach <b>from</b> only <b>one side,</b> the animal is <b>kosher.</b> If the needle penetrated through the wall in a manner visible <b>from both sides,</b> the animal assumes the halakhic status of a <b><i>tereifa</i>.</b> In the first stomach, even if the needle penetrated only one side of the wall, the animal assumes the halakhic status of a <i>tereifa</i>. Therefore, it is crucial to distinguish between the first and the second stomachs.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi said: We too shall speak</b> of matters whose name changed over the generations. The city that, in biblical times, was called <b>Babylon</b> was called <b>Bursif</b> in later generations, and <b>Bursif</b> was called <b>Babylon</b> in later generations.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC