
### Part 1
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that the reference is with regard <b>to eating <i>teruma</i>. Priests may not eat <i>teruma</i> until twilight is completed, which according to Rabbi Yosei’s</b> opinion is slightly later than it is according to Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion.

### Part 2
With regard to the period of twilight, <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> When one can see <b>one star</b> in the evening sky, it is still <b>day; two</b> stars<b>, twilight; three</b> stars, <b>night. That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When one can see <b>one star</b> in the evening sky<b>,</b> it is still <b>day; two</b> stars<b>, twilight; three</b> stars, <b>night. Rabbi Yosei said:</b> This is <b>neither</b> referring to <b>large stars that are visible</b> even <b>during the day, nor to small stars that are visible only</b> late <b>at night. Rather,</b> it is referring to <b>medium-</b>sized stars.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Zevida, said: One who performs a prohibited labor during two twilights,</b> one between Friday and Shabbat and one between Shabbat and the conclusion of Shabbat on Saturday night, <b>is liable</b> to bring a <b>sin-offering</b> for performing a prohibited labor on Shabbat <b>whichever</b> way <b>you</b> look at it. Whether we say that twilight is day or night, certainly one of those labors was performed on Shabbat. <b>Rava said to his servant: You, who are not expert in the measures of the Sages, when the sun is at the top of the palm trees, light the</b> Shabbat <b>lights.</b> His servant asked him: <b>What</b> should we do <b>on a cloudy day,</b> when the sun is not visible at the top of the trees? Rava said to him: <b>In the city, watch the roosters</b> because as evening approaches they sit on their beams. <b>In a field,</b> watch <b>the ravens</b> because they return to their nests as evening approaches. <b>Alternatively,</b> you can watch <b>the plants [<i>adanei</i>]</b> that turn westward in the evening. When they begin to turn westward evening is approaching.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They sound six blasts on Shabbat eve</b> to announce that Shabbat is approaching. The Gemara details what each blast signifies. The <b>first blast</b> is in order <b>to stop the people from work in the fields.</b> The <b>second</b> blast <b>is to stop</b> those who are working in <b>the city, and</b> to inform the proprietors to close the <b>stores.</b> The <b>third</b> is to inform them <b>to light the</b> Shabbat <b>light;</b> that is <b>the statement of Rabbi Natan. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says:</b> The <b>third</b> blast is to inform those who don phylacteries throughout the day <b>to remove</b> their <b>phylacteries,</b> as one does not don phylacteries on Shabbat. <b>And he pauses</b> after the third blast for the length of <b>time</b> it takes to <b>fry a small fish or to stick bread to the</b> sides of the <b>oven.</b> One who forgot to do so and needs those foods for Shabbat may do so then. <b>And he sounds a <i>tekia</i>, and sounds a <i>terua</i>, and sounds a <i>tekia</i>, and he accepts Shabbat.</b> It is then that Shabbat begins in every sense.

### Part 5
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: What shall we do to the Babylonian Jews?</b> They stray from the custom, <b>as</b> they <b>sound a <i>tekia</i> and a <i>terua</i>,</b> and <b>they accept Shabbat during the <i>terua</i>,</b> i.e., upon hearing the blast of the <i>terua</i>. The Gemara asks about this: Do the Babylonians really <b>sound</b> only <b>a <i>tekia</i> and a <i>terua</i></b> and no more blasts? If so, <b>there are</b> only <b>five</b> blasts and not six, as it was taught in the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rather,</b> the correct version is: <b>They sound a <i>tekia</i>, and they again sound a <i>tekia</i>, and</b> then they <b>sound a <i>terua</i>, and they accept Shabbat during the <i>terua</i>.</b> They do so because they continue <b>the custom of their fathers that was handed</b> down <b>to them.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Yehuda taught to Rav Yitzḥak, his son:</b> The <b>second</b> blast that is sounded before Shabbat is to inform people <b>to light the light.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion did he say this? It is <b>neither in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan nor in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. Rather,</b> certainly he told him that the <b>third</b> blast is in order to inform people <b>to light the light, and in accordance with whose</b> opinion did he say this? It is in accordance <b>with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan.</b>

### Part 7
On a similar note, <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> in greater detail: <b>Six blasts are sounded on Shabbat eve.</b> When <b>one begins sounding the first <i>tekia</i>, the people standing</b> and working <b>in the fields refrained from hoeing, and from plowing and from performing all labor in the fields. And</b> those <b>workers</b> who work <b>close</b> to the city <b>are not permitted to enter</b> the city <b>until</b> those who work <b>farther</b> away <b>come, so that they will all enter together.</b> Otherwise, people would suspect that the workers who came later continued to work after the blast. <b>And still,</b> at this time, the <b>stores</b> in the city <b>are open and</b> the <b>shutters</b> of the stores, upon which the storekeepers would arrange their merchandise in front of the stores, remain <b>in place.</b> When <b>he began sounding the second blast, the shutters were removed</b> from where they were placed <b>and the stores were locked and</b> in the homes, however, <b>hot water was still</b> cooking <b>on the stove and pots</b> remained <b>in place on the stove.</b> When <b>he began sounding the third blast,</b> the <b>one</b> charged with <b>removing</b> food from the stove <b>removed</b> it, <b>and</b> the <b>one</b> charged with <b>insulating</b> hot water for Shabbat so that it would not cool off <b>insulated</b> it, <b>and</b> the <b>one</b> charged with <b>kindling</b> the Shabbat lights <b>lit. And</b> the one sounding the <i>shofar</i> <b>pauses for</b> the amount of time it takes to <b>fry a small fish or to stick bread to the</b> sides of the <b>oven, and he sounds a <i>tekia</i>, and sounds a <i>terua</i>, and sounds a <i>tekia</i>, and accepts Shabbat.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina, said: I heard that</b> a person who was pressed for time and <b>comes to light</b> Shabbat lights <b>after six blasts may light</b> without concern, as even the moment of the sixth blast is not yet Shabbat. Proof for this is <b>that the Sages provided the sexton of the synagogue a period</b> of time <b>to take his <i>shofar</i>,</b> which he used to sound the blasts on a tall roof in the middle of the city, <b>to his house.</b> Clearly, during that interval it is not yet Shabbat. He <b>said to him: If so</b>, then <b>you have rendered your statement</b> subject <b>to circumstances,</b> and it would not apply uniformly to all. Shabbat would start at a different time in each place based on the distance between the site where the <i>shofar</i> is sounded and the home of the sexton. <b>Rather,</b> Shabbat began immediately after the final blast with no pause in between. <b>The sexton had a concealed place on top of his roof,</b> where he would sound the <i>shofar</i>, <b>in which he would place his <i>shofar</i> because</b> the consensus is <b>that one may move neither the <i>shofar</i> nor the trumpets</b> on Shabbat.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks with regard to this last <i>halakha</i>: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>the <i>shofar</i> may be moved</b> on Shabbat, <b>and the trumpets may not be moved? Rav Yosei said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as one could say that <b>here,</b> where moving a <i>shofar</i> was permitted, it is referring <b>to</b> a <i>shofar</i> belonging to <b>an individual.</b> Because it has a use even on Shabbat, it may be moved. <b>There,</b> where moving a <i>shofar</i> was prohibited, it is referring <b>to</b> a <i>shofar</i> that belongs to <b>a community.</b> Because it has no use on Shabbat, it is, therefore, considered set-aside [<i>muktze</i>]. <b>Abaye said to him: And in</b> the case of <b>an individual, for what</b> permitted action is a <i>shofar</i> <b>fit</b> to be used on Shabbat? It is fit for use <b>since it is suitable to give water with it</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC