
### Part 1
Rather, Rav’s reasoning must be: It is <b>a decree lest one will fill the corners</b> after having first planted the garden bed, and thereby violate the prohibition of diverse kinds. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why should that matter, the legal status of the garden bed <b>should merely be</b> like <b>a triangular [<i>rosh tor</i>]</b> plot of <b>vegetables. Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: If <b>a triangular</b> plot of <b>vegetables was protruding into another field, it is permitted;</b> there, it is not considered a prohibited mixture of diverse kinds, <b>because the end of the field is distinguishable.</b> Based on the shapes of the two fields where they intersect, the demarcation between them is clear. And the Gemara answers: <b>There is no</b> leniency with regard to a <b>triangular plot in a garden bed.</b> This allowance with regard to a triangular section of one field jutting into another field applies only to a large field where the triangular shape can clearly be attributed to a different field, but in a small garden bed where the seeds are adjacent to one another, it is impossible to distinguish between the seeds.

### Part 2
<b>And Shmuel said:</b> When we learned in the mishna that one may plant five kinds of seeds within a garden bed without violating the prohibition of diverse kinds, <b>we learned this</b> even with regard to <b>a garden bed among garden beds,</b> not only in a solitary bed. The Gemara asks: <b>Don’t the seeds become intermingled with one another?</b> The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where one inclines</b> one <b>row to here,</b> in one direction, <b>and</b> one <b>row to here,</b> in a different direction (<i>Me’iri</i>). In that way they do not appear intermingled.

### Part 3
<b>Ulla said: They raise a dilemma in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael: <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> if <b>one opened a single furrow across its entirety?</b> Is it considered demarcation between the garden beds if one dug a furrow between two garden beds (<i>ge’onim</i>, <i>Tosafot</i>)? <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> The <b>intermingling</b> of these garden beds <b>comes and nullifies the row.</b> The furrow is not considered to be a demarcation between the beds. <b>Rav Asi said: Its intermingling does not disqualify the row. Ravina raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ashi</b> from a mishna: <b>One who plants two rows of cucumbers</b> and <b>two rows of gourds</b> and <b>two rows of Egyptian beans, it is permitted</b> because each of the species is distinct. However, if he plants <b>one row of cucumbers and one row of gourds and one row of Egyptian beans, it is prohibited</b> because in single rows there is no clear demarcation between the species. This indicates that a furrow between different species of seeds does not prevent intermingling between them. Rav Ashi replied: The case in that mishna is an exception. <b>Here, it is different because there are branches</b> that grow out from these species which become entangled with each other, nullifying the furrow between them. Other vegetables, whose branches do not become entangled, may be planted with a single furrow between them.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Kahana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who wishes to fill his entire garden with vegetables</b> and does not want to distance the rows of seeds from one another may <b>make a garden bed</b> that is <b>six by six</b> handbreadths <b>and make five circles inside it</b> (<i>ge’onim</i>, Rambam). He plants different species in the different circles <b>and fills its corners</b> with <b>whatever</b> additional species that <b>he wants.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Aren’t there</b> seeds <b>between</b> the circles, which intermingle with the species that are in the circles? <b>The school of Rabbi Yannai say</b> in response to this: This is referring to a case <b>where one leaves</b> the space <b>in between</b> them <b>barren</b> and does not plant there. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> He may fill the entire bed with seeds, and demarcate between the different types of seeds in the following manner. <b>If</b> the circles <b>were planted lengthwise, he plants</b> the seeds in between <b>widthwise;</b> and if the circles were planted <b>widthwise, he plants</b> the seeds in between <b>lengthwise. Ravina raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ashi:</b> We learned that <b>the work</b> space <b>of a vegetable</b> of one species, when planted with <b>a vegetable</b> of a different species, is <b>six handbreadths. And one views them</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC