### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If <b>a bird flew under the flaps of one’s clothing</b> on Shabbat and cannot get out<b>, he may sit and secure it until dark</b> and then take it<b>. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak raised an objection</b> based on that which we learned in the mishna<b>:</b> If <b>the first person sat in the doorway and filled it, and a second person came and sat next to him, the first person is liable and the second is exempt, even if the first person stood and went. What, does this not</b> mean here<b>,</b> as it does throughout tractate <i>Shabbat</i>, that he is <b>exempt</b> after the fact<b>,</b> but <b>it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>? How then could Rav say one may sit and secure the bird <i>ab initio</i>? The Gemara rejects this<b>: No,</b> the statement in the mishna means that he is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted</b> <i>ab initio</i>. The Gemara adds<b>: So too, it is reasonable</b> to explain the mishna that way <b>from</b> the fact that it <b>was taught in the latter clause</b> of the mishna<b>: To what is this</b> second person’s action <b>similar? To one who locks his house to secure it, and it turns out a deer</b> that was trapped before Shabbat <b>is</b> also <b>secured inside it. By inference,</b> he is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted,</b> just like one who locks the door to his house<b>.</b> The Gemara concludes<b>:</b> Indeed<b>, learn from it</b> that it is so<b>.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Some say</b> a slightly different version. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: We too learned</b> support for Rav’s statement in the mishna: <b>Even if the first person stood and went, the first</b> person <b>is liable and the second is exempt. What, does this not</b> mean that he is <b>exempt, and it is permitted?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> he is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>prohibited.</b> Rav Naḥman said: That is impossible, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that it is taught in the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>To what is this</b> second person’s action <b>similar? To one who locks his house to secure it and it turns out a deer</b> that was trapped before Shabbat <b>is</b> also <b>secured inside it. By inference,</b> he is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted,</b> just like one who locks the door to his house. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that it is so.

### Part 3
With regard to this issue <b>Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>all exempt</b> rulings in the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of Shabbat,</b> although one who performs the action is <b>exempt</b> by Torah law, his action is <b>prohibited</b> by rabbinic law, <b>with the exception of these three</b> for which he is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to perform the action.<br><b>One is this</b> case of the deer. <b>And from what</b> source do we conclude that one is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted? From</b> the fact that it <b>was taught in the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>To what is this</b> second person’s action <b>similar? To one who locks his house to secure it and it turns out a deer</b> that was trapped before Shabbat <b>is</b> also <b>secured inside.</b> <br><b>And another</b> example where he is exempt and it is permitted is: <b>One who drains an abscess</b> containing pus <b>on Shabbat, if</b> he did so <b>to create a</b> permanent <b>opening in it, he is liable.</b> However, <b>if</b> he did so <b>to drain fluid from it, he is exempt. And from what</b> source do we conclude that one is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted? As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A hand needle</b> used for sewing clothes may be moved on Shabbat <b>to remove a thorn.</b> Apparently, removing a thorn on Shabbat is permitted <i>ab initio</i> to the extent that one is even permitted to move a needle for that purpose. <br><b>And another</b> case is: <b>One who traps a snake on Shabbat, if</b> he <b>deals with it so that it will not bite him</b> and in doing so traps it, <b>he is exempt.</b> However, <b>if</b> he traps it <b>for medicinal</b> purposes, <b>he is liable. And from what</b> source do we conclude that one is <b>exempt and</b> it is <b>permitted? As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One may overturn a bowl on top of a lamp</b> <i>ab initio</i> on Shabbat <b>so that</b> the fire <b>will not take hold</b> in <b>the ceiling beam; and</b> similarly, one may overturn a bowl <b>on top of a child’s feces</b> so that he will not touch it and dirty himself, <b>and on top of a scorpion so it will not bite,</b> and the ruling is the same with regard to a snake.

### Part 4
end of chapter

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to any of <b>the eight creeping animals mentioned in the Torah, one who traps them or wounds them</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable.</b> The Torah states: “The following shall be impure for you among the creeping animals that swarm upon the earth: The weasel, and the mouse, and the dab lizard of every variety; and the gecko, and the land-crocodile, and the lizard, and the skink, and the chameleon” (Leviticus 11:29–30). With regard to <b>other abominations and crawling things, one who wounds them is exempt. One who traps them for</b> a specific <b>need is liable;</b> one who traps them <b>for no</b> specific <b>need is exempt.</b> With regard to <b>animals or birds that are in his possession,</b> i.e., an animal that is domesticated and under someone’s control, <b>one who traps them is exempt; and,</b> however, <b>one who wounds them is liable.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it is taught</b> in the mishna: <b>One who wounds them is liable, by inference they have skins.</b> One is liable for inflicting a wound only when there is skin covering the flesh and the blood pools beneath it. <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> who teaches this? <b>Shmuel said: It is Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri, as we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says: The eight creeping animals</b> that are listed in the Torah <b>have skins.</b> Their flesh transmits impurity, but their skin does not transmit impurity. The Rabbis say that both the skin and the flesh of some creeping animals transmit impurity. <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav</b> said: <b>Even if you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of the <b>Rabbis, the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri only with regard to the matter</b> of <b>impurity, as it is written</b> after the Torah lists the creeping animals: <b>“Those are for you the impure</b> among the creeping animals, whoever touches them when they are dead shall become impure until evening” (Leviticus 11:31). The Rabbis derive from the extraneous term: “Those are for you the impure,” <b>to include the</b> fact that the <b>skins of</b> the creatures in the second verse transmit impurity just <b>as their flesh</b> does. <b>However, with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>Shabbat, even the Rabbis concede</b> that their skin is distinct from their flesh.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And, with regard to Shabbat, they do not disagree? Wasn’t</b> the following <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>? <b>One who traps one of the eight creeping animals mentioned in the Torah</b> or <b>one who wounds them is liable;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri. And the Rabbis say:</b> The term <b>skin is</b> utilized <b>only</b>