
### Part 1
<b>And according to Beit Hillel,</b> they <b>even</b> violate the prohibition of <b>interest.</b> In Beit Hillel’s view, it is prohibited to loan or return objects without determining their monetary value, lest the object rise in value and the borrower end up returning an item that is more expensive than the one he borrowed.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> this is <b>so,</b> and one violates so many prohibitions when drawing lots, it should be prohibited to do so with <b>one’s children and family members also.</b> The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>one’s children and family members, this is the reason</b> that it is permitted: <b>It is like</b> the ruling that <b>Rav Yehuda</b> said that <b>Rav said, for Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is permitted to loan to one’s children and family members with interest, in order to let them experience a taste of</b> how difficult it is to repay a loan taken with <b>interest.</b> Also, in the case of family members, all the money, including the money used to repay the loan, belongs to the same person. Therefore, there is no real prohibition of interest.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> this is <b>so,</b> and everything in this case actually belongs to the father, and he uses a lottery system in order to educate his family, it should be permitted to cast lots for <b>a big portion against a small portion also.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so, and</b> the mishna <b>is incomplete and it teaches the following: A person may draw lots with his children and his family members at the table,</b> and he may <b>even</b> do so with <b>a large portion against a small portion. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the ruling that <b>Rav Yehuda</b> said that <b>Rav said.</b> Although <b>with one’s children and family members, yes,</b> this is permitted, <b>with others it is not. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the ruling that <b>Rav Yehuda</b> said that <b>Shmuel said:</b> Raffling <b>a large portion against a small portion is prohibited</b> to do <b>for other people, even on a weekday. What is the reason? Due to</b> the prohibition against gambling with <b>dice,</b> which is prohibited by rabbinic law as a form of theft.

### Part 5
The mishna taught that <b>one may draw lots for</b> the sacrifices but not for the specific portions. This statement is not entirely clear, and the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>But not for the</b> specific <b>portions? Rabbi Ya’akov, son of the daughter of Ya’akov, said</b> that it means: <b>But</b> one may <b>not</b> draw lots <b>for the weekday [<i>ḥol</i>] portions on a Festival.</b> The Gemara challenges: This is <b>obvious.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>since</b> the priests are naturally quarrelsome, which the Sages derive from that which <b>is written:</b> “Yet let no man strive, neither let any man reprove, <b>for your people are like those that strive with the priest”</b> (Hosea 4:4), and in order to maintain peace between them <b>even</b> lotteries for <b>weekday portions</b> were <b>also</b> permitted, therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that this is not the case.

### Part 6
Having quoted Rabbi Ya’akov, son of the daughter of Ya’akov, the Gemara brings another teaching of this <i>amora</i>. <b>And Rabbi Ya’akov, son of the daughter of Ya’akov, said: Anyone</b> who causes <b>another to be punished on his account,</b> they <b>do not bring him within the partition of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> even if he is right. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> know this? <b>If you say</b> it is <b>because</b> of what is written in the prophecy of Micaiah, that proof can be disputed. <b>It is written: “And the Lord said: Who will entice Ahab to go up and fall at Ramot Gilad? And one said: In this manner, and another said: In that manner. And the spirit came out and stood before the Lord and said: I will entice him.</b> And the Lord said to it: With what? <b>And it said: I will go out and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all of his prophets. And He said: You shall entice him and will prevail. Go out and do this”</b> (I Kings 22:20–22).

### Part 7
<b>And we said: What</b> is this <b>spirit? Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This is the spirit of Naboth</b> the Jezreelite, who asked to avenge his death at the hands of Ahab. <b>And what is</b> the meaning of the words: <b>Go out,</b> which God commanded him? <b>Rav said:</b> It means that he was given permission to entice Ahab, but God said: <b>Leave from</b> within <b>My partition.</b> Therefore, it seems that the spirit of Naboth was told to leave God’s area because it caused Ahab to be punished. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>But perhaps there, the reason is as it is written: “One who speaks lies shall not dwell</b> before My eyes” (Psalms 101:7), and this is the only reason that the spirit of Naboth was removed from within God’s partition.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> it is derived <b>from here: “You are filled with shame instead of honor. Drink, you, and be like one who is uncircumcised,</b> the cup of the Lord’s right hand will turn to you and filthiness shall be upon your glory” (Habakkuk 2:16). The verse is expounded: <b>“You are filled with shame instead of honor”; this</b> is referring to <b>Nebuchadnezzar. “Drink, you, and be like one who is uncircumcised”; this is</b> referring to <b>Zedekiah,</b> who was also punished for being the cause of Nebuchadnezzar’s punishment, as will be explained. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>One</b> objection to this is <b>that the entire verse is written about Nebuchadnezzar. And furthermore,</b> with regard to <b>Zedekiah, the righteous one, what could he have done to him?</b> For <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said</b> about this matter: <b>When that wicked man wanted to do this to that righteous man,</b> his foreskin was stretched, as will be explained.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> the basis for this idea is <b>from here: “Punishment is also not good for the righteous”</b> (Proverbs 17:26), meaning that it is not good for a righteous person to issue punishment. <b>There is no</b> meaning of <b>not good other than evil. And it says: “For You are not a God that desires wickedness, evil will not dwell with You”</b> (Psalms 5:5), meaning that <b>You, God, are righteous and evil shall not dwell</b> with You <b>in Your place of dwelling.</b> Even a righteous person who punishes someone and is called evil and cannot dwell within God’s partition.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> may it be <b>inferred that this</b> term used in the mishna, <b><i>ḥalashim</i>, is a word for lots? As it is written: “How have you fallen from heaven, O day-star, son of the morning! How have you been cut down to the ground, casting lots [<i>ḥolesh</i>] over the nations!”</b> (Isaiah 14:12), and <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said:</b> This verse <b>teaches</b> us <b>that he,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, <b>would cast lots [<i>ḥolesh</i>] for the royal leaders</b> of the nations he had captured, <b>in order to know whose day</b> it was to service him with <b>homosexual relations. And it is written: “All the kings of the nations, all of them</b> sleep in glory, every one in his own house” (Isaiah 14:18). <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The meaning of this verse is <b>that they rested from homosexual relations.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: All of the days</b> of the life <b>of that wicked man, laughter could not be found in the mouth of any creature, as it is stated: “The whole earth is at rest and is quiet; they break forth into singing”</b> (Isaiah 14:7). This proves <b>by inference</b> that <b>until now there was not any song.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is prohibited</b> even nowadays <b>to stand in</b> the ruins of <b>the house of that wicked man,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, in Babylonia, for <b>it is stated</b> about that place: <b>“And demons shall dance there”</b> (Isaiah 13:21). There is concern that one may be injured by the harmful forces there (Maharsha).

### Part 13
<b>And Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: At the time</b> when <b>that wicked man,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, <b>wanted to do to that righteous man,</b> Zedekiah, <b>this</b> act of sodomy, <b>his foreskin was stretched three hundred cubits, and it surrounded the entire</b> company at Nebuchadnezzar’s <b>feast, as it is stated:</b> “Woe to one who gives his neighbor drink, who puts your venom in and also makes him drunk so that you may look upon their nakedness. <b>You are filled with shame instead of honor. Drink, you, and be</b> like <b>one who is uncircumcised [<i>vehe’arel</i>]”</b> (Habakkuk 2:15–16). The word <b><i>arel</i>,</b> which refers here to one who is uncircumcised and also connotes the foreskin, <b>has a numerical value of three hundred.</b>

### Part 14
<b>And Rav Yehuda</b> also <b>said</b> that <b>Rav said: When that wicked man descended into Gehenna, everyone who had</b> already <b>descended to Gehenna trembled,</b> and <b>they said,</b> referring to themselves in third person: <b>Perhaps he is coming to rule over them; or is he coming to be weakened like them? As it is stated:</b> “They all answer and say to you: <b>Have you also become weak like us? Have you become like us [<i>eleinu nimshalta</i>]?”</b> (Isaiah 14:10). The Hebrew phrase: <i>Eleinu nimshalta</i>, can mean: Have you become like us, or alternatively: Have you come to rule over us. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said: “Whom do you pass in beauty? Go down and be laid with the uncircumcised”</b> (Ezekiel 32:19). This confirmed that Nebuchadnezzar has the same status in Gehenna as everyone else.

### Part 15
On a related note, the verse states: “And you shall take up this parable against the king of Babylonia and you shall say: <b>How has the oppressor ceased. The exactor of gold has ceased”</b> (Isaiah 14:4). <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> The meaning of this verse is that <b>this nation that said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC