
### Part 1
during which they committed their sins was altogether <b>twenty-six</b> years, as it is written: <b>“Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer and thirteen years they rebelled, and in the fourteenth year</b> Chedorlaomer came” (Genesis 14:4–5). The twelve years plus the fourteen years during which they were enslaved were not years of tranquility, leaving only twenty-six tranquil years when they were sinful.

### Part 2
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said</b>: <b>Any city whose roofs are higher than the synagogue</b> will <b>ultimately be destroyed</b> because of the contempt shown the synagogue. Allusion to this is from that <b>which is stated: “To uplift the house of our God and restore its ruins”</b> (Ezra 9:9). The house that is devoted to God needs to be elevated above the other houses of the city. The Gemara adds: <b>And this applies only to the height of the houses</b> themselves. <b>However,</b> if <b>the poles [<i>kashkushei</i>] and the towers [<i>abrurei</i>]</b> that extend from the house are higher than the synagogue, <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with it. Rav Ashi said: I caused</b> the city of <b>Mata Meḥasseya to not be destroyed</b> by building the synagogue higher than the other houses. The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t</b> Mata Meḥasseya ultimately <b>destroyed?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It was not destroyed because of that sin;</b> other sins caused its destruction.

### Part 3
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> It is preferable to be <b>under</b> the yoke of <b>Ishmael and not under</b> the yoke of <b>a stranger,</b> the Romans; <b>under a stranger and not under a <i>Ḥabar</i>,</b> a Persian Zoroastrian fire priest; <b>under a <i>Ḥabar</i> and not under a Torah scholar,</b> as if one offends a Torah scholar who is greater than he, the scholar will be exacting with him and he will be punished at the hand of Heaven; <b>under a Torah scholar and not under an orphan or a widow,</b> as they are easily insulted and God promised to hear their cries and punish those who offend them.

### Part 4
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> It is preferable to suffer from <b>any</b> extended <b>illness and not</b> from an <b>intestinal illness.</b> Similarly, it is preferable to suffer <b>any pain,</b> even if it is sharp and excruciating, <b>and not heart pain; any</b> slight <b>ache and not a headache; any evil and not an evil wife.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> Even <b>if all the seas would be ink, and</b> the reeds that grow near <b>swamps</b> would be <b>quills, and</b> the <b>heavens</b> would be <b>parchment</b> upon which the words would be written, <b>and all the people</b> would be <b>scribes;</b> all of these <b>are insufficient to write the</b> unquantifiable <b>space of</b> governmental <b>authority,</b> i.e., all the considerations with which a government must concern itself and deal. <b>Rav Mesharshiya said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? <b>“The Heavens on High and the land to the depth and the heart of kings are unsearchable”</b> (Proverbs 25:3).

### Part 6
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said: A fast is effective to</b> neutralize <b>a</b> bad <b>dream like fire</b> burns <b>chaff. Rav Ḥisda said: And</b> a fast is effective specifically <b>on that day</b> that he dreamed. <b>And Rav Yosef said:</b> One suffering from a bad dream that he dreamed is permitted to fast <b>even on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yehoshua, son of Rav Idi, happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rav Ashi. They prepared a third-born calf,</b> whose meat is high quality, <b>for him. They said to him: Let the Master taste something. He said to them: I am sitting</b> in the midst of <b>a fast. They said to him: And does the Master not hold</b> in accordance with <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> of <b>Rav Yehuda, as Rav Yehuda said: A person can borrow his fast</b> and not fast on the day that he originally designated, <b>and repay it</b> by fasting on another day? You can postpone your fast to another day. <b>He said to them: It is a fast for a dream. And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said: A fast is effective to</b> neutralize <b>a</b> bad <b>dream like fire</b> burns <b>chaff. And Rav Ḥisda said</b> that the fast is effective specifically <b>on that day</b> that he dreamed. <b>And Rav Yosef said</b> that a person suffering due to a bad dream is permitted to fast <b>even on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna that <b>if they</b> already <b>began</b> any one of the activities mentioned in the mishna <b>they need not stop</b> to recite the <i>Amida</i> prayer; however, <b>they stop to recite <i>Shema</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t</b> the <b>first clause</b> of the mishna already <b>teach</b> that they need not stop? Why does the mishna repeat it? The Gemara answers: In <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna, <b>we came to</b> discuss <b>matters of Torah.</b> With regard to those engaged in Torah study, they need not stop for prayer, but they are required to stop to recite <i>Shema</i>. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Torah scholars, who were engaged in the</b> study of <b>Torah, stop</b> their Torah study <b>for <i>Shema</i>, and they do not stop for prayer. Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> a caveat to this statement: <b>They only taught</b> that they need not stop for prayer with regard <b>to the likes of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai and his colleagues, whose Torah is their vocation</b> and they never interrupt their Torah study. <b>However,</b> for <b>the likes of us,</b> who also engage in other activities, <b>we stop</b> both <b>for <i>Shema</i></b> and <b>for prayer.</b>

### Part 9
With regard to the essence of the statement the Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>Just as they do not stop for prayer, they do not stop for <i>Shema</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught,</b> it was taught with regard to those engaged <b>in the intercalation of the year.</b> Since their activity is crucial and all the Festivals of the year are determined through that activity, the Sages allowed them to continue and not stop to recite <i>Shema</i>. <b>As Rav Adda bar Ahava said, and the Elders of</b> the city of <b>Hagronya also taught</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, said: When we were engaged in the intercalation of the year in Yavne, we would stop neither for <i>Shema</i> nor for prayer.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna deals with various decrees, especially with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, which were issued in order to distance a person from transgressions that he is liable to commit through habit and routine. The mishna said: <b>The tailor may not go out</b> with <b>his needle adjacent to nightfall</b> on Shabbat eve, <b>lest he forget</b> that he is carrying the needle <b>and go out</b> with it to the public domain even after Shabbat begins. <b>And,</b> similarly, <b>the scribe</b> [<b><i>lavlar</i></b>] may <b>not</b> go out <b>with his quill</b>[<b><i>kulmos</i>]</b> for the same reason. <b>And</b> one <b>may not shake his clothes</b> on Shabbat to rid them of lice; <b>and</b> one <b>may not read</b> a book <b>by candlelight,</b> so that he will not come to adjust the wick of the lamp. However, <b>in truth they said</b> an established <i>halakha</i>: The <b>attendant sees where</b> in the book the <b>children</b> under his supervision are <b>reading</b> in the Torah, even by candlelight on Shabbat. <b>However, he</b> himself <b>may not read. Similarly,</b> the Sages issued a similar decree with regard to other <i>halakhot</i>, as they said: <b>The <i>zav</i> may not eat</b> even <b>with</b> his wife <b>the <i>zava,</i></b> despite the fact that they are both ritually impure, <b>because,</b> by eating together, they will come to excessive intimacy and become <b>accustomed to sin.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Among the <i>halakhot</i> concerning decrees that were issued lest one come to commit a transgression, <b>we learned</b> in a mishna <b>there: A person may not stand in the private domain and drink</b> water located <b>in the public domain,</b> or vice versa, stand <b>in the public domain and drink</b> water located in the <b>private domain,</b> lest he transfer the vessel from which he is drinking the water to the place where he is standing and become liable to bring a sin-offering. <b>However, if he introduced his head and most of his</b> body <b>into the place</b> where the water <b>that he is drinking</b> is located, there is no longer room for concern, and <b>it is permitted,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC