
### Part 1
<b>a</b> ten-handbreadth high <b>post from here,</b> perpendicular to the public domain. This creates a symbolic wall which, in the <i>halakhot</i> of alleyways, has the legal status of a wall. <b>And,</b> he may place <b>an</b> additional <b>post from here,</b> on the other side, and that has the same legal status as if he closed the public domain on all of its sides. <b>Or,</b> he can implement a different solution appropriate for alleyways by placing <b>a beam</b> extending <b>from here,</b> from one end of one house, to the end of the house opposite it. This creates a symbolic partition across the width of the street. <b>And,</b> he may place <b>a beam</b> extending <b>from here,</b> from the other side of the house. According to Rabbi Yehuda, in that way, one is permitted to <b>carry</b> objects <b>and place</b> them <b>in</b> the area <b>between</b> the symbolic partitions, as he would in a private domain. The Rabbis <b>said to him: One may not place an <i>eiruv</i> in the public domain in that</b> way. One who seeks to transform a public domain into a private domain must erect actual partitions.

### Part 2
The Gemara questions the language of the <i>Tosefta</i>: This is a full-fledged private domain. <b>And why did they call it full-fledged?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say: When do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Yehuda</b> and say <b>that it is not the private domain? This applies only</b> with regard to the prohibition <b>to carry</b> there on Shabbat. By means of these partitions, it was not rendered a full-fledged private domain to the point that one is permitted to carry there. <b>However,</b> conceivably, with regard to the prohibition <b>of throwing</b> from the public domain to this place, the Rabbis <b>agree with</b> Rabbi Yehuda that the area between the partitions would be considered a private domain by Torah law and it would be prohibited. <b>Therefore,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught us</b> that according to the Rabbis it is not a private domain at all.

### Part 3
It was also taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> with regard to the definition of a public domain that <b>the Master said,</b> with added emphasis: <b>This is the public domain.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> was this emphasis added <b>to exclude?</b> The Gemara answers: Here, the <i>Tosefta</i> came <b>to exclude another</b> <i>halakha</i> of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. As we learned</b> in a mishna: The Sages permitted those ascending to Jerusalem on the Festival pilgrimage to place posts serving as symbolic boundaries around the wells, in order to render the wells and their surroundings a private domain. That way, the pilgrims could draw water from the wells even on Shabbat, as they became private domains. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If the path of the public domain</b> passes through the area of the wells and the posts and <b>obstructs them, he</b> must <b>divert it to the sides,</b> so that the passersby will not pass through there. In his opinion, many people passing through that area negates the private domain formed merely by means of symbolic boundaries. <b>And the Rabbis say: He need not</b> divert the path of the public domain. The emphasis in the <i>Tosefta</i>: This is the public domain, teaches that only the specific areas listed there fall into the category of a public domain; however, a well around which partitions were established is no longer in the realm of public domain, even if the multitudes continue to walk through that area.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And why do they call it full-fledged?</b> The Gemara answers: This emphasis was unnecessary. But, <b>since he taught the first clause</b> of the <i>Tosefta</i> employing the term <b>full-fledged, he also taught the latter section</b> employing the term <b>full-fledged</b> in the interest of uniformity.

### Part 5
With regard to the places characterized as the public domain, the Gemara asks: <b>And include</b> the <b>desert</b> among the places considered a public domain? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is the public domain? A main street, and a large plaza, and open alleyways, and the desert? Abaye said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> where it enumerated the desert among the public domains, it refers to <b>the time when Israel was dwelling in the desert,</b> and it was an area frequented by the multitudes. And <b>here,</b> where the desert was not enumerated among the public domains, refers to <b>this time,</b> when multitudes do not congregate there.

### Part 6
It was also taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>the Master said: If he carried out</b> an object on Shabbat from the private domain to the public domain or vice versa, if <b>he carried in,</b> if he did so <b>unwittingly, he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> If he did so <b>intentionally</b> and there were no witnesses to his act and he was not forewarned, <b>he is punishable</b> from the hand of Heaven with the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>.</b> If he was forewarned and there were witnesses to his transgression, he is punished by the court <b>and stoned.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Unwittingly, he is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering;</b> it <b>is obvious</b> that one who violates the serious transgression of desecrating the Shabbat unwittingly is liable to bring a sin-offering. The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for</b> the <i>tanna</i> to teach that if he did so <b>intentionally</b> he <b>is punishable with <i>karet</i> and stoned.</b> Since he needed to cite those cases because they involve a novel element, he also cited the case where he performed the transgression unwittingly, in order to complete the picture.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>That is also obvious,</b> as the Torah states explicitly that one who desecrates Shabbat intentionally without witnesses and forewarning is punishable by <i>karet</i>, and that when there are witnesses and forewarning he is executed by stoning. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> came <b>to teach us in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Rav, as Rav said: I found a hidden scroll in the house of Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> in which matters of Oral Torah were briefly summarized, <b>and in it was written: Isi ben Yehuda says: The primary categories of prohibited labor</b> on Shabbat <b>are forty-less-one, and he is liable only for one.</b> This expression is unclear, and it would seem that it means that one who performs all of the prohibited labors is only liable to bring one sin-offering.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>The primary categories of prohibited labor are forty-less-one?</b> The mishna proceeded to enumerate those labors. <b>And we discussed it: Why do I need this tally</b> of forty-less-one? It would have been sufficient for the mishna to merely list the prohibited labors. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The number is also significant, in order to teach us <b>that if he performed all of</b> the prohibited labors <b>within one lapse of awareness,</b> during which he remained unaware of the prohibition involved, <b>he is liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>for each and every one</b> of the prohibited labors separately. Consequently, the statement of Isi ben Yehuda cannot be understood as suggested above.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, say</b> as follows: There are forty prohibited labors less one, and <b>he is not liable for one of them.</b> Among those labors, there is one unspecified exception for which one is not liable to be executed by stoning and merely violates a negative prohibition. <b>That</b> which the <i>Tosefta</i> mentioned with regard to one carrying out on Shabbat being liable for <i>karet</i> and stoning, <b>teaches us: This</b> labor of carrying out from domain to domain, <b>is among those</b> prohibited labors with regard to <b>which there is no uncertainty</b> and it is clear that one is liable for <i>karet</i> and stoning for its violation.

### Part 10
It was also taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>the Master said: However, a sea, and a valley, and the colonnade, and the <i>karmelit</i></b> all enter into the general category of <i>karmelit</i>, which <b>is neither like the public domain nor like the private domain.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And is a valley neither like the private domain nor like the public domain? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna in tractate <i>Teharot</i>: <b>The valley, in the days of summer,</b> which is a time when the multitudes frequent it, nevertheless, it <b>is</b> considered <b>the private domain</b> with regard <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>Shabbat,</b> as according to the parameters of domains of Shabbat it remains in the realm of a private domain. <b>And,</b> still, it is considered like <b>the public domain</b> with regard <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>ritual impurity,</b> where there is a distinction between a place frequented by the multitudes and a place that the multitudes do not frequent. While <b>in the rainy season,</b> the winter, when multitudes do not frequent the fields, the valley is considered like <b>the private domain for this,</b> Shabbat, <b>and for that,</b> ritual purity. A valley is a private domain and not a <i>karmelit</i>.

### Part 11
<b>Ulla said: Actually,</b> the valley <b>is a <i>karmelit</i>; and why does</b> the mishna <b>call it the private domain? In order</b> to emphasize that <b>it is not the public domain,</b> as the mishna in tractate <i>Teharot</i> did not enter into the details of the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat. It merely underscored the distinction between the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat and the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual purity.

### Part 12
Rav Ashi said:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC