
### Part 1
<b>this</b> phrase: <b>Anything that I am permitted to discuss</b> on Shabbat <b>I am permitted to wait for nightfall for its sake,</b> is not appropriate. Rather, the mishna <b>should have</b> formulated the principle in the negative: With regard to <b>anything that I am not permitted to discuss</b> on Shabbat, <b>I am not permitted to wait for nightfall for its sake,</b> similar to the phraseology at the beginning of the mishna. <b>Rather, it is referring to the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which taught: <b>But he may wait for nightfall</b> in order <b>to guard</b> his produce, <b>and he may bring produce in his hand.</b> But even if this is correct, the phraseology does not fit. <b>It should have</b> said the opposite: <b>Anything for which I am permitted to wait for nightfall I am permitted to discuss.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara explains: <b>Actually, it is referring to the latter clause</b> of the mishna, <b>and Abba Shaul relates to this</b> statement that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: It is permitted for a person to say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>Guard</b> my <b>produce that is in your boundary for me, and I will guard</b> your <b>produce in my boundary for you. And</b> this is what <b>Abba Shaul said to the first <i>tanna</i>: Do you not agree</b> that <b>it is permitted for a person to say to another: Guard</b> my <b>produce that is in your boundary for me, and I will guard</b> your <b>produce that is in my boundary for you?</b> It is in such a case that Abba Shaul permitted waiting for nightfall at the edge of the Shabbat boundary in order to guard produce.

### Part 3
The Gemara still finds this difficult: <b>And say</b> simply: With regard to <b>anything that I am permitted to discuss, I am permitted to wait for nightfall for its sake.</b> When Abba Shaul stated that his ruling was a general <b>principle, what</b> did that come <b>to include?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to include that which the Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may not wait for nightfall at the Shabbat boundary</b> in order <b>to bring an animal</b> immediately after Shabbat. If the animal <b>is standing</b> right <b>outside of the boundary, one may call it</b> so that it will <b>come</b> to him. <b>Abba Shaul said a</b> general <b>principle:</b> With regard to <b>anything that I am permitted to discuss</b> on Shabbat, <b>I am permitted to wait for nightfall for its sake.</b> Here, since it is permitted to call to the animal, it is also permitted to wait for nightfall in order to retrieve it.

### Part 4
The Sages also said: <b>And</b> all agree that <b>one may wait for nightfall to attend to the needs of a bride and the needs of a corpse,</b> such as <b>to bring it a coffin and shrouds. And one may say to him,</b> to one’s messenger, on Shabbat: <b>Go to such and such place</b> to buy them, <b>and if you do not find them in that place, bring</b> them <b>from such and such a place.</b> Similarly, one may instruct one’s messenger: <b>If you do not find</b> them <b>for one hundred</b> dinar, <b>buy them for two hundred.</b> However, <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> One is permitted to give instructions to a messenger on Shabbat, <b>provided one does not mention to him</b> a specific monetary <b>amount</b> to spend on <b>the transaction.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may wait for nightfall at the Shabbat boundary to attend to the needs of a bride and the needs of a corpse,</b> such as <b>to bring him a coffin and shrouds.</b> If <b>a gentile brought flutes on Shabbat</b> in order to play music during the eulogy and funeral procession, <b>a Jew may not eulogize with them</b> as accompaniment, <b>unless they were brought from a nearby location</b> within the Shabbat boundary and transporting them did not include any violation of <i>halakha</i>. If gentiles <b>made someone a coffin and dug him a grave</b> on Shabbat, and they then changed their minds and decided to give it to someone else, <b>a Jew may be buried in it. However, if it was</b> initially intended <b>for a Jew,</b> a Jew <b>may never be buried in it.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna taught that if a gentile brought something from a nearby location on Shabbat, a Jew is permitted to make use of it. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> exactly is considered to be <b>from a nearby location? Rav said:</b> Something that is <b>from a location that is actually nearby,</b> meaning that we know with certainty where the object was brought from. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> Even if we do not know exactly where it was brought from, <b>we are concerned that it may have stayed overnight</b> just <b>outside the</b> city <b>wall,</b> which is still within the Shabbat boundary, and no prohibition was violated for the sake of the object. Therefore, it would only be prohibited to use such an object if it was known with certainty that it had been brought from outside the Shabbat boundary. Thus, Rav and Shmuel disagree with regard to a situation in which we do not know where the object was brought from on Shabbat.

### Part 7
<b>The language of the mishna is precise according to Shmuel’s</b> opinion, <b>as it teaches:</b> If a gentile <b>made someone a coffin and dug him a grave</b> on Shabbat and then changed his mind and decided to give it to someone else, <b>a Jew may be buried in it. Consequently,</b> we can derive that if <b>it is uncertain</b> whether the coffin and grave were made for a Jew, <b>it is permitted. Here, too,</b> in a case in which a gentile brings flutes, if <b>it is uncertain</b> whether their transportation was in violation of <i>halakha</i>, <b>it is permitted.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav:</b> In the case of <b>a city in which</b> both <b>Jews and gentiles live and in which there is a bathhouse that functions on Shabbat, if there is a majority of gentiles</b> in the city, the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>in the evening,</b> after Shabbat, a Jew <b>may bathe in it immediately. If there is a majority of Jews</b> in the city, a Jew <b>must wait until</b> the amount of time necessary <b>to heat up water</b> after Shabbat has passed, so that one will not benefit from the fact that the water was heated on Shabbat. If the population of the city is <b>half</b> Jewish <b>and half</b> gentile, <b>it is prohibited</b> to bathe there immediately after Shabbat, <b>and</b> one <b>must wait until</b> the amount of time necessary <b>to heat up water</b> after Shabbat has passed. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: In</b> the case of <b>a small bath, if there is a ruling power</b> in the city, a Jew <b>may bathe in it immediately</b> after Shabbat.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning the phrase: <b>A ruling power? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rav Yehuda, said:</b> It means that <b>if there is an important person in</b> the city <b>who has ten slaves who heat ten water jugs [<i>kumkumin</i>] for him at once in a small bath, it is permitted</b> for a Jew <b>to bathe in it immediately</b> after Shabbat. This is because this bath may have been heated immediately after Shabbat for the use of this important person, rather than on Shabbat itself.

### Part 10
The mishna taught that if gentiles <b>made someone a coffin and dug him a grave</b> and then changed their minds and decided to make it available to someone else, it is permitted for a Jew to be buried in it. The Gemara asks: <b>Why? Here, too, one should</b> at the very least have to <b>wait</b> after Shabbat the amount of time necessary <b>for them to do</b> the work after Shabbat. The Gemara answers: <b>Ulla said:</b> The mishna is addressing a case <b>in which</b> the grave <b>is located in</b> a public <b>street.</b> This indicates that it was intended for a gentile because Jews are not usually buried there. The Gemara asks further: <b>Granted,</b> in the case of a <b>grave,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is understandable. However, in the case of a <b>coffin, what is there to say?</b> Why isn’t a Jew required to wait after Shabbat for the amount of time it would take to make the coffin? <b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> The mishna addresses a case <b>in which</b> the coffin was already <b>placed over the grave</b> of a gentile, which proves that it was intended for him.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may perform all of the needs of the dead</b> on Shabbat. <b>One may smear oil</b> on the body <b>and rinse it</b> with water, <b>and</b> all of this is permitted <b>provided that one does not move any of its limbs,</b> which would constitute a violation of the laws of set-aside objects. When necessary, <b>one may</b> also <b>remove a pillow from beneath it and</b> thereby <b>place it on</b> cold <b>sand in order</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC