
### Part 1
that is placed <b>into a barrel</b> of beer <b>should be severed</b> because the beer will not ferment. <b>A hand</b> that frequently touches the eye <b>causes blindness. A hand</b> that frequently touches the ear <b>causes deafness. A hand</b> that touches the nose or mouth <b>causes polyps [<i>polypus</i>]. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says: She is a liberated</b> entity<b>, this</b> evil spirit that rests on one’s hands before they are washed in the morning, <b>and she refuses</b> to leave <b>until one washes his hands three times. Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> When <b>eye shadow</b> is placed on the eyes it <b>causes</b> the evil spirit called <b>the Daughter of the King to pass, and it stops tears and causes eyelashes to grow. That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Eye shadow causes the Daughter of the King to pass, and stops tears and causes eyelashes to grow.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Mar Ukva said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Leaves</b> that are placed on the eye (Rabbeinu Ḥananel) <b>contain no element of healing,</b> and therefore one may place them on his eyes on Shabbat.<br><b>Rav Yosef said: Coriander contains no element of healing.</b><br><b>Rav Sheshet said: Hops contain no element of healing.</b><br><b>Rav Yosef said: Even for me,</b> who is blind, <b>coriander is harmful.</b> He overstated coriander’s inefficacy, asserting that it is in fact harmful.<br><b>Rav Sheshet said: Arugula even for me,</b> despite my blindness, <b>is beneficial.</b><br><b>And Mar Ukva</b> also <b>said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: All types of hops may</b> be eaten on Shabbat <b>except for <i>teruza</i>,</b> which is used exclusively for medicinal purposes.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: Melon juice,</b> which is beneficial for the intestines, <b>may be</b> strained and drunk on Shabbat (<i>ge’onim</i>). <b>The juice of <i>pipuim</i>,</b> which are a type of vegetable (Rashba), <b>may not be</b> drunk on Shabbat. The Gemara relates: <b>Ze’iri’s wife made</b> melon juice <b>for Ḥiyya bar Ashi and he did not consume</b> it. <b>She said to him: I made it for your Rabbi,</b> Ze’iri, <b>and he ate</b> it, <b>and you do not eat</b> it? The Gemara explains: <b>Ze’iri</b> followed <b>his own reasoning</b> in permitting this drink, <b>as Ze’iri said: One may place clear wine and clear water into a strainer</b> used to strain dregs from wine <b>on Shabbat without concern. Apparently, since</b> the wine and water <b>are drunk</b> even with what little dregs may remain, <b>one is doing nothing</b> to improve them. <b>Here, too, since</b> melon juice <b>is consumed this way</b>, without being strained and for non-medical purposes, <b>one is doing nothing</b> and it is permitted.

### Part 4
<b>And Mar Ukva</b> also <b>said: One whose hand or foot was wounded may immerse it in wine</b> on Shabbat to stop the flow of blood, <b>and he need not be concerned</b> that he is violating the prohibition against healing on Shabbat. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>vinegar, what</b> is the ruling? May one immerse a wound in it? <b>Rav Hillel said to Rav Ashi: When we were in Rav Kahana’s house they said</b> that <b>vinegar is not</b> permitted, as it is considered actual medicine. <b>Rava said: And these people from Meḥoza, since they are delicate, even wine heals them.</b> Therefore, they may not immerse their wounds in wine.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Ravina happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rav Ashi. He saw that a donkey stepped on the back of</b> Rav Ashi’s <b>foot, and</b> Rav Ashi <b>sat and immersed</b> his foot <b>in vinegar</b> on Shabbat. Ravina <b>said to</b> Rav Ashi: <b>Does</b> the <b>Master not hold</b> according to <b>that</b> which <b>Rav Hillel stated,</b> that <b>vinegar</b> is <b>not</b> permitted? <b>He said to him: The back of the hand and the back of the foot are different</b> because their wounds are dangerous.

### Part 6
<b>Some say</b> that Ravina <b>saw that</b> Rav Ashi <b>immersed</b> his foot <b>in wine.</b> Ravina <b>said to him: Does</b> the <b>Master not hold</b> according to <b>that</b> which <b>Rava said: These people from Meḥoza, since they are delicate, even wine heals them? And</b> the <b>Master is also delicate.</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him: The back of the hand and the back of the foot are different, as Rav Adda bar Mattana said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> A wound on <b>the back of the hand or the back of the foot is like a fatal wound, and one may desecrate Shabbat for it.</b>

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: On Shabbat, <b>one may bathe in</b> the therapeutic hot springs of the <b>waters of Gerar, in the waters of Ḥamatan, in the waters of Asya, and in the waters of Tiberias; however,</b> one may <b>not</b> bathe <b>in the Great Sea,</b> namely, the Mediterranean sea, <b>nor in water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked, nor in the Sea of Sodom,</b> because people bathe in those bodies of water only for medicinal purposes.

### Part 8
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> based on that which was taught in another <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may bathe in the waters of Tiberias</b> on Shabbat <b>and in the Great Sea; but</b> one may <b>not</b> bathe <b>in water</b> in which flax <b>was soaked, nor in the Sea of Sodom.</b> This is <b>difficult</b> because in the first <i>baraita</i> the Sages prohibit bathing in <b>the Great Sea,</b> and in this <i>baraita</i> they permit bathing in <b>the Great Sea.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> because <b>this</b> <i>baraita,</i> which permits bathing in the Great Sea, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who deems all seas equal. <b>That</b> <i>baraita,</i> which prohibits bathing there, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that the Great Sea is unlike other seas. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>All seas</b> purify <b>like a ritual bath [<i>mikve</i>], as it is stated:</b> “And God called the dry land earth, <b>and the gathering together of the waters [<i>mikve</i>] He called seas”</b> (Genesis 1:10); this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Only <b>the Great Sea</b> purifies <b>like a ritual bath, and</b> the verse <b>states seas only</b> because <b>there are many seas in</b> the Great Sea, not because all seas purify.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: All seas purify</b> like a ritual bath. They actually purify even more than a ritual bath, as they purify even <b>when</b> they are <b>flowing.</b> Immersion in a sea is purifying not only when its waters are still, but even when they are flowing. That is not the case with a ritual bath, whose waters only purify when still. <b>And</b> sea water <b>is invalid for</b> purifying <b><i>zavim</i> and lepers and for sanctifying purification water</b> to mix the ashes of the red heifer <b>with it.</b> Those cases require spring water. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak strongly objects to this</b> explanation:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC