
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> From <b>a barrel</b> of wine or oil <b>that broke</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may rescue from it food</b> sufficient for <b>three meals, and</b> one may also <b>say to others: Come and rescue</b> food <b>for yourselves.</b> This applies <b>provided that one does not soak up</b> the wine or oil with a sponge or rag, due to the prohibition of squeezing. <b>One may not squeeze fruits</b> on Shabbat in order <b>to extract liquids from them. And if</b> liquids <b>seeped out on their own, it is prohibited</b> to use them on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the fruits were designated <b>for eating,</b> the liquid <b>that seeps from them</b> on Shabbat <b>is permitted.</b> There is no concern lest one purposely squeeze liquids from fruit that is designated for eating. <b>And if</b> the fruits were originally designated <b>for liquids,</b> the liquids <b>that seep from them</b> on Shabbat <b>are prohibited.</b> In the case of <b>honeycombs that one crushed on Shabbat eve, and</b> honey and wax <b>seeped</b> from them <b>on their own</b> on Shabbat, <b>they are prohibited, and Rabbi Eliezer permits</b> using them.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may not soak up wine and</b> one <b>may not collect oil</b> in his hand, so <b>that one will not conduct</b> himself on Shabbat <b>in the manner that he conducts</b> himself <b>during the week. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one’s fruit was scattered in a courtyard</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may collect them from hand to hand,</b> a little at a time, <b>and eat</b> them immediately. <b>However,</b> one may <b>not</b> collect them <b>into a basket or into a box,</b> so <b>that one will not conduct</b> himself on Shabbat <b>in the manner that he conducts</b> himself <b>during the week.</b>

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna: <b>One may not squeeze fruit</b> on Shabbat, and the liquid that seeps from fruit on its own is prohibited. Rabbi Yehuda, however, distinguishes between fruit that is designated for eating, in which case the liquid that seeps out on its own is permitted, and fruit that is designated for juicing, in which case the liquid that seeps out on its own on Shabbat is prohibited. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Rabbi Yehuda concedes to the Rabbis with regard to olives and grapes.</b> Even if they were designated for eating, the liquid that seeps from them on its own on Shabbat is prohibited. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Since they are</b> generally used <b>for squeezing, one had in mind</b> from the outset that these would serve that purpose as well, even if he designated them for eating. <b>And Ulla</b> said that <b>Rav said: Rabbi Yehuda was in disagreement even with regard to olives and grapes. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda with regard to other fruits, and the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda with regard to olives and grapes.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabba said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> as follows: <b>Rabbi Yehuda would concede to the Rabbis with regard to olives and grapes, and the Rabbis would concede to Rabbi Yehuda with regard to other fruit.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Abba:</b> If it is true that they agree with each other, <b>with regard to what do they disagree? He said to him: When you find</b> it, i.e., examine this matter and you will find areas in which they disagree. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: It stands to reason that they disagree with regard to mulberries and pomegranates,</b> which have intermediate status, between olives and grapes, which are always considered designated for juicing, and other fruits, which are not.

### Part 6
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>olives from which one squeezed oil and grapes from which one squeezed wine</b> before Shabbat (<i>Tosafot</i>), and <b>he</b> subsequently <b>brought them into</b> his house, <b>whether</b> he brought them in <b>for</b> use as <b>food or whether</b> he brought them in <b>for</b> use of their <b>liquids, that which seeps from them</b> on its own on Shabbat <b>is prohibited.</b> However, with regard to <b>mulberries from which one squeezed water,</b> i.e., juice, <b>and pomegranates from which one squeezed wine,</b> i.e., pomegranate juice, <b>and he brought them into</b> the house, if he originally <b>brought them in for</b> use as <b>food, what seeps from them is permitted. And</b> if he brought them in <b>for</b> use of their <b>liquids, and</b> similarly, if he brought them in <b>without specifying</b> his intention, <b>what seeps from them is prohibited.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And the Rabbis say: Whether</b> he brought them into the house <b>for</b> use as <b>food or whether</b> he brought them in <b>for</b> use of their <b>liquids, what seeps from them is prohibited.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara questions this <i>baraita</i>: <b>And does Rabbi Yehuda maintain that</b> in the case of <b>undesignated</b> fruit that was not designated for a specific purpose, the liquid that seeps on its own <b>is prohibited? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>A woman’s milk</b> is considered a liquid and therefore <b>renders</b> food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity,</b> whether the milk was expressed <b>volitionally and</b> whether it was expressed <b>unvolitionally?</b> On the other hand, <b>milk of an animal only renders</b> food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> if it was milked <b>volitionally</b> but not if it drips out on its own.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Akiva said: It is an <i>a fortiori</i> inference</b> that this is incorrect: <b>Just as a woman’s milk, which is intended only for young</b> children, is considered a liquid and <b>renders</b> food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> both if the milk is expressed <b>volitionally and</b> if it is expressed <b>unvolitionally, the milk of an animal, which is intended for both young and old, is it not logical that it should render</b> food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity, both</b> if it was expressed <b>volitionally and</b> if it was expressed <b>unvolitionally? They said to him</b> that this <i>a fortiori</i> inference can be refuted in the following way: <b>If a woman’s milk</b> renders food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> even when the milk was expressed <b>unvolitionally, as</b> the status of <b>the blood of her wound is</b> also that of a liquid that renders food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity,</b> that does not mean that <b>the milk of an animal</b> renders food susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC