
### Part 1
<b>vessels full of Persian onions, and boil them in wine, and give it to her to drink. And we say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> that is <b>not</b> effective, <b>seat her</b> at a <b>crossroads, and she should take a cup of wine in her hand, and let a person come from behind her and frighten her and say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is also <b>not</b> effective, <b>bring</b> her <b>a fistful [<i>buna</i>] of cumin, and a fistful of saffron, and a fistful of fenugreek, and cook</b> them <b>in wine, and give it to her to drink, and say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one bring sixty barrel seals, soak them, and then spread it</b> on her <b>and say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is also does <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one bring <i>pashtina</i>,</b> a type of grass, <b>boil it in wine, and then spread it</b> on her <b>and say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one bring a thistle</b> that grows <b>on Roman thorns and burn it, and place its</b> ashes <b>in rags from linen clothing in the summer and in rags from cotton clothing in the winter.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one dig seven pits and burn young</b> grape <b>shoots in them</b> from vines that are <b><i>orla</i>, and place a cup of wine in her hand and raise her up from that</b> pit <b>and sit her in</b> another pit, <b>and raise her from that</b> pit <b>and sit her in this</b> pit, <b>and raise her from that</b> pit <b>and sit her in this</b> other pit. <b>And each and every</b> time <b>say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let one bring fine flour and place it on the bottom half of her</b> body <b>and say to her: Stop</b> emitting <b>your discharge. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>bring an ostrich egg and burn it, and place its</b> ashes <b>in linen rags during the summer, and in cotton rags during the winter. And if</b> this is also <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>open a barrel of wine for her,</b> and let her drink it. <b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>hold a barley</b> grain <b>that is found in the dung of a white donkey. If she holds it for one day</b> her discharge <b>will cease for two days; and if she holds it for two days it will cease for three days, and if she holds it for three days it will cease forever.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara states: <b>For jaundice,</b> one should drink <b>two</b> of the three ingredients mentioned together <b>with beer, and one becomes sterile</b> from it. The Gemara continues to discuss this remedy: <b>And if</b> one does <b>not</b> have these ingredients, i.e., Alexandrian gum, saffron, and alum, or if the remedy did not work, <b>let</b> one <b>bring the head of a salted <i>shibuta</i></b> fish <b>and boil it in beer and drink</b> it. <b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>bring grasshopper brine</b> and drink it. <b>And if one does not have grasshopper brine, let</b> one <b>bring brine</b> of <b>small birds, and enter the bathhouse, and smear himself</b> with it. <b>And if there is no bathhouse, have him stand between the oven and the wall</b> and sweat out his disease. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who seeks to warm</b> this patient up <b>should wrap him</b> tightly <b>in his sheet. Rav Aḥa bar Yosef was sick with</b> this disease, <b>and Rav Kahana performed this</b> remedy <b>for him and he was healed.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara continues: <b>And if</b> this remedy is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>bring three vessels of Persian dates, and three vessels of dripping wax [<i>kira</i>], and three vessels of red aloe, and boil them in beer and drink</b> it. <b>And if</b> this remedy is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>bring a donkey foal, and shave the middle of its head, and let blood from the</b> donkey’s <b>forehead, and place it on his</b> own <b>head. And he should take care</b> not to let the blood enter <b>his eyes lest it blind him. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> one <b>bring a pickled ram’s head and boil it in beer and drink</b> it. <b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> him <b>bring a striped something else,</b> i.e., a pig, <b>and tear it open and place it on his heart. And if</b> this is <b>not</b> effective, <b>let</b> him <b>bring leeks from the middle of the row,</b> which are very sharp.

### Part 5
It is reported that <b>a certain Arab was sick with</b> jaundice. <b>He said to the gardener: Take my cloak and give me a row of leeks</b> in exchange. The gardener <b>gave him</b> the row <b>and he ate it.</b> The Arab <b>said to</b> the gardener: <b>Lend me your cloak and I will sleep in it for a short while.</b> The gardener gave it to him and <b>he wrapped himself in it and slept. When he got hot and stood up</b> pieces <b>fell from</b> the cloak <b>bit by bit</b> because the cloak had become very hot from the Arab’s sweat. The Arab tricked the gardener, who ultimately received nothing.

### Part 6
The Gemara discussed the remedy <b>for jaundice,</b> saying that one should drink <b>two</b> of the ingredients mentioned together <b>with beer, and one becomes sterile</b> from it. The Gemara asks: <b>And is it permitted</b> to cause sterility? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that castration of a man is prohibited? The verse states:</b> “Those whose testicles are bruised, or crushed, or torn, or cut, shall not be offered to the Lord, <b>and you shall not do this in your land”</b> (Leviticus 22:24), meaning that <b>you shall not do it to yourselves;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Ḥanina.</b> Apparently, it is prohibited to castrate a man. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> prohibition <b>applies</b> only in a case <b>where one intends</b> to castrate. <b>Here,</b> in the cure for jaundice, the sterility <b>happens on its own,</b> incidental to the treatment. Proof is cited from that which <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who seeks to castrate a rooster should remove its comb and it will become castrated on its own.</b> Incidental castration is permitted. The Gemara rejects the proof. <b>Didn’t Rav Ashi say: It is arrogance that it assumes</b> when it has its comb, and when the comb is removed it becomes depressed and no longer procreates. However, it is not actually castrated. <b>Rather,</b> apparently this remedy for jaundice is permitted only for <b>one who is castrated</b> and for whom causing sterility is not a concern.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC