
### Part 1
<b>and</b> for trapping <b>a deer into a garden, or into a courtyard, or into an enclosure [<i>bivar</i>], he is liable. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Not all enclosures are identical. This is the principle:</b> If the <b>trapping</b> of the animal <b>is inadequate</b> and it is still necessary to pursue and apprehend it, one is <b>not liable.</b> However, if one trapped a deer into an enclosure <b>in which the trapping is not inadequate,</b> he is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learned</b> in the mishna <b>there</b> in tractate <i>Beitza</i>: <b>One may not trap fish from the enclosures on a Festival, nor may one place food before them,</b> because it is prohibited to feed an animal that may not be eaten on the Festival. <b>However, one may trap an animal or a bird</b> from its enclosures and slaughter them, <b>and one may</b> also <b>place food before them.</b> The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from that which was taught in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>From enclosures of animals, of birds, and of fish, one may not trap on a Festival, nor may one place food before them.</b> This is <b>difficult</b> due to a contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>. This is similarly <b>difficult</b> due to the contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara says: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to the contradiction between the ruling concerning <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling concerning <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>, it is <b>not difficult,</b> because <b>this,</b> the <i>Tosefta</i> that prohibits trapping and feeding the animals in the enclosures, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> cited in the mishna that an animal trapped into an enclosure whose trapping is inadequate, i.e., it is still necessary to pursue and apprehend the animal, is not considered trapped. <b>That,</b> i.e., the mishna in <i>Beitza</i>, which permits trapping and feeding the animals in the enclosures, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who said that animals in an enclosure are considered trapped.

### Part 4
<b>However,</b> concerning the contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>, it is <b>difficult. And if you say</b> that the contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> is <b>also not difficult</b> because <b>this,</b> the mishna, which permits trapping, is referring to <b>a roofed enclosure,</b> in which a bird is considered trapped, and therefore there is no prohibition against apprehending it on Shabbat; and <b>that</b> the <i>Tosefta</i>, which prohibits trapping, is referring to <b>an unroofed enclosure</b> in which a bird is not considered trapped and apprehending it is prohibited, that does not resolve the contradiction. <b>As</b> with regard to <b>a house, which is roofed,</b> there is no dispute, <b>and according to both Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis,</b> trapping <b>a bird into a closet, yes,</b> it is considered trapped, while trapping it <b>into a house, no,</b> it is not considered trapped.

### Part 5
<b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said: Here,</b> in the mishna, according to which a bird in a house is not considered trapped, <b>we are dealing with a free bird,</b> a sparrow, <b>because it does not accept authority.</b> That bird is not intimidated and evades capture even in a house, <b>as the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Why is it called a free bird [<i>tzippor dror</i>]? Because it dwells [<i>dara</i>] in a house as it does in a field.</b> Therefore, the distinction between a roofed and unroofed enclosure resolves the apparent contradiction between the mishna and the <i>Tosefta</i>. The Gemara says: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> understanding, that the difference between the rulings in the two sources is predicated on different circumstances and not on a tannaitic dispute, the apparent contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> is <b>also not difficult. This,</b> the ruling in the <i>Tosefta</i> which prohibits apprehending the animal, is referring to <b>a large enclosure</b> from which the animal cannot escape, but it can still avoid being apprehended. Therefore, the trapping is considered inadequate, and apprehending the animal constitutes trapping. <b>That,</b> the ruling in the mishna that permits apprehending the animal, is referring to <b>a small enclosure</b> in which the animal cannot evade its pursuers and requires no further trapping.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>a large enclosure</b> and <b>what are the circumstances</b> of <b>a small enclosure? Rav Ashi said: Any</b> enclosure <b>where one can run after</b> an animal <b>and reach it in one lunge is a small enclosure. And</b> any <b>other</b> is <b>a large enclosure. Or perhaps: Any</b> enclosure <b>where the shadows from the</b> different <b>walls fall upon each other</b> is <b>a small enclosure,</b> as all enclosures had a uniform height. <b>And</b> any <b>other</b> is <b>a large enclosure. Or perhaps: Any</b> enclosure <b>that does not have</b> a series of <b>corners</b> in which the animal could evade capture is <b>a small enclosure, and</b> any <b>other</b> is <b>a large enclosure.</b>

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Not all enclosures are identical.</b> It depends whether the trapping of the animal is inadequate, in which case one is liable for trapping, or whether the trapping is not inadequate, in which case one is exempt. <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> in this matter. <b>Abaye said to him:</b> If you rule the <b><i>halakha</i></b> in accordance with his opinion, does that mean <b>by inference</b> that the Rabbis <b>disagree,</b> or perhaps there is no dispute and everyone accepts the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What difference is there to you</b> whether or not the Rabbis disagree? In either case the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. He answered him using a folk expression: Is it simply <b>learn the lesson,</b> let <b>it be</b> like <b>a song?</b> In other words, is it sufficient to simply parrot the halakhic ruling? Rather, it is necessary to examine the issue to understand it even if it does not yield a practical halakhic difference.

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps a deer</b> on Shabbat that is <b>blind</b> or <b>sleeping is liable.</b> One who traps <b>a lame, old,</b> or <b>sick</b> deer <b>is exempt. Abaye said to Rav Yosef: What is different</b> about <b>these</b> cases <b>and what is different</b> about <b>those</b> cases? Rav Yosef answered: <b>These,</b> the blind or sleeping deer, <b>are likely to run away</b> when they feel that they are being touched; therefore, they require trapping. However, <b>these,</b> the crippled, old, and sick deer, <b>are not likely to run away</b> and are therefore considered to be already trapped. The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that one who traps a <b>sick</b> deer <b>is liable</b>? <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, in which a sick deer is not considered trapped and one who traps it is liable is referring to a deer that is <b>sick due to a fever,</b> which can still flee; <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i>, in which the deer is considered trapped and one who traps it is exempt is referring to a deer that is <b>sick with fatigue</b> and is incapable of fleeing.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps locusts, cicadas, hornets, or mosquitoes on Shabbat is liable.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> Not every insect is the same in this matter. If one traps <b>any</b> insect <b>whose species is</b> typically <b>trapped</b> for personal use, he is <b>liable, and</b> if one traps <b>any</b> insect <b>whose species is</b> typically <b>not trapped</b> for personal use, he is <b>exempt. It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps locusts when there is dew is exempt.</b> Since it is cold at that time, the locusts are paralyzed. If one traps them <b>when it is hot, he is liable. Elazar ben Mehavai says: If</b> the locusts <b>were swarming, one is exempt</b> for trapping them, because no effort is necessary to apprehend them. <b>A dilemma was raised before them:</b> Does the statement of <b>Elazar ben Mehavai apply to the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, ruling stringently that one is liable for trapping locusts even when there is dew unless they are swarming; or does it <b>apply to the latter</b> clause of the <i>baraita</i>, ruling leniently that one is exempt when trapping locusts, even in the heat when they are swarming? <b>Come and hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma based on a source that addresses the point explicitly: <b>One who traps locusts when there is dew is exempt;</b> one who traps locusts <b>when it is hot is liable. Elazar ben Mehavai says: Even when it is hot, if they were swarming, one is exempt.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>a deer entered a house</b> on its own <b>and one locked</b> the door <b>before it, he is liable</b> for trapping. If <b>two</b> people <b>locked</b> the door, <b>they are exempt,</b> because neither performed a complete labor. If <b>one</b> person <b>is incapable of locking</b> the door <b>and two</b> people <b>locked it, they are liable</b> because that is the typical manner of performing that labor. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems them exempt</b> as he holds that two people who perform a single labor are never liable by Torah law.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One who traps a lion on Shabbat is not liable</b> for trapping <b>unless he traps it in its cage,</b> and until that point it is not considered trapped.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one person sat in the entrance</b> of a courtyard in which there is a deer, <b>but did not fill</b> the entire doorway, and <b>a second</b> person <b>sat and filled it, the second</b> person <b>is liable</b> because he completed the labor of trapping. However, if <b>the first person sat in the doorway and filled it, and a second person came and sat next to him, the first person is liable and the second is exempt even if the first person stood and went</b> away, leaving the second one to secure the deer. The mishna explains: <b>To what is this</b> second person’s action <b>similar? To one who locks his house to secure it, and it turns out a deer</b> that was trapped before Shabbat <b>is</b> also <b>secured inside it.</b> In that case, he is exempt even though he enhances security on the deer, because he did not trap the animal.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC