
### Part 1
<b>the bathroom is different, as it is disgusting.</b> Once a place is called a bathroom it is disgusting and no longer fit for prayer. However, until he actually bathes in a bathhouse it remains fit for prayer.

### Part 2
It was taught in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>There is no greeting [<i>shalom</i>] others</b> permitted in the bathhouse. The Gemara comments that <b>this</b> statement <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Hamnuna in the name of Ulla, who said: It is forbidden for a person to greet [<i>shalom</i>] his friend in the bathhouse because</b> Shalom is one of the names of God, as <b>it is stated:</b> “And Gideon built there an altar for God <b>and he called Him Lord Shalom”</b> (Judges 6:24). Therefore, it is prohibited to utter the word <i>shalom</i> in a dishonorable place.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But if so,</b> words connoting <b>faithfulness are also forbidden to say in the bathroom, as it is written “The faithful God</b> who keeps the covenant and the kindness” (Deuteronomy 7:9). <b>And if you say</b> that <b>it is</b> indeed <b>so,</b> that it is forbidden to use the language of faithfulness in the bathroom, <b>didn’t Rava bar Meḥasseya say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is permitted to say faithfulness in the bathroom?</b> The Gemara answers: There is a difference between the terms: <b>There, the name</b> of God <b>itself is not called</b> in <b>that</b> way, <b>as we translate it</b> as <b>“the faithful God.”</b> However, <b>here, the name</b> of God <b>Himself is called Shalom, as it is written: “And he called Him Lord Shalom.”</b> It is not an adjective, but a holy name in and of itself.

### Part 4
Incidental to the halakhic statement in his name, the Gemara also cites another statement that <b>Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said: One who gives a gift to another must inform him</b> that he is giving it to him. <b>As it is stated:</b> “Only keep My <i>Shabbatot</i> for it is a sign between Me and you for your generations <b>to know that I am God Who sanctifies you”</b> (Exodus 31:13). When the Holy One, Blessed be He, gave Shabbat to Israel, He told Moses to inform them about it. <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“For I am God Who sanctifies you,”</b> meaning that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: I have a good gift in My treasure house and Shabbat is its name, and I seek to give it to Israel. Go inform them</b> about it. <b>From here Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: One who gives</b> a gift of <b>bread to a child needs to inform his mother</b> that he gave it to him. The Gemara asks: <b>What does he do to</b> the child, so that his mother will know that he gave him a gift? <b>Abaye said: He should smear him with oil or place blue shadow around his eye</b> in an obvious manner. When the mother of the child notices and asks him about it, he will tell her that so-and-so gave him a piece of bread. The Gemara asks: <b>And now that we are concerned about witchcraft</b> involving oil or eye shadow, <b>what</b> should one who gives a gift do? <b>Rav Pappa said: He should smear him with</b> food of <b>the same type</b> that he gave him to eat.

### Part 5
With regard to the <i>halakha</i> itself, the Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Ḥama bar Ḥanina say: One who gives a gift to his friend need not inform him,</b> as God made Moses’ face glow, and nevertheless <b>it is stated</b> with regard to Moses: <b>“And Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone when He spoke with him”</b> (Exodus 34:29)? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. When</b> Rav Ḥama bar Ḥanina said that he need not inform him, he was referring to <b>a matter that is likely to be revealed. When</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said that he needs to inform him, he was referring to <b>a matter that is not likely to be revealed.</b> The Gemara asked: If so, <b>isn’t Shabbat likely to be revealed,</b> as it will be necessary to inform them of Shabbat together with the other mitzvot? Why was Moses asked to inform them about Shabbat separately? The Gemara answers: <b>The giving of its reward is not likely to be revealed,</b> and it was necessary to inform them about so extraordinary a gift.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Ḥisda would take in his hand two gifts of</b> the priesthood separated from <b>an ox. He said: Anyone who comes and tells me a new <i>halakha</i> in the name of Rav, I will give</b> these gifts <b>to him. Rava bar Meḥasseya said to him, Rav said as follows: One who gives a gift to his friend needs to inform him, as it stated: “To know that I am God Who sanctifies you.” He gave</b> the gift <b>to</b> Rava bar Meḥasseya. Rava bar Meḥasseya <b>said</b> to Rav Ḥisda: <b>Are the <i>halakhot</i> of Rav so beloved to you?</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: Yes.</b> Rava bar Meḥasseya <b>said to him, this is what Rav said: Fine wool is precious to those who wear it</b> (Rav Ya’akov Emden), meaning only a person who is used to delicate items can appreciate their quality. Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him</b> excitedly: <b>Did Rav say that? The latter</b> statement <b>is preferable to me more than the first. And if I were holding another</b> gift <b>I would give</b> it to <b>you.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said</b> that <b>Rav said: A person should never distinguish</b> one of <b>his sons</b> from <b>among</b> the other <b>sons</b> by giving him preferential treatment. <b>As, due to the weight of two <i>sela</i> of fine wool [<i>meilat</i>] that Jacob gave to Joseph, beyond what</b> he gave <b>the rest of his sons,</b> in making him the striped coat, <b>his brothers became jealous of him and the matter unfolded and our forefathers descended to Egypt.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And Rava bar Meḥasseya said that Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said Rav said: A person should always seek and dwell in a city whose settling</b> took place in the <b>recent</b> past, meaning that it was recently established, <b>as due to the fact that its settling is recent its sins are few,</b> as its residents have not yet had the opportunity to commit many sins there. <b>As it is stated</b> that Lot said to the angel: <b>“Behold, here is this city that is close to run away to and it is small”</b> (Genesis 19:20). <b>What is</b> the meaning of the word <b>close? If you say: That it is close</b> in distance <b>and</b> truly <b>small,</b> why did he need to say that to the angel? <b>Didn’t they see it? Rather,</b> the meaning of the word close must be <b>because its settling was close,</b> that it had been recently settled, and therefore <b>its sins were few. Rabbi Avin said: What is the verse</b> that teaches us that Zoar was newer than the other cities? <b>As it is written: “I will escape there please [<i>na</i>]”</b> (Genesis 19:20); the <b>numerological value</b> of <b><i>nun alef</i></b>, the letters of the word <i>na</i>, is <b>fifty-one, while Sodom</b> was <b>fifty-two</b> years old. <b>And</b> Sodom’s <b>tranquil</b> period

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC