
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> As a continuation to the discussion at the end of the previous chapter, which mentioned circumcision in the context of a discussion of the <i>halakhot</i> of childbirth on Shabbat, the mishna continues to address the <i>halakhot</i> of circumcision. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: If he did not bring an implement</b> for circumcising the child <b>on Shabbat eve, he brings it on Shabbat</b> itself <b>uncovered</b> so that it will be clear to all that he is bringing a circumcision scalpel. <b>And in</b> times of <b>danger,</b> when decrees of persecution prohibit Jews from circumcising their children, <b>one covers it in the presence of witnesses</b> who can testify that he transported the scalpel to perform a mitzva.

### Part 2
<b>And furthermore, Rabbi Eliezer said</b> with regard to this issue: <b>One</b> may even <b>cut down trees to prepare charcoal</b> in order <b>to fashion iron tools</b> for the purpose of circumcision.

### Part 3
Rabbi Eliezer’s approach was not universally accepted, and <b>a principle was stated by Rabbi Akiva: Any prohibited labor that can be performed on Shabbat eve does not override Shabbat,</b> including transporting the circumcision scalpel. However, any prohibited labor involved in the mitzva of <b>circumcision</b> itself <b>that cannot be performed on Shabbat eve overrides Shabbat.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is <b>the reason for Rabbi Eliezer’s</b> opinion that the scalpel must be uncovered <b>due to affection for the mitzva</b> and the desire to publicize it, <b>or perhaps</b> it is <b>due to</b> avoiding <b>suspicion?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> practical <b>difference is there</b> between the two reasons suggested for Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion? The Gemara answers: The difference is with regard to the question of whether or not it is permitted <b>to bring</b> the scalpel <b>covered in the presence of witnesses</b> who are aware that one is bringing the scalpel for the purpose of circumcision. <b>If you say</b> the reason is <b>due to affection for the mitzva,</b> then if it is <b>uncovered, yes,</b> there is a display of affection for the mitzva. If it is <b>covered, no,</b> there is no display of affection. <b>However, if you say</b> the reason for this ruling is <b>due to</b> avoiding <b>suspicion, even</b> if it is <b>covered</b> he may <b>well</b> do so, because the witnesses are aware that a circumcision will be performed. <b>What</b> is the resolution of this dilemma?

### Part 5
<b>It was stated</b> that <b>Rabbi Levi said: Rabbi Eliezer only stated</b> this ruling <b>to</b> express <b>affection for the mitzva. That</b> opinion <b>was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a child is to be circumcised on Shabbat and they failed to bring the scalpel on Shabbat eve, <b>one brings it</b> on Shabbat <b>uncovered,</b> but <b>he does not bring it covered;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rav Ashi said:</b> The language of <b>the mishna is also precise</b> in support of this opinion, <b>as it teaches: And in a time of danger he covers it in the presence of witnesses.</b> By inference, <b>in</b> a time of <b>danger, yes,</b> he covers it; when it is <b>not</b> a time of <b>danger, no,</b> he does not cover it. <b>Conclude from this</b> that the scalpel is uncovered <b>due to affection for the mitzva.</b> The Gemara states: Indeed, <b>conclude from this.</b>

### Part 6
<b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>He brings</b> the scalpel <b>uncovered, and he does not bring it covered;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: In a time of danger they would customarily bring</b> the scalpel <b>covered in the presence of witnesses.</b>

### Part 7
With regard to these witnesses, <b>a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>The</b> necessary <b>witnesses that he is saying,</b> do they include <b>he</b> who is bringing the scalpel <b>and one</b> other witness? <b>Or perhaps</b> they include <b>he</b> who brought the scalpel <b>and two</b> other witnesses to testify on his behalf.

### Part 8
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from the language of the mishna, which stated: <b>And in</b> times of <b>danger he covers it in the presence of witnesses. Granted, if you say</b> it is referring to <b>him and two</b> other witnesses, <b>it</b> works out <b>well;</b> the wording is appropriate. <b>However, if you say</b> it is referring to <b>him and one</b> other witness, <b>what</b> is to be made of the use of the term <b>witnesses</b> in the plural when there is only one other witness? The Gemara refutes this proof: They may still be called witnesses, in the plural, because <b>they,</b> i.e., he and the other witness, <b>are fit to testify elsewhere.</b>

### Part 9
We learned in our mishna: <b>And furthermore, Rabbi Eliezer said:</b> One may even cut down trees to prepare charcoal for the purpose of circumcision on Shabbat. With regard to this issue, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>In the locale of Rabbi Eliezer,</b> where they would follow his ruling, <b>they would</b> even <b>cut down trees</b> on Shabbat <b>to prepare charcoal</b> from it in order <b>to fashion iron</b> tools with which to circumcise a child <b>on Shabbat.</b> On a related note, the <i>baraita</i> relates: <b>In the locale of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili they would eat poultry meat in milk,</b> as Rabbi Yosei HaGelili held that the prohibition of meat in milk does not include poultry.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Levi happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Yosef the hunter. They served him the head of a peacock [<i>tavsa</i>] in milk</b> and <b>he did not eat. When</b> Levi <b>came before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, the latter <b>said to him: Why did you not excommunicate</b> these people who eat poultry in milk, contrary to the decree of the Sages? Levi <b>said to him: It was</b> in <b>the locale</b> of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, and I said: Perhaps he taught them</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> who permits the eating of poultry meat in milk. Given the possibility that their rabbi rules that it is permitted, I cannot come and prohibit it, and I certainly cannot excommunicate them for it.

### Part 11
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna, <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: It is stated</b> in the verse: <b>“You shall not eat anything that dies of itself;</b> to the stranger at your gates you may give it, that he may eat it; or you may sell it to a foreigner; for you are a holy people to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 14:21), <b>and it is stated</b> later in the same verse: <b>“You shall not cook a kid in its mother’s milk.”</b> From the juxtaposition of the two issues it is derived: <b>That which is prohibited due to</b> the prohibition against eating an <b>unslaughtered animal, it is prohibited to cook</b> it <b>in milk.</b> The prohibition against cooking a creature in milk is not limited to only a kid. If so, with regard to <b>poultry, which is prohibited due to</b> the prohibition against eating an <b>unslaughtered animal,</b> I <b>might</b> have thought <b>it should be prohibited to cook</b> it <b>in milk; therefore, the verse states: “In its mother’s milk.”</b> This <b>excludes poultry, which does not have mother’s milk</b> and is therefore not included in the prohibition.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: There was one city in Eretz Yisrael where they would act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> with regard to circumcision, <b>and they would die at their appointed time</b> and not earlier, as a reward for their affection for this mitzva. <b>And not only that, but on one occasion the wicked empire,</b> Rome, <b>issued a decree against the Jewish people</b> prohibiting <b>circumcision; but against that city it did not</b> issue the <b>decree.</b>

### Part 13
Apropos affection for the mitzva of circumcision, the Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> in which <b>it was taught</b> that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Every mitzva that</b> the Jews initially <b>accepted upon themselves with joy, such as circumcision, as it is written: “I rejoice at Your word as one who finds great spoil”</b> (Psalms 119:162), and as the Sages explained, this “word” refers to the mitzva of circumcision, over which they rejoiced, <b>they still perform</b> it <b>with joy. And every mitzva that</b> the Jews initially <b>accepted upon themselves with contentiousness</b> and regret, <b>such as</b> the prohibition against <b>incestuous relations, as it is written: “And Moses heard the people weeping, family by family”</b> (Numbers 11:10), and as the Sages interpreted homiletically: They wept <b>over matters</b> pertaining to <b>their families,</b> as they were prohibited at that time from marrying family members, <b>they still perform with contentiousness.</b> The fact is <b>that there is no marriage contract</b> and wedding <b>in which contentiousness does not arise,</b> as there is inevitably some conflict between the parties. The <i>baraita</i> asserts that this is because, initially, the Jews did not accept the laws governing marriage and family relationships willingly.

### Part 14
<b>It was taught in</b> a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says</b> in praise of the observance of the mitzva of circumcision: <b>Any mitzva for which the Jews sacrificed their lives at the time of the decrees of the</b> wicked <b>empire, such as</b> the prohibition of <b>idolatry and</b> the mitzva of <b>circumcision, is still steadfastly observed. And any mitzva for which the Jews did not sacrifice their lives at the time of the decrees of the</b> wicked <b>empire, such as phylacteries, is still casually observed,</b> meaning that they are not as careful in its fulfillment as they should be.

### Part 15
The Gemara cites proof that the mitzva of phylacteries was not fulfilled properly at the time of the decrees, based upon an incident related to the following <i>halakha</i>. <b>As Rabbi Yannai said:</b> Donning <b>phylacteries requires a clean body like</b> that of <b>Elisha, Man of Wings. What is</b> included in the requirement to have a clean body? <b>Abaye said: That one may not pass wind in them. Rava said: That one may not sleep in them.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And why did they call him Elisha, Man of Wings? Because on one occasion the wicked empire</b> of Rome <b>issued a decree against the Jewish people that,</b> as punishment, <b>they would pierce the brain of anyone who dons phylacteries on his head.</b> Nevertheless, <b>Elisha would don them and</b> defiantly <b>go out to the marketplace.</b> One day, <b>an official</b> who was appointed to enforce the decree <b>saw him.</b> Elisha <b>ran</b> away <b>from him, and</b> the official <b>ran after him. When</b> the official <b>reached him,</b> Elisha <b>removed</b> the phylacteries <b>from his head and held them in his hand.</b> The officer <b>asked him: What is in your hand?</b> Elisha <b>said to him:</b> It is merely <b>a dove’s wings.</b> A miracle took place: <b>He opened his hand, and,</b> indeed, it <b>was found</b> to be <b>a dove’s wings. Therefore,</b> in commemoration of this miracle, <b>they</b> would <b>call him</b> Elisha, <b>Man of Wings.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is different</b> about <b>a dove’s wings,</b> that Elisha specifically <b>told him</b> that he was holding the wings of a dove <b>and he did not tell him</b> he was holding the wings of <b>other birds?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Because the congregation of Israel is likened to a dove, as it is stated:</b> “You shall shine as <b>the wings of a dove covered with silver and her pinions with yellow gold”</b> (Psalms 68:14). <b>Just as a dove</b> has only <b>its wings to protect it, so too, the Jewish people have</b> only <b>mitzvot to protect them.</b> Apparently, Elisha Man of Wings was vigilant in fulfilling the mitzva of phylacteries in the face of the decree, whereas the rest of the people were not.

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Abba bar Rav Adda said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> as follows: <b>On one occasion</b> they were supposed to circumcise a baby on Shabbat, and <b>they forgot and did not bring a scalpel</b> with which to circumcise him <b>on Shabbat eve, and they brought it on Shabbat via roofs and via courtyards,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC