
### Part 1
<b>contrary to the wishes of Rabbi Eliezer.</b> Even though the roofs and courtyards were not halakhically joined in a manner where it would be permitted to carry from one to the other, the Rabbis permitted carrying the scalpel in this manner.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yosef strongly objects to this: Contrary to the wishes of Rabbi Eliezer? On the contrary, it is Rabbi Eliezer who permits</b> this, as he permits carrying the scalpel even through the public domain. <b>And if you say</b> that it means <b>contrary to the wishes of Rabbi Eliezer, who permits</b> carrying <b>even in the public domain, but in accordance with the wishes of the Rabbis,</b> who <b>prohibited</b> carrying <b>via the public domain and</b> only <b>permitted</b> carrying <b>via roofs, via courtyards and enclosures,</b> that is also difficult. <b>And is it permitted</b> according to the opinion of the Rabbis? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Just as one may not bring</b> the circumcision knife <b>via the public domain, so too, one may not bring it via roofs, via enclosures, or via courtyards?</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi said:</b> It means <b>contrary to the wishes of Rabbi Eliezer and his disputants, but in accordance with the wishes of Rabbi Shimon. As we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Roofs, enclosures, and courtyards are all</b> considered as <b>one domain with regard to vessels that rested inside them</b> at the beginning of Shabbat. Therefore, it is permitted to carry vessels that rested inside one to another. However, they are <b>not</b> considered the same domain <b>with regard to vessels that rested inside the house</b> at the beginning of Shabbat. If the homeowners did not join the courtyard by means of an <i>eiruv</i>, it is prohibited to carry vessels from their houses to the courtyard. Even if the houses in a courtyard were joined, it is prohibited to carry from the courtyard to an enclosure unless they were joined by means of an <i>eiruv</i>. In any case, there are circumstances in which Rabbi Shimon allows carrying via roofs, courtyards, and enclosures.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Zeira raised a dilemma before Rabbi Asi: An alleyway</b> whose residents <b>did not merge</b> together, <b>what is</b> its legal status with regard <b>to carrying</b> items <b>in all of it</b> according to Rabbi Shimon? Rabbi Zeira explains the dilemma: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>it is like a courtyard,</b> and <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>a courtyard, even though they did not join</b> the houses in it together and despite the fact that it is prohibited to carry out items from the houses to the courtyard, <b>it is</b> nonetheless <b>permitted to carry in all of it?</b> Therefore, in <b>this</b> alleyway <b>too, even though they did not merge</b> together, <b>it is permitted to carry in all of it</b> despite the fact that it is prohibited to carry items into the alleyway. <b>Or, perhaps</b> an alleyway is <b>not similar</b> in this regard <b>to a courtyard,</b> as a <b>courtyard has four partitions,</b> whereas <b>this,</b> the alleyway, <b>does not have four partitions,</b> but only three. <b>Alternatively,</b> there may be a different reason for the inferior status of an alleyway in this regard: <b>A courtyard has residents</b> and can therefore be considered like a house, which would allow carrying within it, whereas <b>this</b> alleyway <b>does not have residents.</b> Rabbi Asi <b>was silent and did not say anything to him,</b> as he was unable to provide a satisfactory response.

### Part 5
<b>On another occasion</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>found</b> Rabbi Asi <b>sitting and saying: Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: One time they forgot and did not bring a scalpel on Shabbat eve</b> for the purpose of circumcising a child on Shabbat, <b>and they brought it on Shabbat, and the matter was difficult</b> in the eyes of <b>the Rabbis: How can they abandon the words of the Rabbis,</b> who prohibit doing so, <b>and act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer?</b> Why did they find this difficult? <b>One</b> reason was <b>that Rabbi Eliezer was a <i>Shammuti</i>,</b> i.e., a follower of the views of Beit Shammai (Jerusalem Talmud), and the <i>halakha</i> is generally in accordance with the opinion of Beit Hillel in their disputes with Beit Shammai. <b>And furthermore,</b> there is a general rule that in a dispute between <b>an individual and</b> the <b>many,</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the many.</b> Here too, the <i>halakha</i> should certainly be in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, who disagree with Rabbi Eliezer.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Oshaya said: I asked Rabbi Yehuda the Cutter,</b> i.e., the circumcisor, <b>and he told me</b> that this incident occurred in <b>an alleyway</b> whose residents <b>did not merge</b> together, <b>and they brought</b> the scalpel <b>from this end</b> of the alleyway <b>to that end,</b> where the baby was. That concludes Rabbi Asi’s account of the event. Rabbi Zeira <b>said to</b> Rabbi Asi: Since you related that story without expressing any reservations, it appears that <b>the Master</b> must <b>hold</b> that with regard to <b>an alleyway</b> whose residents <b>did not merge</b> together, <b>it is permitted to carry in all of it. And</b> Rabbi Asi <b>said to him: Yes,</b> that is the <i>halakha</i>. Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: But on a</b> different <b>occasion I raised a dilemma</b> on this matter <b>before you and you did not say so to me. Perhaps in the course</b> of your studies <b>your knowledge was restored to you? He said to him: Yes, in the course</b> of my studies <b>my knowledge was restored to me,</b> and I remembered this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 7
With regard to the very same <i>halakha</i>, <b>it was stated</b> as a principle that <b>Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav said: An alleyway that was not merged</b> by the residents of the courtyards that open into it, <b>it is only permitted to carry in it</b> within <b>four cubits.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said: This</b> halakhic <b>matter was stated by Rabbi Zeira, and he did not explain it.</b> It remained enigmatic <b>until Rabba bar Avuh came and explained it. As Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>an alleyway that was not merged</b> by the residents of the courtyards that open into it, if they <b>joined the courtyards with the houses,</b> i.e., the homeowners within each courtyard joined together and are therefore permitted to carry within the courtyards themselves, <b>it is only permitted to carry in it within four cubits,</b> as in an intermediate domain [<i>karmelit</i>]. However, if they <b>did not join the courtyards with the houses</b> and it is prohibited to carry within the courtyards, <b>it is permitted to carry in the entire</b> alleyway.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥanina Ḥoza’a said to Rabba: What is different</b> about a case <b>where</b> they <b>joined the courtyards with the houses?</b> Is it <b>because</b> the <b>courtyards were detached and became</b> like <b>houses? And Rav follows his</b> regular line of <b>reasoning,</b> for <b>Rav said: An alleyway can only be made</b> into <b>a permitted</b> area for carrying <b>by means of a sidepole and a crossbeam,</b> which is the standard <i>halakha</i> in a closed alleyway, <b>if there are</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC