
### Part 1
<b>Conclude from this</b> <i>halakha</i> that even when it is food that <b>shrivels and improves</b> by remaining on the fire, it is nevertheless <b>permitted</b> to leave it. The food is already completely cooked and there is no concern lest one come to stoke the coals and ignite the fire. Rabbi Oshaya did not distinguish between different types of foods in permitting this. The Gemara rejects this conclusion: <b>Here,</b> it <b>is different</b> because <b>he covered</b> the coals in the stove <b>with ashes,</b> and that is the reason that he is permitted to leave food on the stove. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what</b> purpose was there <b>to say</b> this <i>halakha</i>? Is it to teach that if the coals are covered with ashes, there is no room for concern? That is obvious. The Gemara answers: The case where he covered it with ashes and it <b>reignited</b> on Shabbat <b>was necessary</b> and required additional articulation. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>since it reignited, it returns to its original status</b> and is prohibited, therefore <b>it taught us</b> that this is not the case.

### Part 2
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to a stove that <b>he</b> swept out or <b>covered with ashes</b> before Shabbat <b>and</b> subsequently <b>reignited</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may leave hot water that</b> was already <b>completely heated and cooked food that</b> was already <b>completely cooked upon it, even if</b> the <b>coals</b> were <b>from</b> the wood of <b>a broom</b> tree, which are very hot and long-burning. If so, <b>conclude from this</b> that even if food <b>shrivels and improves</b> while on the stove, it <b>is permitted</b>. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Here,</b> in this case, <b>it is different</b> because <b>he covered it with ashes.</b> Therefore, it is permitted to leave it on the stove. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what</b> was the purpose <b>of saying</b> this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: Mention of the case where he covered it with ashes and it <b>reignited</b> on Shabbat <b>was necessary.</b> The Gemara challenges that explanation: <b>This</b> case <b>is identical to the</b> previous <b>one.</b> Why did Rabbi Yoḥanan find it necessary to repeat what was already said? The Gemara responds that there is a novel element in his statement. It <b>was necessary</b> to teach the case of <b>coals</b> from the wood of <b>a broom</b> tree. Even in a case of especially hot coals it is permitted.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Sheshet said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>a stove that was lit with pomace</b> or <b>with wood, one may leave hot water on it even if</b> the water <b>has not</b> yet <b>been completely heated, and</b> the same is true for <b>cooked food</b> even <b>if it was not</b> yet <b>completely cooked.</b> However, if <b>one removed</b> the food from the stove, <b>one may only return</b> it <b>if he sweeps</b> the coals out of the stove while it is still day, <b>or if he places ashes</b> on the coals. The reason for mentioning this <i>halakha</i> is because <b>he holds</b> that in <b>our mishna we learned</b> with regard to <b>returning</b> the cooked food to the stove; <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>leaving</b> a pot on top of the stove, if it was placed there while it was still day, <b>one may leave it</b> on the stove <b>even if it is not swept and not covered with ashes.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: We</b> already <b>learned both</b> aspects of Rav Sheshet’s <i>halakha</i> and there is no need to teach us something that was already stated explicitly in the mishna. <b>We</b> already <b>learned</b> that it is permitted <b>to leave</b> a pot on the stove. <b>One may not put bread into the oven at nightfall and</b> may <b>not</b> place <b>cake on top of coals unless</b> there is enough time before Shabbat <b>that its surface will form a crust.</b> However, if <b>its surface already formed a crust</b> before Shabbat, <b>it is permitted</b> to leave it even in an oven that was not swept and not covered with coals. Likewise, <b>we also</b> already <b>learned</b> in our mishna the second aspect of Rav Sheshet’s <i>halakha</i> that it is permitted <b>to return</b> the pot to the fire, as <b>Beit Hillel say: One may even return. And</b> it is clear that <b>Beit Hillel only went so far as permitting</b> the return of the pot <b>in</b> a stove that is <b>swept</b> or <b>covered with ashes; however, in one that is not swept</b> or <b>covered with ashes,</b> they did <b>not</b> permit doing so. If so, Rav Sheshet’s statement is superfluous. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Sheshet also</b> only came to <b>teach us the inference from the mishna</b> and not to introduce new <i>halakhot</i>.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>a stove that was lit with pomace</b> or <b>with wood,</b> on Shabbat eve <b>one may leave a cooked dish that was</b> already <b>completely cooked, as well as hot water that was</b> already <b>completely heated, upon it and even if</b> it is the type of food that when left for a prolonged period of time on the fire it <b>shrivels and improves.</b> There is no concern lest one come to stoke the coals. The Gemara relates that <b>one of the Sages said to Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda: Isn’t it Rav and Shmuel who both say,</b> contrary to your opinion, that if food <b>shrivels and improves</b> when placed on the stove, leaving it on there on Shabbat is <b>prohibited?</b>

### Part 6
Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda <b>said to him: Is that to say</b> that <b>I do not know</b> that <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: If</b> food <b>shrivels and improves</b> when left on the fire for an extended period, it is <b>prohibited</b> to leave it there? <b>When I said to you</b> that it is permitted to leave it, <b>I said</b> it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan. Rav Ukva from Meishan said to Rav Ashi: You, who are close to</b> the place where <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> lived, <b>act in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>Rav and Shmuel; we will act in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: What is</b> the ruling with regard <b>to leaving</b> food on the stove from Shabbat eve? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: Didn’t they leave</b> food <b>for Rav Yehuda and</b> he <b>ate</b> it? Apparently, it is permitted to do so. Abaye <b>said to him: No proof can be brought from Rav Yehuda. Since he is in danger,</b> as he is sick and needs hot food, <b>even on Shabbat as well, it is permitted to</b> heat up food <b>for him.</b> However, <b>for me and you</b> as well as for all other people <b>what</b> is the ruling? Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>In Sura, they leave</b> food on the stove from Shabbat eve, <b>as Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak</b> from Sura <b>was a master of</b> good <b>deeds</b> who was meticulous in his performance of mitzvot, <b>and they would leave</b> food <b>for him and he would eat it. Rav Ashi said: I stood before Rav Huna and</b> saw that <b>they left fish fried in oil [<i>kasa deharsena</i>]</b> for him atop the stove on Shabbat, <b>and he ate</b> the fish on Shabbat. <b>And I do not know if</b> his reason for doing so is <b>because he holds</b> that <b>it is permitted</b> to leave food that <b>shrivels and improves</b> when left on the stove for a long time. Or, <b>if</b> it is <b>because this</b> dish <b>has flour</b> in it, and therefore it <b>shrivels and deteriorates.</b> Everyone agrees that it is permitted to leave food atop the stove that shrivels and deteriorates.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> Food that <b>shrivels and improves</b> when left on the stove, <b>it is prohibited</b> to leave it on the stove; if it <b>shrivels and deteriorates, it is permitted. The principle in this matter</b> is as follows: <b>Any</b> food <b>that has flour in it shrivels and deteriorates, except for a cooked turnip</b> dish, <b>which, even though it has flour, shrivels and improves. And this applies only</b> when <b>there is meat in it, but</b> when <b>there is no meat in it, it shrivels and deteriorates. And when there is meat in it, too, we only said</b> that it shrivels and improves <b>when</b> one <b>does not need it for guests, but</b> when one <b>needs it for guests,</b> it <b>shrivels and deteriorates</b> because it is not polite to serve guests overcooked food, which is not aesthetic. Furthermore: Leaving dishes made <b>of figs [<i>lafda</i>], porridge,</b> or <b>dates</b> on the stove causes them to <b>shrivel and deteriorate.</b>

### Part 9
<b>They raised</b> a <b>dilemma before Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC