### Part 1
<b>and his soul ascends</b> to its place beneath the Throne of Glory, <b>and does not descend anymore.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, said in the name of Rav: From a person’s eulogy it is apparent whether or not he has a share in the World-to-Come.</b> If the listeners are pained and brought to tears during the eulogy, it is clear that the person was righteous. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav say to Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat: Stir</b> the hearts of those gathered <b>during</b> my <b>eulogy, for I will be standing there</b> and listening to your words? Even a person as great as Rav needed to give instructions about his eulogy. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> for <b>this</b> statement, which maintains that those who merit a share in the World-to-Come can be identified by their eulogies, is referring to a situation in which <b>they</b> attempt to <b>stir</b> the listener <b>and he is stirred;</b> while <b>that</b> statement is referring to a situation in which <b>they</b> attempt to <b>stir</b> the listener <b>and he is not stirred.</b> That is an indication that the deceased person was not righteous.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said to Rabba: In the case of the Master,</b> i.e., Rabba, <b>whom all of the inhabitants of</b> his city, <b>Pumbedita, hate, who will be stirred during his eulogy? He said to him: It is sufficient for me</b> if <b>you and Rabba bar Rav Ḥanan</b> are stirred.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Elazar raised a dilemma</b> before <b>Rav: Which</b> type of person <b>has a share in the World-to-Come?</b> He <b>said to him:</b> We can derive this from the verse: <b>“And your ears shall hear a word behind you, saying: This is the path, walk on it, when you turn to the right or to the left”</b> (Isaiah 30:21). In other words, if people eulogize one by saying that others should follow in his path, he must have a share in the World-to-Come. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: Anyone with whom our Rabbis are pleased</b> has a share in the World-to-Come. In interpreting the verse: <b>“And the eulogizers walk about the marketplace”</b> (Ecclesiastes 12:5), <b>the people of the Galilee say: Do things</b> that you will want people to say at your eulogy <b>in front of your bier. The people of Judea say: Do things</b> that you want people to say at your eulogy <b>behind your bier.</b> The Gemara remarks: <b>And they do not disagree;</b> this <b>Sage</b> expressed it according to the norm <b>in his place, and</b> this <b>Sage</b> expressed it differently according to the norm <b>in his place.</b> The custom in the Galilee was that the eulogizers would stand before the bier and the custom in Judea was that eulogizers would stand behind the bier.

### Part 5
<b>We learned there</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Repent one day before your death. Rabbi Eliezer’s students asked him: But does a person know the day</b> on which <b>he will die? He said to them: All the more so</b> this is a good piece of advice, and <b>one should repent today lest he die tomorrow; and</b> by following this advice <b>one will spend his entire life in</b> a state of <b>repentance. And</b> King <b>Solomon also said in his wisdom: “At all times your clothes should be white, and oil shall not be absent from upon your head”</b> (Ecclesiastes 9:8), meaning that a person always needs to be prepared.

### Part 6
Similarly, <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said</b> the following story as <b>a parable</b> to this lesson: The situation is comparable <b>to a king who invited his servants to a feast and did not set a time for them</b> to come. <b>The wise among them adorned themselves and sat at the entrance to the king’s house. They said: Is the king’s house missing anything</b> necessary for the feast? Certainly the king could invite them at any moment. <b>The fools among them went to</b> attend to <b>their work</b> and <b>said: Is there such thing as a feast without</b> the <b>toil</b> of preparing for it? While the feast is being prepared, we will attend to other matters.

### Part 7
<b>Suddenly, the king requested</b> that <b>his servants</b> come to the feast. <b>The wise among them entered before him adorned</b> in their finest clothes, <b>and the fools entered before him dirty. The king was happy to greet</b> the <b>wise ones and angry to greet</b> the <b>fools.</b> The king <b>said: These</b> wise servants <b>who adorned themselves for the feast shall sit and eat and drink,</b> but <b>these</b> fools <b>who did not adorn themselves for the feast shall stand and watch.</b> There is a similar outcome for people who think that their day of death and judgment is far away and do not prepare themselves for it.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Meir’s son-in-law said in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> If the punishment for those who did not prepare themselves in advance was merely to stand and watch, it would not be severe enough because <b>they also look like servants</b> at the feast, which is not such a disgraceful punishment. <b>Rather, these and these,</b> both groups of people, <b>sit</b> at the feast. <b>These</b> wise and righteous people <b>eat, and these</b> wicked fools <b>are hungry; these</b> righteous people <b>drink, and these</b> wicked people <b>are thirsty, as it is stated:</b> “Therefore, <b>thus said the Lord,</b> God: <b>Behold, My servants shall eat and you shall be hungry; behold, My servants shall drink and you shall be thirsty;</b> behold, My servants shall rejoice and you shall be ashamed. <b>Behold, My servants shall sing from a joyous heart and you shall scream from a pained heart”</b> (Isaiah 65:13–14).

### Part 9
<b>Alternatively,</b> the verse quoted above can be interpreted in the following way: <b>“At all times let your clothes be white”; this</b> is clothing that contains <b>ritual fringes [<i>tzitzit</i>],</b> which are white. <b>“And oil shall not be absent from upon your head”; these</b> words hint to <b>phylacteries,</b> which are worn on the head.

### Part 10
end of chapter

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One</b> who was traveling on Shabbat eve and <b>night fell,</b> and Shabbat began while he was still <b>en route, gives his</b> money <b>pouch to a gentile</b> traveling with him. <b>And if there is no gentile with him he places it on the donkey.</b> Once <b>he reached the outer courtyard</b> of the city, where belongings can be securely placed, <b>he takes the vessels that may be moved on Shabbat</b> off the donkey. With regard to the vessels <b>that may not be moved on Shabbat, he unties the ropes</b> that attach his bags to the donkey, <b>and the bags</b> of vessels <b>fall on their own.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> We learned in the mishna: One who was traveling on Shabbat eve and night fell, and Shabbat began while he was still en route, gives his money pouch to a gentile. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages permitted him to give his pouch to a gentile?</b> Is it not prohibited for a Jew to ask a gentile to perform a prohibited labor on Shabbat? The Gemara answers: <b>The Sages maintain</b> that <b>a person does not restrain himself</b> when faced with losing <b>his money. If you do not permit him</b> to give his pouch to a gentile, <b>he will come to carry four cubits in a public domain,</b> thereby violating a Torah prohibition.

### Part 13
<b>Rava said:</b> This allowance to give the pouch to a gentile is <b>specifically</b> with regard to <b>his</b> own <b>pouch, but</b> in the case of <b>a lost object</b> that he found, <b>no,</b> it was not permitted. The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious,</b> as <b>we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>His pouch,</b> and nothing else. The Gemara answers: Rava specified this <b>lest you say</b> that <b>the same is true even</b> with regard to <b>a lost object,</b> that one may give it to a gentile on Shabbat, and <b>the</b> mishna <b>taught</b> the case of <b>his pouch</b> merely because it is the <b>manner</b> in <b>which the matter</b> typically occurs. Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that the mishna is in fact establishing a <i>halakha</i> restricted to his pouch. The Gemara comments: <b>And we only said</b> that this allowance does not apply to a lost object when <b>it did not come into his possession</b> before Shabbat. <b>However,</b> if the object already <b>came into his possession</b> before Shabbat, <b>its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>his pouch.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Some state</b> this dilemma in a different manner. <b>Rava raised a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>a lost object that came into his possession</b> before Shabbat, <b>what is</b> the ruling? Is the <i>halakha</i> that <b>since it</b> already <b>came into his possession, its</b> legal status is <b>like</b> that of <b>his pouch? Or perhaps, since he did not exert</b> himself to acquire <b>it, its</b> legal status is <b>not like</b> that of <b>his pouch.</b> Since he expended no effort, he would be capable of restraining himself even when faced with losing it. Therefore, there is no need for the Sages to permit him to give it to a gentile. The Gemara concludes: <b>Let</b> this dilemma <b>stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 15
We learned in the mishna: <b>And if there is no gentile with him</b> he places it on the donkey. The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> is specifically because <b>there is no gentile with him;</b> if <b>there is a gentile with him, he gives it to the gentile</b> and does not place it on a donkey. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>a donkey</b> belonging to a Jew, <b>you are commanded with regard to its rest</b> on Shabbat. With regard to <b>a gentile, you are not commanded with regard to his rest</b> and no Torah prohibition is being violated.

### Part 16
The Gemara teaches an additional <i>halakha</i>: If there was no gentile with him but there was <b>a donkey, a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor,</b> meaning someone under thirteen years old, <b>one places it on the donkey,</b> but <b>one neither gives it to the deaf-mute, nor the imbecile, nor the minor. What is the reason</b> for this? Although they are not obligated to fulfill mitzvot, <b>these</b> are <b>people,</b> but <b>this</b> donkey <b>is not a person.</b> It is preferable to place it on the donkey rather than give it to a person. And if <b>a deaf-mute and an imbecile</b> were with him, he gives it to <b>the imbecile.</b> If <b>an imbecile and a minor</b> were with him, he gives it to <b>the imbecile.</b>

### Part 17
<b>A dilemma was raised</b> before the Sages: If <b>a deaf-mute and a minor</b> were with him, <b>what</b> is the ruling? To whom does he give his pouch? The Gemara answers: <b>According to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer you have no dilemma.</b> Rabbi Eliezer holds that a deaf-mute has a greater degree of halakhic intelligence than does a minor, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: The <i>teruma</i> of a deaf-mute</b> that he separated from his produce