
### Part 1
<b>only for testimony</b> that <b>a woman’s</b> husband died, enabling her to remarry. Only in that case can a ruling rely on hearsay testimony, and that is specifically so the woman will be allowed to remarry.

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages about a related matter: With regard to <b>hearsay testimony in testimony</b> permitting a priest to eat <b>a firstborn</b> animal, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? After the destruction of the Temple, the Sages decreed that if a priest has the firstborn offspring of a kosher animal and it becomes blemished, he must bring witnesses to testify that he did not cause the blemish. Priests were suspected of violating the prohibition against inflicting a wound on firstborn animals to enable them to eat the animals. The question here pertains to a case in which there is no one available who can testify that he saw firsthand how the animal was blemished, but there is someone who heard from an eyewitness how the blemish was caused. <b>Rav Ami prohibited</b> accepting hearsay testimony in this case, <b>and Rav Asi permitted</b> doing so.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ami said to Rav Asi: Didn’t the school</b> of <b>Menashya teach</b> that <b>hearsay testimony is only valid in testimony</b> enabling <b>a woman</b> to remarry, indicating that it is not accepted in the case of a firstborn animal? Rav Asi answered: Emend the previously cited ruling and <b>say:</b> Hearsay testimony is <b>only</b> valid <b>in testimony for which</b> the testimony of <b>a woman is valid.</b> A woman’s testimony is accepted with regard to the death of a man, enabling his wife to remarry, and it is also accepted with regard to a firstborn animal. <b>Rav Yeimar deemed hearsay testimony</b> valid in permitting the slaughter of a firstborn animal that developed a blemish. <b>Mareimar called him: Yeimar who permits the firstborn;</b> Mareimar was of the opinion that testimony of that kind is invalid and cannot provide the basis to allow the animal to be slaughtered. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is</b> that <b>hearsay testimony is valid with regard to a firstborn</b> animal.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna that according to Rabbi Eliezer, honey that flows on its own from <b>honeycombs</b> is permitted on Shabbat. <b>When Rav Hoshaya came from Neharde’a, he came and brought a <i>baraita</i> with him:</b> With regard to <b>olives and grapes that one crushed before Shabbat and</b> their juices <b>seeped out on their own</b> on Shabbat, the juices <b>are prohibited</b> for use on Shabbat; <b>and Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon permit</b> using them.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> rhetorically: <b>Did he</b> merely <b>come to teach us an additional person?</b> This opinion already appears in the mishna in the name of Rabbi Elazar. Did Rav Hoshaya cite the <i>baraita</i> merely to add the name of Rabbi Shimon? <b>Abaye said to him: He is teaching us a great deal, as if</b> we learned this matter <b>from the mishna</b> alone, <b>I would have said: It is there that it is</b> permitted, because <b>initially</b> it was <b>food and ultimately</b> it remained <b>food,</b> since it is possible to assert that the honey that seeped is a food rather than a liquid. <b>However, here,</b> with regard to olives and grapes, <b>which initially</b> were <b>food and ultimately</b> became <b>liquid, say</b> that it is <b>not</b> permitted even according to Rabbi Elazar. Therefore, <b>he is teaching us</b> that Rabbi Elazar rules leniently even in the case of olives and grapes.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Any</b> salted food item <b>that was</b> already <b>placed in hot water,</b> i.e., cooked, <b>before Shabbat, one may soak it in hot water</b> even <b>on Shabbat. And anything that was not placed in hot water before Shabbat, one may rinse it in hot water on Shabbat</b> but may not soak it, <b>with the exception of old salted</b> fish <b>and small salted fish and</b> the <b><i>kolyas ha’ispanin</i></b> fish, <b>for which rinsing</b> with hot water <b>itself is completion of the prohibited labor</b> of cooking.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> We learned in the mishna that an item that was cooked before Shabbat may be soaked in hot water on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>In what case</b> would soaking in hot water be required after the item was already cooked? <b>Rav Safra said: In the case of the chicken of Rabbi Abba,</b> which for medical reasons was cooked so thoroughly that it completely dissolved. <b>And Rav Safra said: One time I happened to come there and he fed me</b> chicken prepared that way, <b>and if not</b> for the fact that <b>Rabbi Abba gave me three-leaf-,</b> i.e., year, <b>old wine to drink, I would have been forced</b> to vomit.

### Part 8
<b>The Gemara relates that Rabbi Yoḥanan would spit from the thought of Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> because he found it so disgusting. <b>Rav Yosef said: Then we should spit from</b> the thought of <b>Rabbi Abba’s chicken,</b> which is even more disgusting to people from Babylonia. <b>And furthermore, Rav Gaza said:</b> On <b>one occasion I happened to come there,</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>and I prepared Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> and <b>all of the sick people of the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>asked me for it.</b> Apparently, not everyone in Eretz Yisrael found it disgusting.

### Part 9
We learned in the mishna: <b>Anything that was not</b> cooked <b>in hot water</b> before Shabbat, one may rinse it in hot water on Shabbat except for salted fish and <i>kolyas ha’ispanin</i>. The Gemara asks: If <b>one</b> unwittingly <b>rinsed</b> it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> If <b>one rinsed</b> these foods, he is <b>liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering</b> for having performed the prohibited labor of cooking. <b>Mar, son of Ravina, said: We, too, have also learned</b> this ruling in the mishna, which states: <b>Except for old salted fish and <i>kolyas ha’ispanin</i>, rinsing itself is completion of their prohibited labor</b> of cooking. One who rinses these items is considered to have performed a prohibited labor. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that this is the ruling.

### Part 10
Apropos relations between the Jews of Eretz Yisrael and Babylonia, the Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba and Rabbi Asi were sitting before Rabbi Yoḥanan, and Rabbi Yoḥanan was sitting and dozing.</b> In the meantime the two of them conversed. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said to Rabbi Asi: For what</b> reason <b>are the fowl in Babylonia fatter</b> than those in Eretz Yisrael? <b>He said to him:</b> This is not at all the case; <b>go to the desert of Gaza</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>and I will show you</b> fowl that are <b>fatter than them.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba then asked: <b>For what</b> reason are <b>Festivals in Babylonia more joyous</b> than those in Eretz Yisrael? Rabbi Asi answered him: <b>Because</b> in Babylonia <b>they are poor,</b> and it is only on Festivals that they have a lot to eat, which causes them to rejoice. Rabbi Ḥiyya then asked: <b>For what</b> reason <b>are Torah scholars in Babylonia distinguished</b> by their special rabbinic garb? Rabbi Asi answered: <b>Because they are not well-versed in Torah.</b> If they would not distinguish themselves by dressing differently, they would not be respected for their Torah knowledge. He then asked: <b>For what</b> reason <b>are gentiles</b> ethically <b>contaminated?</b> He answered: <b>Because they eat abominable creatures and crawling things,</b> and that causes bad character traits.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan woke up</b> due to their discussion <b>and said to them:</b> You <b>children, did I not tell you this,</b> that the verse <b>“Say to wisdom: You are my sister,</b> and call understanding your kin” (Proverbs 7:4) means that <b>if the matter is as clear to you as</b> the fact that <b>your sister is forbidden to you, say it, and if not, do not say it;</b> and these explanations that you offered are unfounded. <b>They said to him: Then will the Master tell us</b> the answers to <b>some of them?</b> He said to them: <b>Why are</b> the <b>fowl in Babylonia fatter</b> than those in Eretz Yisrael? <b>Because they were not exiled, as it says: “Moab has been at ease since his youth and he has settled on his lees,</b> and he was not emptied from vessel to vessel <b>and did not go into captivity;</b> therefore his taste remained in him and his scent did not change” (Jeremiah 48:11). Apparently, one who is not exiled retains his strength.

### Part 12
<b>And here</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> even the animals and birds <b>were exiled? As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>no person passed through</b> the land of <b>Judea</b> for <b>fifty-two years, as it is stated: “I will raise crying and wailing for the mountains</b> and a lamentation for the pastures of the wilderness, for they have been burned, with no person passing through, and they do not hear the voice of the cattle, <b>from the bird of the heavens to the beast [<i>behema</i>,</b> spelled <i>beit</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>heh</i>], <b>all have fled and gone”</b> (Jeremiah 9:9). <b><i>Behema</i> has a numerical value of fifty-two,</b> alluding to the fact that no one passed through for fifty-two years. From the verse cited in this <i>baraita</i>, it is clear that even the animals and birds were exiled, as it states: “All have fled and gone.”

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ya’akov said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They all returned except for the <i>kolyas ha’ispanin</i>, as Rav said: Those inclines of Babylonia return the water</b> through underground watercourses <b>to the spring of Eitam</b> in Eretz Yisrael, and the fish also returned through these watercourses. <b>And this</b> fish, the <i>kolyas</i>, <b>because its spine is not strong, it could not ascend</b> these watercourses and did not return to Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 14
Rabbi Yoḥanan continued to answer the questions of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba and Rabbi Asi: <b>For what</b> reason are the <b>Festivals in Babylonia more joyous</b> than those in Eretz Yisrael? <b>Because they were not</b> included <b>in that curse</b> with which Eretz Yisrael was cursed, <b>as it is written: “And I will cause all of her happiness to cease, her Festival, her New Moon, and her Shabbat and all her Festivals”</b> (Hosea 2:13). <b>And it is</b> also <b>written: “My soul hates your New Moons and your Festivals; they are a burden to Me;</b> I am weary to bear them” (Isaiah 1:14). <b>What is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>“They are a burden to me”? Rabbi Elazar said</b> that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said: Is it not enough for the Jewish people that they sin before Me, that they</b> also <b>burden Me to know which harsh decree I will bring upon them? Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> Because of this curse, <b>there is not a single Festival on which troops did not come to Tzippori</b> to conduct searches or to collect taxes. <b>And Rabbi Ḥanina said: There is not a single Festival on which an <i>egmon</i> and a <i>kamton</i> and a branch bearer,</b> Roman officials, <b>did not come to Tiberias</b> to collect taxes, thereby disrupting the festive celebrations.

### Part 15
<b>For what</b> reason are <b>the Torah scholars in Babylonia distinguished</b> by special garb? <b>Because they are not native to that place</b> and therefore require special dress to distinguish themselves, <b>as people say</b> in the folk expression: <b>In</b> my own <b>city,</b> I am honored for <b>my name; in</b> a place that is <b>not</b> my own <b>city,</b> I am honored for <b>my clothing.</b> The Gemara then praised the Sages of Babylonia by interpreting the verse “In days <b>to come Jacob will take root, Israel will bud and blossom”</b> (Isaiah 27:6). <b>Rav Yosef taught: These are the Torah scholars in Babylonia, who add buds and blossoms to the Torah.</b>

### Part 16
Rabbi Yoḥanan then explained to them: <b>Why are gentiles</b> ethically <b>contaminated?</b> It is because <b>they did not stand on Mount Sinai. As when</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC