### Part 1
<b>it is prohibited to insert</b> it <b>tightly on a Festival</b> due to the prohibited labor of wringing. Doesn’t Rabbi Shimon permit performing an unintentional act from which a prohibited labor may ensue? The Gemara answers: <b>In that</b> case, <b>even Rabbi Shimon concedes</b> that it is prohibited, <b>as it was Abaye and Rava who both said: Rabbi Shimon concedes in</b> instances categorized as: <b>Cut off its head and it shall not die.</b> This category refers to situations where the ensuing prohibited labor is inevitable. In those kinds of cases, one is liable even according to Rabbi Shimon. Since stuffing a cloth into a barrel will inevitably lead to wringing wine from it, Rabbi Shimon concedes that doing so is forbidden.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks again: <b>Didn’t Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi say</b> that <b>Rav said</b> explicitly: The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and Rav Ḥanan bar Ami</b> said that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon. And Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin taught</b> the same tradition <b>without</b> mentioning the names of the <b>men</b> who cited the statements, but cited it directly: <b>Rav said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon. Rather, Rava said: I and the lion of the group explained</b> this. <b>And</b> the Gemara asks: <b>And who is</b> the lion of the group? It is <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin.</b> He and Rava explained: The <b><i>halakha</i> is</b> indeed <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> but <b>not for his reason.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> exactly is the meaning of the statement: The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> but <b>not for his reason? If we say</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who permits</b> smearing rose oil, but <b>not for his reason, because Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that rose oil <b>heals, and Rav holds</b> that it <b>does not heal,</b> which is why he permits smearing it on Shabbat, then <b>does Rav hold</b> that rose oil <b>does not heal? From</b> the fact <b>that it is taught: Princes smear rose [<i>vered</i>] oil on their wounds; by inference,</b> it <b>heals. Rather,</b> it means: The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who <b>permits</b> rose oil, <b>but not for his reason. As Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that <b>although</b> rose oil <b>is uncommon</b> and expensive, and anyone who sees one smearing it realizes that it is for medicinal purposes, nevertheless, it is <b>permitted. And Rav holds</b> that <b>if</b> rose oil <b>is common</b> in a given place, <b>yes,</b> one may smear it on himself; <b>however, if</b> it is <b>not common</b> there, it is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>And in Rav’s place, roses were common,</b> and that is why he permitted smearing with rose oil on Shabbat. However, in a place where rose oil is uncommon, he concedes to the Rabbis, who prohibited doing so.

### Part 4
end of chapter

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are knots for which one is liable</b> to bring a sin-offering if one tied them on Shabbat: <b>A camel driver’s knot and a sailor’s knot,</b> both of which are meant to be permanent. <b>And just as one is liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>for tying these</b> knots, <b>so too, he is liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>for untying them. Rabbi Meir says</b> a principle: <b>For</b> tying <b>any knot that one can untie with one of his hands, one is not liable</b> to bring a sin-offering, because a loose knot of that sort is not considered permanent even if that was his intention.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What are a camel driver’s knot and a sailor’s knot? If you say</b> that these are <b>a knot that</b> one uses to <b>tie</b> a strap <b>to the</b> camel’s <b>nose ring</b> in order to pull it <b>and a knot that</b> one uses <b>to tie</b> a rope <b>to the ring</b> [<i>isterida</i>] <b>fixed to the bow of a ship</b> when the ship is docked, then <b>these knots are not</b> meant <b>to be permanent,</b> as they are periodically untied. <b>Rather,</b> a camel driver’s knot is <b>the knot</b> that fixes the <b>nose ring itself</b> in the camel’s nose, and the sailor’s knot is <b>the knot</b> that fixes the <b>ring itself</b> to the ship. These knots are never untied and are permanent.

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Meir says</b> a principle: For tying <b>any knot</b> that one can untie with one of his hands, one is not liable for tying it. <b>Rav Aḥadvoy, brother of Mar Aḥa, raised a dilemma:</b> With regard to tying <b>a bow, what is</b> the ruling <b>according to Rabbi Meir?</b> Is it permitted to tie it tightly on Shabbat or not? The dilemma is: Is <b>the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir</b> merely that <b>because one can untie</b> the knot <b>with one of his hands</b> it is not considered a permanent knot, <b>and this</b> bow <b>too, he can untie it</b> with one of his hands and therefore he would not be liable for tying on Shabbat? <b>Or perhaps the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir is because</b> typically a knot that can be untied with one hand <b>is not</b> particularly <b>tight, and this</b> bow <b>is tight</b> and therefore it is prohibited to tie it on Shabbat. This dilemma is not resolved, and the Gemara concludes: <b>Let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>You have knots for which one is not liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>as</b> one is liable for tying <b>a camel driver’s knot and a sailor’s knot;</b> however, it is nevertheless prohibited to tie them. <b>A woman may tie</b> closed the <b>opening of her robe</b> with straps, <b>as well as</b> the <b>strings of her hairnet and</b> the laces <b>of her girdle,</b> i.e., a wide belt tied with laces. One may <b>also</b> tie the <b>straps</b> of <b>a shoe</b> or <b>a sandal, as well as</b> the spouts of <b>wine</b> or <b>oil jugs.</b> One may <b>also</b> tie a garment over <b>a pot of meat. Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: One may tie</b> a rope across an entrance <b>before an animal so that it will not go out.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> matter <b>itself is difficult,</b> as there is an internal contradiction in the mishna. On the one hand, <b>you said</b> that <b>there are knots for which one is not liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>as</b> he is for tying <b>a camel driver’s knot and a sailor’s knot,</b> which would seem to indicate that although <b>there is no</b> Torah <b>liability, there is a</b> rabbinic <b>prohibition. And then it was taught that a woman may tie the opening of her robe,</b> indicating that doing so is permitted <b>even <i>ab initio</i>.</b> The Gemara answers that <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: There are knots for which one is not liable</b> to bring a sin-offering for tying them on Shabbat <b>as</b> he is for tying <b>a camel driver’s knot and a sailor’s knot. And which are these?</b>