
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>Are they comparable? There,</b> with regard to the Torah scroll, the casing <b>is a base for a permitted object,</b> i.e., the scroll itself, which may be moved on Shabbat; whereas <b>here,</b> with regard to the hide of the Paschal lamb, the skin <b>is a base for a prohibited object,</b> i.e., the flesh of the sacrifice, which may not be moved until nightfall because it may not be eaten until night. <b>Rather, this is what they said to him: If one may save</b> the <b>casing of the Torah scroll along with the scroll, even if there is money inside it,</b> why then <b>may one not move</b> the <b>hide together with</b> the <b>flesh?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Are they comparable? There,</b> with regard to the Torah scroll, the casing <b>becomes a base for a prohibited object and a permitted object;</b> whereas <b>here,</b> with regard to the hide, <b>it is entirely a base for a prohibited object. Rather, this is what they said to him: If one may bring a casing that has money inside it from outside</b> in order <b>to save a Torah scroll in it,</b> why <b>may one not move</b> the <b>hide together with the flesh?</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where</b> do we derive <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>itself?</b> As it is not stated in the mishna, from where do we derive that it is permitted on Shabbat to bring a casing containing money from the outside in order to save a Torah scroll? <b>If you say</b> that <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> in a situation <b>where</b> the casing has money <b>in it one does not throw it</b> away but brings it out with the casing, when the casing is outside and has money in it, one may also <b>bring</b> the money <b>along with it; is it comparable? There,</b> with regard to the Torah scroll’s casing with money inside, if one tarries in order to empty the money from the case, <b>in the meantime the fire might catch</b> the Torah scroll and burn it; whereas <b>here,</b> with regard to bringing in the casing, <b>in the meantime he could have thrown it away. Rather, Mar bar Rav Ashi said: Actually,</b> it is <b>as we said initially.</b> The Sages equated carrying the Torah casing with flaying the hide of the Paschal lamb. <b>And</b> as for <b>what was difficult for you,</b> that <b>here,</b> with regard to the Torah casing, <b>moving</b> alone is involved, whereas <b>here,</b> with regard to a Paschal lamb, a prohibited <b>labor</b> is involved, it can be explained as referring to a case <b>where one does not need the hide</b> of the Paschal lamb. Therefore, he is exempt.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But Abaye and Rava both said: Rabbi Shimon concedes in</b> cases categorized as <b>cut off its head and will it not die,</b> i.e., an action with an inevitable consequence. When an action has an inevitable consequence, even Rabbi Shimon, who normally exempts a person for performing an action with an unintended consequence, maintains the one is liable. Rather, we must say <b>that one flays it strip by strip,</b> and thereby he does not benefit from the hide. It therefore does not constitute the prohibited labor of stripping the hide.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna: <b>And to where may one rescue them?</b> Into an alley that is closed, which, if it is surrounded on three sides, is considered to be a private domain by Torah law. Ben Beteira says: Even into an open alley. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of an alley that is <b>open,</b> and <b>what are the circumstances</b> of an alley that is <b>not open? Rav Ḥisda said:</b> An alley that has <b>three walls and two posts</b> at its entrance <b>is an alley that is not open;</b> one that has <b>three walls and one post is an alley that is open. And they both,</b> the first <i>tanna</i> and ben Beteira, disagree in the mishna <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, as we learned</b> in a mishna: For <b>preparation of an alley</b> to permit carrying within it on Shabbat, <b>Beit Shammai say</b> the alley must have <b>a post</b> on the side of the entrance <b>and a beam</b> over the entrance. <b>And Beit Hillel say: Either a post or a beam</b> is sufficient. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> In order to permit carrying, <b>two posts</b> are required.

### Part 5
<b>Rabba said to him: Did you call</b> an alley that has <b>three walls and one post open?</b> Even if Rabbi Eliezer does not permit carrying there, it is still not considered to be open but closed. <b>And furthermore, according to the Rabbis,</b> if this is so, <b>let us rescue food and drinks</b> by carrying them <b>there</b> as well. Since the Sages only permitted carrying in an alley that is not open, and because, according to all opinions, it is permitted to carry in a closed alley, one should also be allowed to save food and water, and not only a Torah scroll, by carrying them there. <b>Rather, Rabba said:</b> An alley that has <b>two walls and two posts</b> at both entrances to the alley <b>is an alley that is not open.</b> If it has <b>two walls and one post, it is an alley that is open.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And both of them</b> hold <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Furthermore, Rabbi Yehuda said: One who has two houses</b> opposite each other <b>on two sides of the public domain,</b> if he chooses, <b>he may</b> create a private domain for himself in the area of the public domain. He may <b>place a</b> ten-handbreadth high <b>post from here,</b> perpendicular to the public domain. This creates a symbolic wall which, in the <i>halakhot</i> of alleyways, has the legal status of a wall. <b>And</b> he may place <b>an</b> additional <b>post from here,</b> on the other side, and that has the same legal status as if he closed the public domain on all of its sides. <b>Or,</b> he can implement a different solution appropriate for alleyways by placing <b>a beam</b> extending <b>from here,</b> from one end of one house, to the end of the house opposite it. This creates a symbolic partition across the width of the street. <b>And</b> he may place <b>a beam</b> extending <b>from here,</b> from the other side of the house. According to Rabbi Yehuda, in that way, one is permitted to <b>carry</b> objects <b>and place</b> them <b>in</b> the area <b>between</b> the symbolic partitions, as he would in a private domain. The Rabbis <b>said to him: One may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> in the public domain in that</b> way.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rabba: According <b>to your</b> opinion <b>too,</b> according <b>to the</b> opinion of the <b>Rabbis</b> cited in the mishna who agree with Rabbi Yehuda and permit carrying in an alley that is closed, let <b>us</b> also <b>save food and drinks</b> by carrying them <b>there.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC