### Part 1
The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>one may reset a break</b> on Shabbat, which was the ruling in Shmuel’s version of the mishna. The Gemara relates that <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana happened</b> to come <b>to Pumbedita</b> and <b>he did not enter Rav Yehuda’s lecture.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>sent for Adda, his attendant,</b> and <b>said to him: Go drag him</b> to the lecture. <b>He went and dragged him</b> forcibly to the lecture (Rabbeinu Ḥananel). Rabba bar bar Ḥana <b>came and found</b> Rav Yehuda <b>teaching</b> that <b>one may not reset a break</b> on Shabbat. <b>He said to him: This is what Rav Ḥana of Baghdad said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>one may reset a break</b> on Shabbat. Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Ḥana is ours,</b> a Babylonian scholar, <b>and Shmuel is ours, and</b> nevertheless, <b>I did not</b> yet <b>hear</b> this <i>halakha</i>; <b>did I not rightfully drag you</b> to the lecture?

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna that <b>one whose hand was dislocated</b> may not treat it by vigorously moving it about in water. The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Avya was</b> once <b>sitting before Rav Yosef and his hand became dislocated.</b> Rav Avya then displayed a variety of hand positions and <b>he said to him: What</b> is the ruling with regard to <b>this?</b> Am I permitted to place my hand in this way, or is it a violation of the prohibition against healing on Shabbat? Rav Yosef said to him: <b>It is prohibited.</b> Rav Avya again asked: <b>And what</b> is the ruling if I position my hand in <b>this</b> way? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: It is prohibited. In the meantime, his hand</b> was restored to its proper location and <b>was healed.</b>

### Part 3
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What is your dilemma? We learned</b> in our mishna that <b>one whose hand or foot was dislocated</b> on Shabbat <b>may not</b> vigorously <b>move it about in cold water; however, he may rinse it in the usual manner, and if it is healed, it is healed.</b> Rav Avya <b>said to him:</b> That is no proof, <b>as didn’t we learn</b> in our mishna that <b>one may not reset a break, and Rav Ḥana of Baghdad said</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is</b> that <b>one may</b> indeed <b>reset a broken bone.</b> Therefore, perhaps a dislocated limb may also be treated on Shabbat. Rav Yosef <b>said to him: Were all these woven together in a single weave? Where it was stated</b> that an alternative version of the mishna exists, <b>it was stated; where it was not stated, it was not stated.</b> Therefore, the ruling of the mishna with regard to a dislocated limb must be observed.

### Part 4
end of chapter

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may borrow jugs of wine and jugs of oil from another</b> on Shabbat, <b>as long as one does not say</b> the following <b>to him: Loan me. And similarly, a woman</b> may borrow <b>from another loaves</b> of bread on Shabbat. <b>And if</b> the lender <b>does not trust him</b> that he will return them, the borrower <b>may leave his cloak with him</b> as collateral <b>and make</b> the proper <b>calculation with him after Shabbat. And similarly,</b> on <b>the eve of Passover in Jerusalem, when</b> it <b>occurs on Shabbat, one</b> who is procuring a Paschal lamb <b>may leave his cloak with him,</b> i.e., the person from whom he is purchasing it, <b>and take</b> the lamb to bring as <b>his Paschal lamb, and</b> then <b>make</b> the proper <b>calculation with him after the Festival.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> It was taught in the mishna that one is permitted to borrow jugs from another on Shabbat, but one may not use the phrase loan me. <b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan said to Abaye: What is different</b> about the expression <b>let me borrow,</b> that makes it permitted? <b>And what is different</b> about the expression <b>loan me</b> that makes it prohibited? <b>He said to him:</b> If someone says <b>let me borrow,</b> the lender <b>will not come to write</b> down the loan because the expression indicates that the borrower intends to return the object in its current state within a short amount of time. On the other hand, the expression <b>loan me</b> indicates a more extended loan in which the object is not necessarily returned in exactly the same manner in which it was taken. Therefore, the lender <b>will come to write</b> down the terms of the loan.

### Part 7
Rava bar Rav Ḥanan challenged Abaye’s answer: <b>But since on weekdays there are times one intends to say loan me and</b> instead <b>says let me borrow, and</b> the lender <b>is not particular about his</b> imprecise terminology and <b>he comes to write</b> down the terms of the loan, <b>on Shabbat he will also come to write.</b> Abaye <b>said to him: On a weekday, when there is no difference if one says loan me or let me borrow,</b> lenders <b>are not particular about his</b> terminology, and the lender will therefore <b>come to write</b> down the terms of the loan. <b>On Shabbat, since</b> only the expression <b>let me borrow was allowed by the Sages,</b> while the expression <b>loan me was not permitted, the matter is recognizable.</b> Both of the parties must bear in mind which terminology is acceptable, <b>and</b> the lender <b>will not come to write.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan said to Abaye: Now, since the Sages said that</b> with regard to <b>all matters of a Festival, as much as we can change</b> the way we do things from the manner in which we do them on weekdays, <b>we change, these women who fill their pitchers with water, what is the reason they do not change</b> the way they draw water from their normal weekday procedure? Abaye answers: <b>Because it is not possible</b> to change the procedure. <b>How would they do it</b> differently? If you say that <b>those who</b> normally <b>fill a large pitcher should fill a small pitcher</b> on a Festival, <b>they would</b> thereby <b>add</b> to their <b>walking</b> and expend extra effort. Conversely, if <b>those who</b> normally <b>fill a small pitcher would fill a large pitcher</b> on a Festival, <b>they would</b> thereby <b>add</b> to the weight of their <b>load.</b> Even though these methods are different from the norm, they would cause added exertion. Therefore, the Sages did not require that one draw water in an unusual fashion.