
### Part 1
The valley discussed in the mishna in <i>Teharot</i> is unusual, as it refers to <b>a case where it has partitions</b> that are ten handbreadths high surrounding it. <b>And in accordance with that</b> which <b>Ulla said</b> that <b>Rav Yoḥanan said: An enclosure [<i>karpef</i>],</b> a large courtyard that is not contiguous with the house and does not serve a direct purpose for the house, that is <b>greater than</b> a field that produces a crop of <b>two <i>se’a</i>, that was not</b> originally <b>surrounded</b> by a fence <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>residence,</b> but with a partition to protect his belongings, <b>and even</b> if it is as large as a field that produces a crop of one <b><i>kor</i>,</b> thirty times the size of a <i>se’a</i>, <b>and even two <i>kor</i>,</b> it is still considered a private domain. <b>And,</b> consequently, <b>one who throws</b> an object <b>into it</b> from the public domain on Shabbat <b>is liable. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>It is a partition</b> that surrounds the enclosure and its legal status is like that of a partition in every sense, <b>except that it is lacking residents.</b> Even though the Rabbis were stringent with regard to this enclosure because of the lack of residents and prohibited carrying in it as if it were a <i>karmelit</i>, that does not negate its primary legal status; by Torah law it is a full-fledged private domain. The same is true with regard to the aforementioned valley. The valley is a large area surrounded by partitions erected for the purpose of protection and thereby assumes private domain status.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> in explanation of the mishna, <b>Rav Ashi did not say in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Ulla,</b> as he provided a reason for it. <b>However, what is the reason that Ulla did not say in accordance with his</b> own <b><i>halakha</i></b> that he cited in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan? The Gemara answers: Ulla could have <b>said to you: If</b> the mishna is referring to a case where <b>it has partitions,</b> would it <b>call</b> that place <b>a valley? It is an enclosure.</b> The implication of the word valley is that there are no partitions at all. <b>And Rav Ashi</b> defends his opinion by saying: The language <b>taught</b> in the mishna is: <b>The private domain</b> and not a <i>karmelit</i>. Therefore, his explanation more closely approximates the language of the mishna.

### Part 3
In the <i>Tosefta,</i> the list of places whose legal status is that of a <i>karmelit</i> also includes <b><i>karmelit.</i></b> The Gemara asks: <b>Aren’t they, all</b> the other places listed there, i.e., a sea, a valley, and a colonnade, <b>a <i>karmelit</i> too?</b> If so, what is this <i>karmelit</i> that is prominently mentioned here? The Gemara answers: <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This</b> addition of <i>karmelit</i> <b>was only necessary</b> in order to teach the case of <b>a corner adjacent to the public domain, where, although at times the multitudes push</b> their way <b>in and enter it, since its use is inconvenient it is considered a <i>karmelit</i>.</b>

### Part 4
Similarly, <b>when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Between the pillars</b> alongside the public domain <b>is judged like a <i>karmelit</i>. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Although the multitudes stride there, since they cannot walk</b> in it <b>in a direct manner,</b> uninterrupted, <b>it is considered like a <i>karmelit</i>. Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> The same is true for <b>the bench that is before the pillars</b> upon which the merchants place their wares; it <b>is judged</b> to be <b>like a <i>karmelit</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: According <b>to the one who said</b> that <b>between the pillars</b> is considered like a <i>karmelit</i>, <b>all the more so a bench</b> is considered a <i>karmelit</i>. However, according <b>to the one who said</b> that <b>a bench</b> is a <i>karmelit</i>, one could say that that <b>is</b> so specifically with regard to <b>a bench</b> because <b>its use is inconvenient. However,</b> the space <b>between the pillars, whose use is convenient,</b> would <b>not</b> be considered a <i>karmelit</i>. <b>Another version</b> of that statement: <b>However, between the pillars where, at times, the multitudes stride there is considered like the public domain.</b>

### Part 6
With regard to the question to what degree does the use of the multitudes determine whether a specific place is considered a public domain, the Gemara cites the <i>halakha</i> that <b>Rabba bar Sheila said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> If <b>an upright brick</b> was placed <b>in the public domain and one threw</b> an object from a distance of four cubits <b>and he stuck</b> the object <b>to its side, he is liable</b> for throwing in the public domain. But if the object landed <b>atop</b> the brick, <b>he is not liable.</b> Because the multitudes do not step on the brick, it is not a full-fledged public domain.

### Part 7
It was <b>Abaye and Rava, who both said: And that is</b> specifically when that brick <b>is</b> at least <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>high,</b> as then <b>the multitudes do not step on it,</b> and, therefore, even though the brick is standing in the public domain, it is considered an independent domain. However, <b>thorns and shrubs, even though they are not three handbreadths high,</b> are not considered part of the public domain. Since people do not walk on thorns, those areas cannot be considered part of the public domain. <b>And Ḥiyya bar Rav said: Even</b> the place where there are <b>thorns and shrubs</b> in the public domain, if they were low, the place is considered part of the public domain. <b>However,</b> a place in the public domain where there are <b>feces</b> is <b>not</b> considered part of the public domain, as people do not walk there. <b>And Rav Ashi said: Even</b> a place in the public domain where there are <b>feces</b> is considered part of the public domain, since ultimately people who are rushing to work do not take care to avoid it and will step on it.

### Part 8
<b>Rabba from the school of Rav Sheila said: When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: There is no <i>karmelit</i> less than four</b> handbreadths. <b>And Rav Sheshet</b> added and <b>said: And</b> the <i>karmelit</i> <b>extends up to ten</b> handbreadths. With regard to the formulation of Rav Sheshet, the Gemara wondered: <b>What is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>And extends up to ten? If you say that</b> it means <b>if there is a partition ten</b> handbreadths <b>high</b> surrounding it <b>then it is</b> considered <b>a <i>karmelit</i>, and if not, it is not</b> considered <b>a <i>karmelit</i>. And</b> is it <b>not</b> a <i>karmelit</i>? <b>Didn’t Rav Giddel say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav said: A house that does not have</b> walls <b>inside it</b> that are <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>high, and</b> with <b>its roofing it reaches</b> a height of <b>ten</b> handbreadths above the ground; <b>on its roof, one may carry on all of it,</b> as its roof is a private domain in every sense, <b>and inside it, one may only carry four cubits,</b> as inside, the height is insufficient to render it a private domain, and it retains <i>karmelit</i> status? Apparently, even an area less than ten handbreadths high has the legal status of a <i>karmelit</i>.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, what is</b> the meaning of Rav Sheshet’s formulation: <b>And extends up to ten?</b> Apparently, <b>up to ten</b> handbreadths <b>is that which is</b> within the parameters of <b>a <i>karmelit</i>, and above ten</b> handbreadths <b>is not a <i>karmelit</i>. And as Shmuel said to Rav Yehuda: Keen scholar [<i>shinnana</i>], do not be</b> involved with questions <b>in the matters of Shabbat above ten</b> handbreadths. The Gemara elaborates: With regard <b>to what <i>halakha</i></b> and in the context of what issue did Shmuel make this statement? <b>If you say</b> his intention was that <b>there is no private domain above ten</b> handbreadths, <b>didn’t Rav Ḥisda say:</b> One who <b>stuck a stick in the</b> ground of <b>the private domain and threw</b> an object from the public domain <b>and it landed atop it, even</b> if the stick was <b>a hundred cubits high, he is liable, since the private domain extends up to the sky?</b> Apparently, there is a private domain even above ten handbreadths.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC