
### Part 1
<b>Measure and bring</b> a lot of money, <b>has ceased. And some say</b> that the meaning of the statement is that this nation <b>said: Bring very, very much, without measure.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara cites another verse pertaining to Nebuchadnezzar: <b>“And surpassing greatness was added unto me”</b> (Daniel 4:33), about which <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Yirmeya bar Abba said: This teaches that</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>rode atop a male lion and tied a serpent to its head, fulfilling what was said</b> of him: <b>“And the beasts of the field I have also given him to serve him”</b> (Jeremiah 27:6).

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may not hire workers on Shabbat</b> to work for him after Shabbat because even speaking about weekday matters is prohibited on Shabbat. Similarly, <b>a person may not tell another</b> on Shabbat <b>to hire workers for him. One may not</b> even <b>wait for nightfall at</b> the edge of <b>the Shabbat boundary</b> in order to leave the boundary immediately after Shabbat <b>to hire workers for himself or to bring produce</b> from his field. <b>But he may wait for nightfall</b> at the edge of the Shabbat boundary in order <b>to guard</b> his produce that is outside the Shabbat boundary, <b>and</b> he may then <b>bring produce</b> back <b>in his hand,</b> since he did not initially intend to wait at the edge of the boundary for this purpose. <b>Abba Shaul stated a</b> general <b>principle:</b> With regard to <b>anything that I am permitted to discuss</b> on Shabbat, <b>I am permitted to wait for nightfall</b> at the edge of the Shabbat boundary <b>for its sake.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The beginning of the mishna taught that one may not hire workers on Shabbat, and one may not tell another to hire workers for him. The Gemara finds this puzzling and states: This is <b>obvious. What is the difference between him and another?</b> Just as he is prohibited from hiring workers on Shabbat, others are also prohibited from doing so. <b>Rav Pappa said: Another</b> is referring to <b>a gentile. Rav Ashi strongly objects to this:</b> This is itself a prohibition, for <b>telling a gentile</b> to do something that is prohibited for a Jew on Shabbat violates a <b>rabbinic prohibition.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi said: Even if you say</b> that it is referring to <b>another Jew,</b> it can be said that the novel element of this ruling is not the statement itself but what can be derived from it. <b>This is what it is teaching us: One may not say to another</b> explicitly on Shabbat: <b>Hire workers for me, but one may say to another: Does it seem that you will join me this evening?</b> This is permitted even though both of them understand that the questioner intends to hire the other person to work for him. <b>And</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa; as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>Does it seem that you will join me this evening? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: A person may say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>Does it seem that you will join me this evening?</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa. And Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What is the reason for Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa’s</b> ruling? <b>As it is written</b> in the verse from which we derive the prohibition to speak on Shabbat about activities that one may not perform on that day: “And you shall honor it by not doing your ways, <b>nor pursuing your business, nor speaking of it”</b> (Isaiah 58:13). We derive from this verse that <b>speaking is prohibited,</b> but merely <b>contemplating</b> these matters <b>is permitted.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Rav Huna raised a contradiction to Rava: Did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> really <b>state</b> as a general principle that <b>speaking is prohibited,</b> but <b>contemplating is permitted? Consequently,</b> we can derive from here that <b>contemplation is not tantamount to speech. But Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is permitted to think</b> about Torah <b>in any place except for a bathhouse and a bathroom.</b> This statement indicates that contemplation is tantamount to speech, as even thought is prohibited in these locations. The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there, for</b> with regard to Torah <b>we need</b> to fulfill the verse: “For the Lord your God walks in the midst of your camp to deliver you and to give your enemies before you; <b>therefore, your camp shall be sacred</b> so that He see no unseemly thing in you and turn away from you” (Deuteronomy 23:15); <b>and</b> the requirement to be sacred is <b>not</b> fulfilled if one thinks about Torah while in the bathhouse or bathroom.

### Part 8
The Gemara challenges this: But <b>here, too,</b> with regard to a bathhouse and a bathroom, <b>it is written: “So that He see no unseemly thing [<i>davar</i>] in you”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:15). We can infer that this prohibits speech [<i>dibbur</i>] but not contemplation. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse is not referring to speech. <b>It is needed for</b> the ruling of <b>Rav Yehuda, for Rav Yehuda said: Opposite a naked gentile, it is prohibited to recite <i>Shema</i>,</b> as this is included in the prohibition of unseemly things mentioned above.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Why did</b> Rav Yehuda <b>teach</b> this prohibition <b>particularly</b> with regard to <b>a gentile? Even</b> in the presence of a naked <b>Jew,</b> reciting <i>Shema</i> is <b>also</b> prohibited. The Gemara answers: That ruling <b>is stated</b> employing the style of: <b>There is no need.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>There is no need</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a Jew,</b> as it is certainly <b>prohibited</b> to recite <i>Shema</i> in the presence of a naked Jew. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>a gentile, since it is written about him: “Whose flesh is as the flesh of donkeys”</b> (Ezekiel 23:20), perhaps his flesh is not considered nakedness, and one may <b>say that it seems well</b> and permitted. Therefore, Rav Yehuda <b>teaches us</b> that it is also prohibited to recite <i>Shema</i> before a naked gentile.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: Why not <b>say</b> that <b>it is indeed so,</b> that gentile flesh is not considered nakedness? The Gemara rejects this idea: <b>The verse</b> already <b>said</b> with regard to the sons of Noah: “And they walked backward and covered their father’s nakedness, and their faces were turned backward, <b>and they did not see their father’s nakedness”</b> (Genesis 9:23). The verse uses the term nakedness with regard to Noah, who was a gentile.

### Part 11
The Gemara addresses the basis of the <i>halakha</i> mentioned above: <b>And is it speaking</b> about proscribed activities <b>prohibited</b> on Shabbat? <b>But Rav Ḥisda and Rav Hamnuna both said: It is permitted to make calculations pertaining to a mitzva on Shabbat, and Rabbi Elazar said</b> that this means that <b>one may apportion charity for the poor on Shabbat. And Rabbi Ya’akov bar Idi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One may attend to</b> activities necessary for <b>saving a life or for communal needs on Shabbat, and one may go to a synagogue to attend to communal affairs on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One may go to theaters [<i>tarteiot</i>], and circus performances [<i>kirkesaot</i>], and courthouses [<i>basilkaot</i>] to attend to communal affairs on Shabbat. And</b> one of the Sages in <b>the school of Menashe taught: One may</b> make the necessary arrangements to <b>pair off children</b> so that they will <b>be betrothed on Shabbat, and</b> one may likewise make arrangements <b>for a child</b> by finding someone <b>to teach him</b> how to read <b>books and to teach him a craft.</b> If speaking about monetary matters is prohibited on Shabbat, how is it possible to participate in all these activities? The Gemara answers that although speaking about similar things is generally prohibited on Shabbat, it is permitted in these cases because <b>the verse said: “Nor pursuing your business, nor speaking of it”</b> (Isaiah 58:13), which indicates that <b>your business</b> matters <b>are prohibited</b> to speak of on Shabbat, but <b>the business of Heaven,</b> matters which have religious significance, <b>is permitted</b> to speak of.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>calculations of: What is it to you, [<i>mallakh</i>],</b> calculations that are in no way relevant to the person making them, <b>and of: What</b> significance <b>does it have [<i>ma bekhakh</i>],</b> calculations that do not have any practical significance, it is <b>permitted to make them on Shabbat.</b> This <b>was also taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Calculations</b> with regard to matters <b>that have passed</b> or <b>that will be in the future may not be calculated</b> on Shabbat. However, with regard to calculations of: <b>What is it to you,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC