
### Part 1
<b>Isn’t that</b> what we learned <b>in the mishna,</b> with regard to which <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: That</b> liability is <b>when it came to rest atop something,</b> which means that the object must actually land in order for the one who threw it to be liable. Mareimar <b>said to</b> Ravina: <b>Are you saying</b> it is a case of <b>rolling?</b> One cannot cite proof from a rolling object because <b>a rolling object will not ultimately come to rest. However,</b> with regard to <b>this</b> object, which passed within three handbreadths of the ground, I would say: <b>Since it will ultimately come to rest, even though</b> it has <b>not</b> yet <b>come to rest,</b> it <b>is</b> considered <b>as an object</b> that <b>came to rest.</b> Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that even in that case one is not liable until it actually comes to rest upon something.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who throws</b> an object <b>four cubits into the sea is exempt. If there was a swamp and the public domain passes through it, one who throws</b> an object <b>four cubits into it is liable</b> like one who carried four cubits in the public domain. <b>And how</b> deep <b>is</b> this <b>swamp?</b> It is <b>less than ten handbreadths</b> deep. In the case of <b>a swamp that the public domain passes through, one who throws</b> an object <b>four cubits into</b> the swamp <b>is liable.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>One of the Sages said to Rava: Granted, passing passing</b> is mentioned <b>twice</b> in the mishna; <b>this teaches us</b> that <b>passage under duress is considered passage,</b> but <b>usage under duress is not considered usage. But why do I need it</b> to mention <b>swamp swamp twice?</b> Rava answered him: <b>One</b> case <b>is</b> referring <b>to the summer, and one</b> case <b>is</b> referring <b>to the winter. And</b> both cases <b>are necessary, as had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> only <b>one</b> mention of swamp, I would have said that <b>these matters,</b> i.e., cases indicating that passage under duress is considered passage, <b>apply</b> only <b>in the summer because people commonly</b> pass through the swamp <b>to cool themselves; however, in the winter</b> I would have thought that it would <b>not</b> be so. <b>And had</b> the mishna <b>taught us</b> only the case of <b>winter,</b> I would have said that <b>since they are filthy</b> from mud anyway, <b>they do not mind</b> walking through the swamp, <b>but in the summer</b> it would <b>not</b> be so.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said:</b> It is possible to explain this other way. It was <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to state swamp twice because <b>it would have entered your mind to say</b> that <b>these matters apply</b> specifically <b>where</b> the swamp <b>is not four cubits</b> wide because then people walk through the swamp and do not circumvent it, <b>but where</b> the swamp <b>is four cubits</b> wide, people <b>circumvent it.</b> Therefore, it was necessary to teach that people walk through swamps that are both narrow and wide.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> another explanation: It was <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to state swamp twice because <b>it would have entered your mind to say</b> that <b>these matters apply</b> specifically <b>where</b> the swamp is at least <b>four</b> handbreadths wide, <b>but where</b> the swamp <b>is not four</b> handbreadths wide, people <b>step over it</b> and do not walk through it. The Gemara comments: <b>And Rav Ashi</b> follows his own <b>reasoning, as Rav Ashi said: One who threw</b> an object <b>and it came to rest on one of the beams of a bridge is liable.</b> Even though the width of each beam is less than four handbreadths, it joins together with the other beams to form a single surface of the public domain <b>because</b> even though many people step over the beams, still <b>many people step on it.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who throws</b> an object <b>from the sea to dry land, or from dry land to the sea, or from the sea onto a boat, or from a boat into the sea, or from one boat to another is exempt</b> because the sea has the legal status of a <i>karmelit</i>. If <b>boats</b> are <b>tied together, one may carry</b> an object <b>from one to the other</b> on Shabbat. However, <b>if they are not tied, even though they are adjacent, one may not carry from one to the other.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was stated</b> that the Sages disagreed with regard to the manner in which one may draw seawater onto <b>a boat</b> on Shabbat. <b>Rav Huna said: One extends a projection of any size from</b> the side of the boat as a distinctive sign, <b>and fills</b> a receptacle with water from the sea. <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rabba bar Rav Huna say: One creates an area,</b> a frame <b>of four</b> by four handbreadths, <b>and fills</b> the water from inside it.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>Rav Huna,</b> who <b>said</b> that <b>one extends a projection of any size and fills</b> a receptacle with water, <b>maintains</b> that <b>we measure</b> the <b><i>karmelit</i> from the</b> sea <b>floor.</b> Since the sea itself is deeper than ten handbreadths, the boat is considered to be floating in the air, <b>and the air is an exempt domain,</b> as it is above ten handbreadths from the ground of the <i>karmelit</i>. <b>And by law</b> one <b>should not require a projection</b> because he is drawing water from an exempt domain into a private domain, which is permitted <i>ab initio</i>. <b>Rather,</b> the reason a projection is required is <b>so that he will have a distinctive sign</b> and not come to draw water from a <i>karmelit</i> into a private domain.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥisda and Rabba bar Rav Huna say: One creates an area,</b> a frame <b>of four</b> by four handbreadths, <b>and fills</b> a receptacle with water. <b>They maintain</b> that <b>we measure</b> the <b><i>karmelit</i> from the surface of the water,</b> and <b>the water</b> in the sea has a legal status <b>like</b> that of <b>solid land.</b> Therefore, <b>if one does not create an area of four</b> by four, <b>he will carry from a <i>karmelit</i> to the private domain.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Naḥman said to Rabba bar Avuh: And according to Rav Huna,</b> who <b>said</b> that <b>one extends a projection of any size from</b> the side of the boat <b>and fills</b> a receptacle with water, isn’t there room for concern that <b>at times when</b> the water <b>is not ten</b> handbreadths deep, <b>he will carry from a <i>karmelit</i> into the private domain?</b> He <b>said to him: We learned</b> through tradition that <b>a boat does not travel in</b> water that is <b>less than ten</b> handbreadths deep. He asks: Although <b>a boat has a protrusion</b> at its bow is more than ten handbreadths above the sea floor, the entire length of the boat is not necessarily that far above the bottom. <b>Rav Safra said: Those people who measure the depth of the water</b> with long poles <b>proceed before</b> the ship and ensure that that the water is at least ten handbreadths deep.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin: According to Rav Ḥisda and Rabba bar Rav Huna, who say</b> that in order to draw water onto a boat on Shabbat <b>one creates an area of four</b> by four handbreadths <b>and fills</b> a receptacle, <b>how does he throw out his waste water? And if you say he pours it out in the same area</b> from which he draws water, the water that he subsequently draws from there will be <b>disgusting to him.</b> Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin answered him: <b>He pours it onto the side</b> of the <b>boat</b> from which it runs into the sea, and he does not pour it directly into the sea. The Gemara asks: Even so, <b>it is</b> accomplished by means of <b>his power.</b> Although he did not pour it directly, he caused the waste water to enter the sea. The Gemara answers: The Sages <b>did not issue a decree</b> to prohibit an action performed by <b>one’s power in a <i>karmelit</i>.</b> They only prohibited throwing an object directly. <b>And from where do you say</b> that this is so? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a <b>ship, one may neither carry from it into the sea, nor from the sea into it.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC