
### Part 1
<b>a stake in a tree and hung a</b> four<b>-</b>by<b>-</b>four handbreadth <b>basket from it</b> into which he placed the food for his joining of the Shabbat boundaries, if the basket was <b>above ten handbreadths</b> from the ground, <b>his <i>eiruv</i> is not a</b> valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b> It is prohibited for him to take the bread from the basket on Shabbat, because the basket’s area and height render it a private domain, and he is standing in a different domain. If the basket was <b>below ten handbreadths</b> from the ground, <b>his <i>eiruv</i> is a</b> valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara examines this statement: <b>The reason</b> for this distinction between above and below ten handbreadths is specifically because <b>he drove a stake into a tree</b> and hung the basket from it. <b>However,</b> if <b>he did not drive</b> a stake into a tree, but tied the basket to the tree itself, <b>even</b> if it was <b>below ten handbreadths</b> from the ground <b>his <i>eiruv</i> is not a</b> valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b> If he were to take the bread from the basket he would be making use of the sides of the tree, which is prohibited on Shabbat. <b>And isn’t</b> it the case that <b>this</b> is the <b><i>tanna</i> who prohibits using</b> the <b>sides</b> of the tree, <b>and</b> nevertheless, <b>he permits using</b> the <b>sides of the sides,</b> contrary to Rava’s opinion?

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa said: Here, we are dealing with a</b> narrow-mouthed <b>basket</b> that is tightly tied to the tree. Since it is difficult to remove anything from it, <b>when he takes the</b> bread for the <b><i>eiruv</i> he moves the tree, and he is</b> thereby <b>using the</b> sides of the <b>tree itself</b> and not the sides of the sides of the tree. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that use of the <b>sides</b> of a tree or an animal <b>is prohibited</b> on Shabbat, but use of the <b>sides of the sides is permitted.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said: Now that you said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is that use of the <b>sides is prohibited,</b> with regard to <b>this ladder</b> that one climbs to an <b>elevated</b> area, <b>a person may not lean it against the palm tree</b> itself <b>because it is</b> considered use of the <b>sides</b> of the tree on Shabbat. <b>Rather, he should lean it on stakes</b> that are <b>external</b> to the trunk of <b>the palm tree. And when</b> one <b>climbs</b> the ladder, <b>he should not place his foot on the stakes. Rather, he should place it on the rungs</b> of the ladder because it is prohibited to use the sides of the tree.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may untie <i>peki’in</i> of grain before an animal</b> on Shabbat, <b>and one may spread the <i>kifin</i> but not the <i>zirin</i>.</b> These terms will be explained in the Gemara. <b>One may not crush hay or carobs before an animal</b> on Shabbat in order to facilitate its eating. He may do so <b>neither</b> for a <b>small</b> animal <b>[<i>daka</i>] nor</b> for a <b>large</b> one. <b>Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> to do so <b>with carobs for a small</b> animal, because it can swallow the hard carobs only with difficulty.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Huna said: They are</b> called <b><i>peki’in</i></b> and <b>they are</b> also called <b><i>kifin</i>.</b> The difference between them is that <b><i>peki’in</i></b> are tied with <b>two</b> knots, whereas <b><i>kifin</i></b> are tied with <b>three. <i>Zirin</i>,</b> which may not be moved on Shabbat, are bundles <b>of cedar</b> branches eaten by animals when the branches are small and moist. <b>And this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: One may untie <i>peki’in</i> of grain before an animal and spread</b> them, <b>and the same is true for <i>kifin</i>, but not</b> for <b><i>zirin</i>,</b> which <b>one</b> may <b>neither spread nor untie. Rav Ḥisda said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion of <b>Rav Huna? He holds</b> that with regard <b>to exerting</b> oneself <b>with food</b> on Shabbat, <b>one may exert</b> himself; however, with regard <b>to rendering food</b> edible, <b>one</b> may <b>not render</b> it so. Bundles of crops which are fit for animal consumption in their present state may be further prepared on Shabbat. Cedar branches cannot be eaten when bound together; therefore, one may not exert himself to untie them and render them edible on Shabbat.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda</b> understood the mishna differently and <b>said: They are</b> called <b><i>peki’in</i> and they are</b> also called <b><i>zirin</i>.</b> The difference between them is that <b><i>peki’in</i></b> are tied with <b>two</b> knots, whereas <b><i>zirin</i></b> are tied with <b>three. <i>Kifin</i></b> are bundles <b>of cedar</b> branches. <b>And this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: One may untie <i>peki’in</i> of grain before an animal; however,</b> with regard to <b>spreading them, no,</b> he may not spread them. <b>And</b> with regard to <b><i>kifin</i>, one</b> may <b>also spread them. However,</b> that is <b>not</b> the case with regard to <b><i>zirin</i>,</b> as it is prohibited to <b>spread</b> them, and it is <b>only</b> permitted <b>to untie</b> them. <b>Rava said: What is the reason</b> for <b>Rav Yehuda’s</b> opinion? <b>He holds</b> the opposite of Rav Huna’s opinion. He holds that with regard to <b>rendering food</b> edible, <b>one</b> may <b>render</b> it so; however, with regard to <b>exerting</b> oneself on Shabbat <b>with food</b> that is already in an edible state, <b>one</b> may <b>not exert</b> himself.

### Part 8
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>One may not crush hay or carobs before an animal</b> on Shabbat in order to facilitate its eating. He may do so <b>neither</b> for a <b>small</b> animal <b>nor</b> for a <b>large</b> one. <b>Is this not</b> referring to <b>carobs</b> that are <b>similar to hay? Just as</b> it is referring to <b>hay that is soft, so too,</b> it is referring to <b>carobs that are soft. Apparently, we do not exert</b> ourselves <b>with food.</b> Since the carobs are suitable for animal consumption without being crushed, it is prohibited to exert oneself and crush them. <b>And</b> this is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of <b>Rav Huna.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara answers that <b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you: No,</b> the mishna is referring to <b>hay</b> that is <b>similar to carobs. Just as</b> it is referring to <b>carobs that are hard, so too,</b> it is referring to <b>hay that is hard</b> and crushing it renders it edible. The Gemara asks: <b>How is it</b> possible <b>to find</b> hay that is so hard that an animal cannot eat it? The Gemara answers: It is referring <b>to young donkeys,</b> that can only eat hay that is crushed well.

### Part 10
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which we learned in the continuation of the mishna: <b>Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> crushing <b>carobs for a small</b> animal. The Gemara infers: <b>For a small</b> animal, <b>yes,</b> it is permitted; <b>for a large one, no,</b> it is not permitted. <b>Granted, if you say</b> that the <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds:</b> One may <b>not exert</b> himself <b>with food</b> on Shabbat, but with regard to <b>rendering</b> food edible, <b>one</b> may <b>render</b> food edible, <b>that</b> explains <b>that which Rabbi Yehuda</b> said in response: Feeding <b>carobs to a small animal is also</b> a case of <b>rendering food</b> edible because the animal cannot eat hard carobs. <b>However, if you say</b> that the <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that with regard to <b>rendering</b> food edible, <b>one</b> may <b>not render</b> food edible on Shabbat, but with regard to <b>exerting</b> oneself <b>with food, one</b> may <b>exert</b> himself, then <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who permits</b> crushing <b>carobs for a small</b> animal, <b>all the more so</b> he should permit crushing carobs <b>for a large</b> one. If carobs are suitable for consumption by a small animal, all the more so are they suitable for consumption by a large animal.

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Do you hold that</b> the small animal <b>[<i>daka</i>]</b> mentioned here is referring to <b>an actual small</b> animal? No; rather, <b>what</b> is the meaning of <b><i>daka</i></b> here? It is referring to a <b>large</b> animal. <b>And what</b> is the reason that the mishna <b>calls it <i>daka</i>? Because it is particular [<i>dayka</i>] about</b> its <b>food.</b> Since this animal can eat uncrushed carobs when there is no alternative, one may exert himself and crush them for it.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: From the fact <b>that it is taught in the first clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Neither</b> for a <b>small</b> animal <b>nor</b> for a <b>large</b> animal, <b>it can be inferred</b> that when <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> said <b><i>daka</i>, he meant an actual small</b> animal. The Gemara was unable to answer to find an answer to this question and it remains <b>difficult.</b> Nonetheless, Rav Huna’s opinion was not refuted.

### Part 13
Therefore, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which we learned in another mishna: <b>One may chop</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC