
### Part 1
<b>and served Torah scholars extensively, why did he die at half his days?</b> Where is the length of days promised him in the verse? <b>No one would respond to her</b> astonishment <b>at all.</b> Eliyahu said: <b>One time I was a guest in her</b> house, <b>and she was relating that entire event</b> with regard to the death of her husband. <b>And I said to her: My daughter, during the period of your menstruation, how</b> did <b>he</b> act <b>toward you? She said to me: Heaven forbid, he did not touch me even with</b> his <b>little finger.</b> And I asked her: <b>In the days of your white</b> garments, after the menstrual flow ended, and you were just counting clean days, <b>how did he act toward you</b> then? She said to me: <b>He ate with me, and drank with me, and slept with me with bodily contact and,</b> however, <b>it did not enter his mind about something else,</b> i.e., conjugal relations. <b>And I said to her: Blessed is the Omnipresent who killed him</b> for this sin, <b>as</b> your husband <b>did not show respect to the Torah. The Torah said: “And to a woman in the separation of her impurity you should not approach”</b> (Leviticus 18:19), even mere affectionate contact is prohibited. The Gemara relates that <b>when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said:</b> That student did not actually sleep with her with bodily contact; rather, <b>it was</b> in <b>one bed</b> that they slept without contact. <b>In the West,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say</b> that <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef said:</b> When they would sleep together in one bed, she wore <b>a belt [<i>sinar</i>]</b> from the waist down that <b>would separate between him and her.</b> Nevertheless, since the matter is prohibited, that student was punished.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are among the <i>halakhot</i> that</b> the Sages, <b>who went up to visit him, said in the upper story of Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya ben Garon.</b> The precise nature of these <i>halakhot</i> will be explained in the Gemara. These <i>halakhot</i> are considered one unit because they share a distinctive element. Since many Sages were there, among them most of the generation’s Torah scholars in Eretz Yisrael, they engaged in discussion of various <i>halakhot</i> of the Torah. It turned out that when the people expressing opinions <b>were counted,</b> the students of <b>Beit Shammai outnumbered</b> the students of <b>Beit Hillel, and they issued decrees</b> with regard to <b>eighteen matters on that day</b> in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the language that introduces our mishna, <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: Did we learn</b> in our mishna: <b>These are</b> among the <i>halakhot</i>, <b>or did we learn</b> in our mishna: <b>And these are</b> among the <i>halakhot</i>? The difference is significant. <b>Did we learn: And these,</b> and if so, the reference would be to <b>those that we said</b> earlier, i.e., that those <i>halakhot</i> are included in the decrees? <b>Or did we learn: These,</b> and if so the reference would be to <b>those that we seek to mention below? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution to this dilemma from the fact that these matters were taught together in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not shake</b> garments to rid them of lice <b>by the light of the lamp and one may not read by the light of the lamp; and these are among the <i>halakhot</i> that</b> the Sages <b>said in the attic of Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya ben Garon. Conclude from this</b> that <b>we learned: And these</b> in the mishna, and the reference is to the decrees mentioned earlier.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i>, which is a list of days of redemption that were established as celebrations for generations: <b>Who wrote <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i>?</b> This scroll was written by <b>Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya</b> ben Garon <b>and his faction, who held dear</b> the memory of <b>the troubles</b> that befell Israel and their salvation from them.

### Part 5
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: We also hold dear</b> the memory of <b>the troubles</b> from which Israel was saved, <b>but what can we do? If we came to write</b> all the days of that kind, <b>we would not manage to</b> do so, as the troubles that Israel experienced in every generation and era are numerous, and on each day there is an event worthy of commemoration.

### Part 6
<b>Alternatively:</b> Why do we not record the days of salvation from troubles? Just as <b>a crazy person is not hurt,</b> as he is not aware of the troubles that befall him, so too, we cannot appreciate the magnitude of the calamities that befall us.

### Part 7
<b>Alternatively: The flesh of a dead person does not feel the scalpel</b> [<b><i>izemel</i></b>] cutting into him, and we, too, are in such a difficult situation that we no longer feel the pains and troubles. With regard to the last analogy, the Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Yitzḥak say: The</b> gnawing of <b>maggots is as excruciating to the dead as</b> the stab of <b>a needle is to the flesh of the living,</b> as <b>it is stated</b> with regard to the dead: <b>“But his flesh shall hurt him, and his soul mourns over him”</b> (Job 14:22)? Rather, <b>say</b> and explain the matter: <b>The dead flesh</b> in parts of the body <b>of the living person</b> that are insensitive to pain <b>does not feel the scalpel</b> that cuts him.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: Truly, that man is remembered for the good, and his name is Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya, as if not for him, the book of Ezekiel would have been suppressed because its contents,</b> in many details, <b>contradict matters of Torah.</b> The Sages sought to suppress the book and exclude it from the canon. <b>What did he,</b> Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya, <b>do? They brought him three hundred jugs of oil,</b> for light and food, <b>up</b> to his upper story, <b>and he sat</b> isolated <b>in the upper story</b> and did not move from there until <b>he homiletically interpreted</b> all of those verses in the book of Ezekiel that seemed contradictory, and resolved the contradictions.

### Part 9
We learned in the mishna that when the Sages went up to the upper story of the house of Ḥananya ben Ḥizkiya ben Garon, they were counted <b>and issued eighteen decrees</b> in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai. The Gemara asks: <b>What are those eighteen matters?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna, a list of the decrees that the Sages issued with regard to items whose level of impurity is such that if they come into contact with <i>teruma</i> they disqualify it. By means of that contact, the <i>teruma</i> itself becomes impure, but it does not transmit impurity to other items. <b>These disqualify <i>teruma</i>: One who eats food</b> with <b>first</b> degree ritual impurity status acquired as a result of contact with a primary source of ritual impurity, e.g., a creeping animal; <b>and one who eats food</b> with <b>second</b> degree ritual impurity status acquired as a result of contact with an item with first degree ritual impurity status; <b>and one who drinks impure liquids</b> of any degree of impurity; <b>and one whose head and most of his</b> body <b>come into drawn water</b> after he immersed himself in a ritual bath to purify himself; <b>and a ritually pure person that three <i>log</i></b> of <b>drawn water fell on his head and most of his</b> body; <b>and a Torah scroll; and the hands</b> of any person who did not purify himself for the purpose of handling <i>teruma</i>; <b>and</b> one <b>who immersed himself during the day,</b> i.e., one who was impure and immersed himself, and until evening he is not considered completely pure; <b>and foods and vessels that became impure by</b> coming into contact with impure <b>liquids.</b> Contact with any of these disqualifies the <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara seeks to clarify these matters.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks first: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who holds that <b>one who eats food</b> with <b>first</b> degree ritual impurity status, <b>and one who eats food</b> with <b>second</b> degree ritual impurity status, <b>disqualify</b> the <i>teruma,</i> but

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC