
### Part 1
<b>would seek pairs of Sages</b> engaged in conversation on Shabbat and <b>said to them: Please do not desecrate</b> Shabbat by failing to delight in Shabbat.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who said: <b>Even an individual who prays on Shabbat evening must recite</b> the passage: “And the heavens and the earth <b>were finished [<i>vaykhullu</i>]”</b> (Genesis 2:1–3), <b>as Rav Hamnuna said: Anyone who prays on Shabbat evening and recites</b> the passage of <b>vaykhullu, the verse ascribed him</b> credit <b>as if he became a partner with the Holy One, Blessed be He, in the act of Creation. As it is stated:</b> “And the heavens and the earth <b>were finished [<i>vaykhullu</i>].” Do not read</b> it as: <b>Were finished [<i>vaykhullu</i>]; rather,</b> as: <b>They finished [<i>vaykhallu</i>].</b> It is considered as though the Holy One, Blessed be He, and the individual who says this become partners and completed the work together. <b>Rabbi Elazar said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that speech is like action? As it is stated: “By the word of God the heavens were made,</b> and all of their hosts by the breath of His mouth” (Psalms 33:6).

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ḥisda said</b> that <b>Mar Ukva said: One who prays on Shabbat evening and recites <i>vaykhullu</i>, the two ministering angels who accompany the person</b> at all times <b>place their hands on his head and say to him: “And your iniquity has passed, and your sin has been atoned”</b> (Isaiah 6:7). <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: Two ministering angels accompany a person on Shabbat evening from the synagogue to his home, one good</b> angel <b>and one evil</b> angel. <b>And when</b> he <b>reaches his home and finds a lamp burning and a table set and his bed made, the good angel says: May it be</b> Your <b>will that it shall be like this for another Shabbat. And the evil angel answers against his will: Amen. And if</b> the person’s home is <b>not</b> prepared for Shabbat in that manner, <b>the evil angel says: May it be</b> Your <b>will that it shall be so for another Shabbat, and the good angel answers against his will: Amen.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: A person should always set his table on Shabbat eve</b> with all the preparations for an important feast, <b>even if he only needs</b> the table set for <b>an olive-bulk</b> of food. <b>And Rabbi Ḥanina said: A person should always set his table at the conclusion of Shabbat,</b> Saturday night, for a feast in deference to the Shabbat that passed, <b>even if he only needs</b> the table set for <b>an olive-bulk</b> of food. And with regard to the meal at the conclusion of Shabbat, they said: <b>Hot water after Shabbat</b> is a <b>remedy [<i>melugma</i>], warm bread at the conclusion of Shabbat</b> is a <b>remedy.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>They would prepare for Rabbi Abbahu at the conclusion of Shabbat a third-born calf,</b> and <b>he would eat</b> one <b>kidney from it. When his son Avimi grew up,</b> he <b>said to</b> his father: <b>Why do you waste so much? Let us leave a kidney over from Shabbat eve,</b> and you will not need to slaughter an entire calf for that purpose. Indeed, <b>they left</b> the calf and did not slaughter it, <b>and a lion came and ate it.</b> This teaches that one should not be miserly when it comes to honoring Shabbat.

### Part 5
Apropos the reward for honoring Shabbat, the Gemara cites statements about the reward for answering amen. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said</b> that <b>anyone who answers: Amen, may His great name be blessed,</b> wholeheartedly, <b>with all his might,</b> they <b>rip his sentence, as it is stated: “When punishments are annulled in Israel, when the people offer themselves, bless the Lord”</b> (Judges 5:2). <b>What is the reason for when punishments are annulled? Because</b> the Jewish people <b>blessed God.</b> When one recites: Amen, may His great name be blessed, and blesses God, his punishment is annulled. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even</b> if <b>one has within him a trace of idolatry,</b> when he answers amen <b>he is forgiven. It is written here,</b> in the verse above: <b>“When punishments [<i>pera’ot</i>] are annulled.” And it is written there,</b> with regard to the sin of the Golden Calf: “And Moses saw <b>that</b> the nation <b>was wild [<i>paru’a</i>],</b> for Aaron had let them loose for anyone who might rise against them” (Exodus 32:25). Even one with the wildness of idolatry is forgiven. <b>Reish Lakish said: One who answers amen with all his strength, they open the gates of the Garden of Eden before him, as it is stated: “Open the gates, and a righteous nation shall come who keeps the faith”</b> (Isaiah 26:2). <b>Do not read: Who keeps [<i>shomer</i>] the faith [<i>emunim</i>], but rather: Who say [<i>she’omerim</i>] amen. What</b> is the allusion of the word <b><i>amen</i>? Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> It is an acronym of the words: <b>God, faithful King [<i>El Melekh ne’eman</i>].</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel, said in the name of Rav: Fire is only found in a place where there is desecration of Shabbat, as it is stated: “And if you do not heed Me to sanctify the day of Shabbat, and to refrain from carrying burdens</b> and come to the gates of Jerusalem on the day of Shabbat, <b>and I will light a fire in its gates and it will consume the palaces of Jerusalem and it will not be extinguished”</b> (Jeremiah 17:27). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>And it will not be extinguished? Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> Fire will break out <b>at a time when people are not found to extinguish it. Abaye said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because people desecrated the Shabbat in it, as it is stated: “And from My <i>Shabbatot</i> they averted their eyes, and I was profaned among them”</b> (Ezekiel 22:26). Several punishments were decreed to befall Jerusalem as punishment for this transgression.

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests additional reasons for the destruction of Jerusalem. <br><b>Rabbi Abbahu said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because</b> its citizens intentionally <b>omitted recitation of <i>Shema</i> morning and evening, as it is stated: “Woe to those who rise early in the morning and pursue the drink</b> and are aflame from wine until late in the evening” (Isaiah 5:11). <b>And it is written</b> in the continuation of that passage: <b>“And their drinking parties have lyre and lute, drum and flute and wine, and they do not look upon the actions of God,</b> and they do not see His hands’ creations” (Isaiah 5:12). This means that in the morning and evening, when the Jews should have been reciting <i>Shema</i>, they were drinking wine and liquor. <b>And it is written</b> in that passage: <b>“Therefore My nation is being exiled for its ignorance;</b> its honor will die of hunger and its multitudes will be parched with thirst” (Isaiah 5:13).

### Part 8
<b>Rav Hamnuna said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because schoolchildren there were interrupted</b> from studying Torah, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And I am filled with the wrath of God, I cannot contain it, <b>pour it onto the infants in the street</b> and onto the gathering of youths together, for men and women alike will be captured, the elderly along with those of advanced years” (Jeremiah 6:11). Rav Hamnuna explains: <b>What is the reason that</b> the wrath is <b>poured?</b> It is <b>because infants are outside</b> in the streets and are not studying Torah. <br><b>Ulla said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because people had no shame before each other, as it is stated: “They acted shamefully; they have performed abominations, yet they neither were ashamed</b> nor did they know humiliation. Therefore, they will fall among the fallen, they will fail at the time that I punish them, said God” (Jeremiah 6:15). <br><b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because</b> its <b>small and</b> the <b>great</b> citizens <b>were equated.</b> They did not properly value the prominent leaders of their generation, <b>as it is stated: “And the common people were like the priest,</b> the slave like his master, the maidservant like her mistress, the buyer like the seller, the lender like the borrower, the creditor like the one indebted to him” (Isaiah 24:2). <b>And it is written afterward: “The land shall be utterly desolate</b> and completely plundered, for God has said this” (Isaiah 24:3).

### Part 9
<b>Rav Amram, son</b> of <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Abba, said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because the people did not rebuke one another, as it is stated: “Her ministers were like stags that found no pasture,</b> and they walked without strength before their pursuer” (Lamentations 1:6). <b>Just as this stag</b> turns <b>its head toward the other’s tail</b> when it grazes, and each one feeds on its own, <b>so too, the Jewish people in that generation lowered their faces to the ground and did not rebuke one another.</b> <br><b>Rabbi Yehuda said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because they disparaged the Torah scholars in it, as it is stated: “And they mocked the messengers of God and disdained His words and taunted His prophets, until the wrath of God arose against His people, until it could not be healed”</b> (II Chronicles 36:16). <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Until it could not be healed? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> It means that <b>anyone who disparages Torah scholars cannot be healed from his wound.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Do not touch My anointed ones and do My prophets no harm”</b> (I Chronicles 16:22)? <b>“Do not touch My anointed ones,” these are the schoolchildren,</b> who are as precious and important as kings and priests (Maharsha); <b>“and do not harm My prophets,” these are Torah scholars. Reish Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda Nesia: The world only exists because of the breath,</b> i.e., reciting Torah, <b>of schoolchildren. Rav Pappa said to Abaye: My</b> Torah study <b>and yours, what</b> is its status? Why is the Torah study of adults worth less? He <b>said to him: The breath</b> of adults, <b>which is</b> tainted by <b>sin, is not similar to the breath</b> of children, <b>which is not</b> tainted by <b>sin. And Reish Lakish said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda Nesia: One may not interrupt schoolchildren</b> from studying Torah, <b>even in order to build the Temple. And Reish Lakish said to Rabbi Yehuda Nesia: I have received from my ancestors, and some say</b> that he said to him: I have received <b>from your ancestors as follows: Any city in which there are no schoolchildren</b> studying Torah, they <b>destroy it. Ravina said:</b> They leave <b>it desolate.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And Rava said: Jerusalem was destroyed only because there were no more trustworthy people there, as it is stated: “Roam about the streets of Jerusalem and see, and search its plazas, if you can find a person, who acts justly, who seeks integrity, that I should forgive it”</b> (Jeremiah 5:1). The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Ketina say: Even at the time of Jerusalem’s failure, trustworthy people did not cease there, as it is stated: “For a man will grab his brother of his father’s house and say: You have a garment. Come be a chief over us</b> and let this ruin be under your care” (Isaiah 3:6)? <b>Things that people use to cover up like a garment,</b> secrets, <b>are in your hands</b> and you know about them. Therefore, you should be a leader of the community. And that which is stated: <b>“And let this ruin be under your care,”</b> meaning:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC