
### Part 1
<b>even</b> one who <b>carries out a corpse to bury it. Rava said: And Rabbi Shimon agrees</b> that one who carries out <b>a hoe</b> on Shabbat <b>with which to dig or a Torah scroll from which to read</b> is <b>liable.</b> The Gemara asks: This is <b>obvious, as if those</b> acts of carrying out <b>are also</b> in the category of <b>a prohibited labor not necessary for its own sake</b> because the carrier’s intention is to dig or to read, <b>if so, according to Rabbi Shimon, how can you find</b> an act of carrying that would be considered <b>a prohibited labor necessary for its own sake?</b> The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, there is a novel element in Rava’s statement. <b>Lest you say</b> that Rabbi Shimon deems one liable <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> one carries out an object <b>for the sake</b> of the one carrying it, <b>as well as for its own sake,</b> for example, in a case <b>where</b> one carried out <b>a hoe</b> for its own sake, in order <b>to sharpen its blade, and</b> for the sake of the one carrying it, in order <b>to dig</b> with it, or one carried out <b>a Torah scroll</b> for its own sake, in order <b>to emend</b> it, <b>and</b> for the sake of the one carrying it, in order <b>to read from it;</b> therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Shimon deems one liable for carrying out an object even when it is carried only for his own sake and not for the sake of the object.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a corpse in</b> the city of <b>Derokera</b> and <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak permitted carrying it out into a <i>karmelit</i></b> on Shabbat because, for some reason, it could not remain where it was. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, brother of Mar, son</b> of <b>Rabbana, said to Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak: In accordance with whose</b> opinion did you permit moving the corpse to the <i>karmelit</i>? If it was <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, say that</b> in that case <b>Rabbi Shimon exempted</b> one <b>from</b> the <b>obligation</b> to bring a <b>sin-offering.</b> However, <b>there</b> remains <b>a rabbinic prohibition.</b> Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak <b>said to him: By God, have you entered into</b> an understanding of the matter? <b>Even according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda it is permitted</b> to carry out the corpse, <b>as did I say</b> they may carry it out <b>to the public domain? I said</b> that it may be carried out <b>into a <i>karmelit</i>,</b> which is only prohibited by rabbinic law. With regard to prohibitions by rabbinic law, the principle states: <b>Great is human dignity, as it overrides a prohibition in the Torah:</b> “You shall not deviate from that which they tell you to the right or to the left” (Deuteronomy 17:11).

### Part 3
<b>We learned there</b> in a mishna discussing the <i>halakhot</i> of leprosy: <b>One who plucks</b> white hairs that are <b>signs of impurity, and</b> similarly <b>one who burned the unaffected skin</b> in the midst of a leprous sore in an attempt to purify himself, <b>violates a prohibition,</b> as it is stated: “Take heed [<i>hishamer</i>] in the plague of leprosy” (Deuteronomy 24:8). This ruling is based on the principle that the term <i>hishamer</i> indicates a prohibition. On this topic, <b>it was stated:</b> With regard to one who plucks <b>one of two</b> white hairs, everyone agrees that he is <b>liable</b> because a single hair remains, which is less than the measure that determines impurity, i.e., two hairs. It is with regard to one who plucks <b>one of three</b> white hairs that there is a dispute between the <i>amora’im</i>. <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> He is <b>liable. Rav Sheshet said:</b> He is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara elaborates. <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> He is <b>liable</b> because <b>his actions were effective, as if another</b> hair <b>is removed,</b> the <b>impurity would cease.</b> He thereby hastened his purification and is in violation of the prohibition. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> He is <b>exempt</b> because his actions were ineffective, as <b>now, in any case, the impurity is</b> intact even after he removed one hair. His act is ineffective, and therefore he does not violate the prohibition.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Sheshet said: From where do I</b> derive and <b>state</b> my opinion? I derive it <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And similarly,</b> one who carries out <b>an olive-bulk of a corpse and an olive-bulk of an animal carcass is liable.</b> The Gemara elaborates: By inference, one who carries out <b>half an olive-bulk is exempt. What, is it not taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One who carries out <b>half an olive-bulk</b> of a corpse <b>is liable? Is it not</b> that the contradiction is resolved as follows? That <b>which was taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>He is liable,</b> is referring to a case where one <b>carried out half an olive-bulk from an olive-bulk.</b> Because less than an olive-bulk of the corpse remained, it is no longer a source of ritual impurity. <b>And</b> that <b>which we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>He is exempt,</b> is referring to a case where one <b>carried out half an olive-bulk from an olive-bulk and a half.</b> Since an entire olive-bulk remains, the source of impurity remains intact. <b>And Rav Naḥman</b> explains it differently. Both <b>this,</b> the one who carried out half an olive-bulk from an olive-bulk, <b>and that,</b> the one who carried out half an olive-bulk from an olive-bulk and a half, are <b>liable. And</b> that <b>which we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>He is exempt,</b> is referring to a case where one <b>carried out half an olive-bulk from a large corpse.</b> In that case, even Rav Naḥman agrees that his action was ineffective. Since he did not carry out a measure that determines liability, he is exempt.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who removes his fingernails with one another</b> on Shabbat without scissors, <b>or with his teeth, and the same</b> is true with regard to one who removes <b>his hair</b> with his hands, <b>and the same</b> is true with regard to <b>his mustache, and the same</b> is true with regard to <b>his beard, and the same</b> is true with regard to a woman <b>who braids her hair, and the same</b> is true with regard to one <b>who applies blue</b> eye shadow, <b>and the same</b> is true with regard to one <b>who applies blush, Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> them all <b>liable,</b> as they each performed a labor prohibited by Torah law. <b>And the Rabbis prohibited</b> performing all of these actions <b>due to rabbinic decree.</b> None of the actions constitute prohibited labors.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> is specifically with regard to a case where one removes his fingernails <b>by hand; however,</b> everyone agrees that one is <b>liable</b> if he removes them <b>with a utensil.</b> The Gemara asks: This is <b>obvious. We</b> explicitly <b>learned</b> the phrase: <b>With one another,</b> in the mishna. The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>the Rabbis also exempt</b> one who removes his fingernail <b>with a utensil,</b> i.e., because one is not interested in the removed nail, he did not perform the prohibited labor of shearing, <b>and that which was taught</b> in the mishna: <b>With one another,</b> is intended <b>to convey the far-reaching nature of Rabbi Eliezer’s</b> statement that one is liable even in a case where he removed his fingernails with one another; therefore, Rabbi Elazar <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> is specifically with regard to one who removes fingernails <b>for himself; however,</b> with regard to one removing fingernails <b>for another, everyone agrees</b> that <b>he is exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious. We</b> explicitly <b>learned</b> the phrase: <b>His fingernails,</b> in the mishna. The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> one <b>liable</b> for cutting <b>another’s</b> fingernails <b>as well, and that which was taught</b> in the mishna: <b>His fingernails,</b> is intended <b>to convey the far-reaching nature of the</b> statement of the <b>Rabbis</b> that one is exempt even in a case where he removes his own nails, and all the more so in a case where he removes another’s; therefore, Rabbi Elazar <b>teaches us</b> that everyone agrees that he is exempt when removing another’s nails.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna: <b>And the same</b> is true with regard to one who removes <b>his hair</b> with his hands; Rabbi Eliezer deems him liable and the Rabbis deem him exempt. One of the Sages <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who removes</b> enough of his hair <b>to fill the opening of the scissors</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable. And how much</b> is enough <b>to fill the opening of the scissors? Rav Yehuda said: Two</b> hairs. The Gemara asks: <b>But was it not taught</b> later in that <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> with regard to the Torah prohibition against removing one’s hair and causing <b>baldness</b> as an expression of mourning the dead: “Nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead” (Deuteronomy 14:1), one who removes <b>two</b> hairs is <b>liable?</b> Apparently, enough to fill the opening of a scissors is a different amount of hairs. The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that these are not two different measures. The <i>baraita</i> is saying: <b>And the same</b> is true <b>for baldness, two</b> is the measure.

### Part 9
<b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who removes</b> enough of his hair <b>to fill the opening of the scissors on Shabbat is liable. And how much</b> is enough <b>to fill the opening of the scissors?</b> It is <b>two</b> hairs. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One is liable for removing even <b>one</b> hair. <b>And the Sages agree with Rabbi Eliezer</b> that <b>one</b> who <b>collects</b> and plucks <b>white</b> hairs <b>from among black</b> ones <b>is liable even</b> if he removed <b>a single</b> hair. His actions indicate that one hair is significant for him. <b>And this matter</b> of plucking white hairs <b>is prohibited</b> for men <b>even on weekdays, as it is stated:</b> “A woman shall not don a man’s clothes, <b>and a man shall not wear a woman’s garment”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:5). The Sages derive that any action typically performed by women for beautification is prohibited for men.

### Part 10
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> With regard to <b>a fingernail, the majority of which has been severed,</b> and it is only connected to the finger by a small piece; <b>and</b> with regard to <b>shreds</b> of skin, <b>the majority of which have been severed</b> from the body; <b>by hand,</b> one <b>is permitted</b> to completely remove them on Shabbat. If he removes them <b>with a utensil, he is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>Is there any matter</b> where one who performs an action <b>with a utensil is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, and</b> if he performs that action <b>by hand, it is permitted <i>ab initio</i>,</b> and it is not even prohibited by rabbinic decree? The Gemara answers: <b>This is what</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar meant <b>to say:</b> If <b>the majority has been severed,</b> removing the rest <b>by hand is permitted.</b> If he removes the rest <b>with a utensil</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> but <b>it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>. And if the <b>majority has not</b> yet <b>been severed,</b> if he removes the rest <b>by hand</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> but <b>it is prohibited</b> to do so <i>ab initio</i>. If he did so <b>with a utensil,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering. Rav Yehuda said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar</b> in this matter. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And that is if the</b> partially severed portions of the fingernail <b>were severed facing upward</b> near the nail <b>and cause him pain;</b> in that case one may remove them <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna: <b>And the same</b> is true with regard to a woman <b>who braids her hair,</b> and one who applies blue eye shadow, and one who applies blush; Rabbi Eliezer deems them liable by Torah law. The Gemara asks: <b>For</b> performance of <b>what</b> prohibited labor is a woman <b>who braids her hair,</b> or <b>who applies blue</b> eye shadow, <b>or who</b> applies <b>blush</b> on Shabbat <b>liable? Rabbi Avin said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said:</b> A woman <b>who braids her hair</b> is liable <b>due to weaving,</b> as braiding and weaving are similar actions. A woman <b>who applies blue</b> eye shadow is liable <b>due to writing.</b> A woman <b>who applies blush</b> is liable <b>due to spinning.</b> Women would make a string from a doughy substance and pass it over their faces to redden their complexion. <b>The Rabbis said before Rabbi Abbahu: And is that the</b> typical <b>manner of weaving, and is that the</b> typical <b>manner of writing, and is that the</b> typical <b>manner of spinning?</b> Rabbi Eliezer would certainly agree that one who performs a prohibited labor in an atypical manner is exempt. <b>Rather, Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> This matter was <b>explained to me</b> by <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> himself.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC