
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>a bone</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make a spoon. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> In a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make from it a key.</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>glass</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to scrape</b> and smooth <b>the top of a bobbin,</b> a sharpened stick used by weavers. The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>a pebble or a stone</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to throw at a bird</b> to chase it away. <b>Rabbi Elazar bar Ya’akov says: Equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to throw at an animal,</b> which is larger.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that the measure of Rabbi Yehuda is greater? Don’t we maintain that the measure of the Rabbis is greater? Ulla said:</b> Rabbi Yehuda did not refer to the entire key, but to <b>the teeth of a key.</b> With regard to the above, the Gemara cites that which <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The teeth of a key are ritually pure,</b> and they cannot become impure when separate from the key, as they have no function on their own. However, if <b>one affixed them to a key, they</b> can become <b>ritually impure</b> as part of a utensil. <b>And</b> teeth <b>of a lock, even though one attached them to the door and affixed them with nails, are ritually pure, as anything attached to the ground has</b> the same legal status <b>as the ground</b> itself, which cannot become ritually impure.

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>glass</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to scrape</b> and smooth the top of a bobbin. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> that <i>halakha</i> in a <i>Tosefta</i> in a different manner: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>glass</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to cut two threads at once,</b> as a glass shard can be used in place of a knife.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>a pebble or a stone</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to throw at a bird</b> to chase it away. <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> ben Ya’akov says: Equivalent to that which is used to throw at an animal. <b>Rabbi Ya’akov said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And that is</b> only if the stone is large enough <b>that</b> the animal <b>feels it. And how much is the measure</b> of that stone? <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Ya’akov says: A weight of ten <i>zuz</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Zunin entered the study hall</b> and <b>said to</b> the Sages: <b>My teachers,</b> with regard to <b>stones</b> that may be moved on Shabbat for wiping in <b>the bathroom, how much is their measure? They said to him:</b> Stones of only three sizes may be moved for that purpose: <b>An olive-bulk, a nut-bulk, and an egg-bulk. He said to them: And will he take scales [<i>turtani</i>] into</b> the bathroom to weigh each stone? <b>They were counted and the Sages concluded</b> that one need not measure the stones. He simply takes <b>a handful</b> of stones. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> the measure of bathroom stones is <b>an olive-bulk, a nut-bulk, and an egg-bulk. Rabbi Shimon, son of Rabbi Yosei, says in the name of his father:</b> One need not measure the stones. He simply takes <b>a handful</b> of stones.

### Part 6
<b>Our Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to Shabbat: Three sharpened stones may be taken into the bathroom. And what is their measure? Rabbi Meir says: A nut-bulk; Rabbi Yehuda says: An egg-bulk. Rafram bar Pappa said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Like</b> the <b>dispute here, so too,</b> there <b>is a dispute</b> between these Sages <b>with regard to</b> the minimum size of <b>a citron.</b> The Gemara is surprised at the comparison. Why does the Gemara cite this <i>baraita</i> as a mnemonic to recall the dispute about the size of a citron? <b>There,</b> with regard to a citron, it is <b>a mishna</b> that is known by all; <b>here</b> it is <b>a <i>baraita</i>,</b> which is more obscure and more likely to require a mnemonic and a comparison to a more popular source. <b>Rather,</b> the phrasing is reversed: <b>Like</b> the <b>dispute</b> with regard to <b>a citron, so too,</b> there <b>is a dispute here.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda said: However,</b> one may <b>not</b> move <b>the <i>payis</i></b> for use in a bathroom. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b><i>payis</i>? Rabbi Zeira said:</b> It refers to <b>clods of Babylonian earth,</b> which is soft and flaky. <b>Rava said: It is prohibited to manipulate</b> the anus <b>with a stone on Shabbat</b> to help discharge bodily functions <b>in the manner</b> that <b>one manipulates</b> it <b>on weekdays. Mar Zutra strongly objected to this:</b> According to Rava, should one <b>endanger himself</b> by refraining from relieving himself? The Gemara explains: He meant he should do so <b>in an unusual manner</b> and not in the manner it is typically done. With regard to the size of stones, <b>Rabbi Yannai said: If</b> he has <b>a fixed place for a bathroom,</b> he may take <b>a handful</b> of stones; if he does not need them on Shabbat, he can use them on another occasion. <b>If</b> he does <b>not</b> have a fixed place he may bring in <b>an average size</b> stone, which is the size <b>of a small mortar</b> used <b>for</b> crushing <b>spices. Rav Sheshet said: If</b> the stone <b>has an indication on it</b> that it has already been used in the bathroom, <b>one is permitted</b> to move it for that purpose on Shabbat, regardless of its size.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection:</b> Is it permitted to wipe with a stone that was already used? Didn’t the Sages say: <b>Ten things bring a person to</b> suffer from <b>hemorrhoids and they are: One who eats the leaves of bulrushes, grape leaves, tendrils of grapevines, the palate and tongue of an animal,</b> as well as any other part of the animal which is not smooth and which has protrusions, <b>without salt, the spine of a fish, a salty fish that is not fully cooked, and one who drinks wine dregs, and one who cleans himself with lime and clay,</b> the materials from which earthenware is made, <b>and one who cleans himself with a stone with which another</b> person <b>has cleaned himself. And some say: One who suspends himself in the bathroom as well.</b> Apparently, using a previously used stone is dangerous to one’s health. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> where it is prohibited, is referring <b>to</b> a case where the stone is still <b>moist. Here,</b> where it is permitted, is referring <b>to</b> a case where the stone is <b>dry. And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>here,</b> where it is prohibited, is referring to <b>one side,</b> using the side that was already used; <b>here,</b> where it is permitted, is referring <b>to both sides,</b> using the other side of the same stone. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>this,</b> where it is permitted, is referring <b>to one’s own</b> stone, which he used to clean himself; <b>this,</b> where it is prohibited, is referring to <b>another</b> person’s stone, which poses a danger.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef:</b> What is the ruling if <b>rain fell on</b> the stone <b>and</b> the indications that it had been used previously in the bathroom <b>were obscured?</b> The dilemma is: Is moving it permitted like a stone that is designated for use in the bathroom on Shabbat, or, is moving it prohibited since its indications were obscured and it might have the legal status of set-aside? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: If indication on them is apparent,</b> even though it is partially obscured, <b>it is permitted,</b> since the stone remains clear that it is designated for use in the bathroom.

### Part 10
<b>Rabba bar Rav Sheila raised a dilemma before Rav</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC