
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who writes two letters</b> on Shabbat <b>during one lapse of awareness is liable.</b> The following substances used as ink are explained in the Gemara. One is liable if <b>he wrote with <i>deyo</i>, with <i>sam</i>, with <i>sikra</i>, with gum [<i>komos</i>], or with copper sulfate [<i>kankantom</i>] or with any substance that makes a mark.</b> If one wrote <b>on two walls</b> of a house that form <b>a corner, or on two parts of a writing tablet, and</b> the two items <b>are read together, he is liable. One who writes on his flesh</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable.</b> If <b>one</b> unwittingly <b>scratches</b> letters <b>on his flesh</b> on Shabbat, <b>Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering and the Sages deem</b> him <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 2
If <b>one wrote with liquids</b> or <b>with fruit juice,</b> or if one drew letters <b>with road dust, with scribes’ dust</b> that they use to dry the ink, <b>or with any substance</b> with <b>which</b> the writing <b>does not endure, he is exempt.</b> Similarly, if one wrote by holding the pen on <b>the back of his hand, with his foot, with his mouth,</b> or <b>with his elbow;</b> if <b>one wrote</b> only <b>a single letter,</b> even if it was <b>adjacent to</b> other preexisting <b>writing;</b> or if <b>one wrote over</b> other <b>writing;</b> if <b>one meant to write</b> the letter <b><i>ḥet</i></b> and instead <b>wrote</b> the two halves of the <i>ḥet</i> as <b>two</b> instances of the letter <b><i>zayin</i>;</b> if one wrote <b>one</b> letter <b>on the ground and one on a rafter;</b> if <b>one wrote</b> one letter <b>on two walls of a house,</b> or <b>on two parts of a writing tablet that are not read together, he is exempt.</b> If <b>one wrote one letter</b> as <b>an abbreviation</b> representing an entire word, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Beteira deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring a sin-offering, <b>and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara defines the terms used in the mishna. <b><i>Deyo</i></b> is <b><i>deyota</i></b> made from soot. <b><i>Sam</i></b> is <b><i>samma</i>,</b> which is yellow-tinged arsenic. <b><i>Sikra</i>, Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: It is called <i>sikreta</i></b> in Aramaic and is a lead-based red paint. <b><i>Komos</i></b> is <b><i>koma</i></b> in Aramaic, and it is an ink made with gum Arabic from the sap of a tree. <b><i>Kankantom</i>, Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> This is <b>the black</b> substance <b>used by cobblers,</b> copper sulfate.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna that one who writes <b>with any substance that makes a mark</b> is liable. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does this statement come <b>to include?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to include that which Rabbi Ḥananya taught</b> with regard to writing a bill of divorce: If <b>one wrote it with the juice of</b> the fruit called <b><i>teriya</i>, or</b> with <b>gallnut juice</b> instead of ink, <b>it is valid.</b> Similarly, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya taught:</b> If <b>one wrote</b> a bill of divorce <b>with lead, with soot</b> (<i>ge’onim</i>), <b>or with shoeblack, it is valid.</b> Since those substances leave a permanent mark, one who writes with them on Shabbat is liable.

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna: If <b>one</b> unwittingly <b>scratches</b> letters <b>on his flesh</b> on Shabbat, Rabbi Eliezer deems him liable to bring a sin-offering and the Sages deem him exempt. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer said to the Rabbis: Didn’t</b> the infamous <b>ben Stada take</b> magic <b>spells out of Egypt in a scratch on his flesh? They said to him: He was a fool, and you cannot cite proof from a fool.</b> That is not the way that most people write. Incidentally, the Gemara asks: Why did they call him <b>ben Stada,</b> when <b>he was the son of Pandeira? Rav Ḥisda said:</b> His mother’s <b>husband,</b> who acted as his father, was named <b>Stada,</b> but the <b>one who had relations</b> with his mother and fathered him was named <b>Pandeira.</b> The Gemara asks: Wasn’t his mother’s <b>husband Pappos ben Yehuda? Rather, his mother</b> was named <b>Stada</b> and he was named ben Stada after her. The Gemara asks: But wasn’t <b>his mother Miriam, who braided women’s hair?</b> The Gemara explains: That is not a contradiction. <b>Rather,</b> Stada was merely a nickname, <b>as they say in Pumbedita: This</b> one <b>strayed [<i>setat da</i>] from her husband.</b>

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: If <b>one wrote</b> only <b>a single letter,</b> even if it was <b>adjacent to</b> other preexisting <b>writing,</b> he is exempt. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion is cited in the mishna? <b>Rava bar Rav Huna said:</b> This <i>halakha</i> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, as if</b> it were <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, didn’t he say:</b> One who adds <b>a single</b> thread <b>to a</b> previously <b>woven fabric is liable</b> for weaving? In his opinion, although a single thread or letter is insignificant in and of itself, one is liable because adding even a small measure to existing material is significant.

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna: If <b>one wrote over</b> other <b>writing</b> he is exempt. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion is cited in the mishna? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This <i>halakha</i> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one needed to write the</b> Tetragrammaton, the <b>name</b> of God, in a Torah scroll, and became confused <b>and intended</b> instead <b>to write</b> the name <b>Yehuda, and</b> while intending to write Yehuda <b>he erred and omitted</b> the letter <b><i>dalet</i>,</b> thereby writing the name of God, he should do the following. <b>He passes a quill</b> with more ink <b>over</b> the name <b>and sanctifies it,</b> i.e., he writes it with the intention required when writing a holy name. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And the Rabbis say:</b> Even if he adds ink over what he wrote, <b>this</b> writing of God’s <b>name is not ideal.</b> Apparently, according to Rabbi Yehuda, writing over other writing is considered writing anew.

### Part 8
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one wrote a single letter and</b> thereby <b>completed a book,</b> or if <b>one wove a single thread and</b> thereby <b>completed an</b> entire <b>garment, he is liable.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion is cited in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>Rava bar Rav Huna said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who <b>said:</b> One who adds <b>a single</b> thread <b>to a</b> previously <b>woven fabric is liable</b> for weaving. <b>Rav Ashi said: Even</b> if you <b>say</b> that in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> one who does so <b>to complete</b> a garment is <b>different.</b> Even if he is not liable for weaving, he is liable at least for striking a blow with a hammer to complete the production process of a vessel.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Ami said:</b> If <b>one wrote one letter</b> on paper <b>in Tiberias and one</b> letter on paper <b>in Tzippori, he is liable</b> because he performed a full-fledged act of <b>writing that is lacking</b> only in <b>proximity.</b> When the two pieces of paper are brought together he will have written two associated letters. The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: If <b>one wrote</b> one letter <b>on two walls of a house,</b> or <b>on two parts of a writing tablet that are not read together, he is exempt?</b> All the more so that this is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to one who wrote in two different cities. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> in the case of the parts of a tablet, <b>there is the lack of</b> an additional <b>act</b> of cutting or tearing to facilitate bringing the letters <b>together.</b> However, <b>here,</b> in the case of two cities, even though they are distant from one another, there is <b>no lack</b> of an additional act to facilitate <b>bringing them together.</b>

### Part 10
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: If <b>one emended a single letter</b> on Shabbat, <b>he is liable.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>Now,</b> if <b>one wrote a single letter</b> on Shabbat <b>he is exempt;</b> is it possible that if <b>one emends a single letter</b> he is <b>liable? Rav Sheshet said: With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where one removed the roof of a <i>ḥet</i> and transformed it into two</b> instances of the letter <b><i>zayin</i>,</b> effectively writing two letters with a single correction. <b>Rava said:</b> It is not necessarily referring to that specific case. It could even be referring to a case <b>where one removed the protrusion</b> from the back <b>of a <i>dalet</i> and transformed it into a <i>reish</i>,</b> thereby emending the written text. One who did so is liable for performing the prohibited labor of striking a blow with a hammer to complete the production process of a vessel.

### Part 11
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught:</b> If <b>one intended to write one letter</b> on Shabbat

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC