
### Part 1
<b>And</b> according <b>to Ḥananya,</b> who holds that a boat carried both full and empty can become ritually impure, is <b>carrying by oxen considered carrying?</b> He answered his own question. <b>Yes,</b> as <b>we learned</b> in a mishna: In terms of the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual purity and impurity, <b>there are three</b> distinct types of <b>wagons:</b> A wagon built <b>like a chair,</b> meaning closed on the sides, can become <b>ritually impure</b> with impurity imparted by <b>treading.</b> Since it is designated for sitting, it becomes impure if a <i>zav</i> sits on it, even if he does not touch it. A wagon built <b>like a bed</b> can become <b>ritually impure</b> with <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse.</b> It contracts all types of impurity, except for impurity imparted by the treading of a <i>zav</i>. A wagon made <b>of stone,</b> whose bottom is netting, remains <b>ritually pure</b> and does not become impure <b>from any</b> type of impurity. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And if</b> in the stone wagon <b>there is</b> a <b>receptacle for pomegranates,</b> i.e., the holes are not large enough for a pomegranate to fall through, it is considered a utensil and it can become <b>impure with impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse.</b> Even though a stone wagon is not carried full, but is pulled by oxen, it can become ritually impure. Apparently, carrying by oxen is considered carrying.

### Part 2
By association, the Gemara now cites the second part of the mishna: With regard to laws of impurity, <b>there are three</b> types of <b>chests: A chest that opens from the side,</b> on which one can sit or lie, because it can be used for sitting, it can become <b>ritually impure</b> with <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>treading</b> if a <i>zav</i> sits on it. Even if one needs to open the chest, a person can keep sitting on it. A chest that opens <b>from the top</b> does not become ritually impure with impurity imparted by treading because it cannot be opened with somebody on it. However, it can become impure <b>with impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse. And</b> a chest <b>that comes</b> in a very large <b>size,</b> and can hold more than forty <i>se’a</i>, remains <b>ritually pure</b> and does not become impure <b>from any</b> type of impurity.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to impurity imparted by <b>treading, an earthenware vessel is ritually pure.</b> If a <i>zav</i> sits on an earthenware vessel and does not touch the inside of it, it does not become impure. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> That is <b>even</b> the status of <b>a ship.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>saying? Rav Zevid said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying the following:</b> According to the first <i>tanna</i>, with regard to impurity imparted by <b>treading, an earthenware vessel is ritually pure; however,</b> if the <i>zav</i> <b>touches</b> the vessel it becomes <b>impure. And an earthenware ship</b> can become <b>impure</b> with impurity imparted by the treading of a <i>zav</i>, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Ḥananya. Rabbi Yosei says: Even a boat is ritually pure, in accordance with</b> the opinion of the <b><i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna. <b>Rav Pappa strongly objects to this</b> explanation: If so, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the word <b>even</b> employed by Rabbi Yosei, indicating that he is adding to the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i>? According to the above explanation, the first <i>tanna</i> says that a boat can become ritually impure and Rabbi Yosei says that it is pure. Rabbi Yosei is not adding to the previous opinion but disagreeing with it. <b>Rather, Rav Pappa said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying the following:</b> With regard to impurity imparted by <b>treading, an earthenware vessel is ritually pure, and</b> with regard to <b>its contact</b> with a source of ritual impurity, <b>it is impure. And</b> as far as <b>a wooden vessel</b> is concerned, with regard to <b>both its</b> impurity imparted by <b>treading and its contact</b> with a source of ritual impurity, it is <b>impure. And a Jordan ship is ritually pure in accordance with</b> the opinion of the <b><i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Even the boat is impure</b> like other wooden vessels, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Ḥananya.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara questions what was stated: <b>And from where do we</b> derive that with regard to impurity imparted by <b>treading, an earthenware vessel is ritually pure? Ḥizkiya said:</b> It is <b>as the verse states: “And whoever touches his bed</b> shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 15:5). The verse <b>juxtaposes his bed to himself. Just as he has</b> the possibility of <b>purification</b> through immersion <b>in a ritual bath, so too, his bed</b> is referring to a vessel that <b>has</b> the possibility of <b>purification in a ritual bath.</b> Since an impure earthenware vessel cannot be purified in a ritual bath, unlike other vessels, it does not become ritually impure when a <i>zav</i> lies on it.

### Part 5
Similarly, <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that the verse states: “Every bed on which she lies all the days of her <i>zava</i> emission <b>shall be for her like the bed of her menstrual period”</b> (Leviticus 15:26). The verse <b>juxtaposes her bed to herself: Just as she has</b> the possibility of <b>purification in a ritual bath, so too, her bed</b> is referring to a vessel that <b>has</b> the possibility of <b>purification in a ritual bath.</b> This is <b>to the exclusion of an earthenware vessel, which does not have</b> the possibility of <b>purification in a ritual bath. Rabbi Ila strongly objects</b> to this from what we learned: <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>a</b> reed <b>mat</b> becomes ritually impure <b>from</b> contact with <b>a corpse?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC