
### Part 1
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: The measure that determines liability for carrying out ink is equivalent to that which is used to write <b>two letters</b> when he carries out dried <b>ink, and two letters</b> when the ink is <b>in the quill,</b> and <b>two letters in the inkwell [<i>kalmarin</i>]. Rava raised a dilemma:</b> What is the <i>halakha</i> if one carried out sufficient ink to write <b>one letter</b> in the form of dried <b>ink,</b> and sufficient ink to write <b>one letter in the quill,</b> and sufficient ink to write <b>one letter in the inkwell?</b> Do they join together to constitute the measure for liability, or is each considered separately? No resolution was found for this dilemma. Therefore, <b>let it stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said: One who carried out</b> a measure of ink equivalent to that which is used to write <b>two letters</b> on Shabbat, <b>and he wrote</b> two letters <b>as he walked,</b> even though he did not place the written material in the public domain, he is <b>liable</b> for carrying out the ink. <b>Their writing is their placement.</b> He is liable even without placing the ink on the ground. <b>And Rava said: One who carried out</b> sufficient ink to write <b>one letter and he wrote it, and</b> then <b>proceeded to carry out</b> sufficient ink to write <b>one</b> more <b>letter and he wrote it,</b> is <b>exempt. What is the reason</b> that he is exempt? <b>At the time that he</b> carried out <b>the last</b> drop of ink, <b>he was lacking the first measure</b> of ink. The ink that he carried out first dried slightly in the interim and not enough remained to write one letter.

### Part 3
<b>And Rava said</b> with regard to a similar issue: <b>One who carried out half of a dried fig</b> on Shabbat <b>and placed it</b> in a different domain, <b>and proceeded to carry out</b> another <b>half of a dried fig and placed it,</b> the <b>first becomes as one that was snatched by a dog or burned and</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> as he did not carry out the measure of a dried fig for which he would be liable. The Gemara wonders: <b>And why</b> is he exempt; <b>isn’t</b> an entire dried fig <b>placed</b> together? Why isn’t he liable for carrying it out? The Gemara explains: <b>This is what</b> Rava <b>is saying: And if he lifted</b> the <b>first</b> half-fig <b>first before placement of</b> the <b>second,</b> i.e., the two half-figs were never placed together, the <b>first becomes as one that was snatched by a dog or burned and</b> he is <b>exempt. And Rava said: One who carried out half of a dried fig</b> on Shabbat <b>and placed it</b> in a different domain, <b>and proceeded to carry out</b> another <b>half of a dried fig and passed</b> the second half-fig <b>over</b> the already placed first half-fig, <b>is liable</b> even though they were never placed together. The Gemara asks: <b>And why</b> is he liable? The second half-fig <b>did not come to rest.</b> The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where he passed</b> the second half-fig <b>within three</b> handbreadths of the first half-fig. The <i>halakha</i> is that objects less than three handbreadths apart are considered attached.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And didn’t Rava</b> himself <b>say:</b> An object that passes <b>within three handbreadths</b> of the ground, according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, must come to rest atop some</b> defined place and if it does not it is not considered placed? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> where Rava said that it must actually come to rest, it is referring to <b>one who throws</b> the object; <b>here,</b> where proximity alone is sufficient to render him liable, it is referring to <b>one who passes</b> an object in his hand, since he can place the object down at any point.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught: One who carried out half of a dried fig</b> into the public domain on Shabbat <b>and proceeded to carry out</b> another <b>half of a dried fig, within one lapse of awareness, is liable; within two lapses of awareness, he is exempt</b> because in neither lapse did he carry out a measure that would render him liable. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> If he carried out the half-figs <b>within one lapse of awareness to one domain</b> he is <b>liable; to two domains he is exempt.</b> If he carried the two half-figs to two separate sections of the public domain, he is exempt because there is no permitted manner to unite the two halves. <b>Rabba said</b> with regard to Rabbi Yosei’s statement: <b>That is</b> only in a case <b>where there is</b> an area in which there is <b>liability to</b> bring a <b>sin-offering between them.</b> It only applies in a case where there is a private domain between the two sections of the public domain and carrying between them is prohibited by Torah law. <b>However,</b> if the two sections of the public domain were separated by <b>a <i>karmelit</i>, no,</b> he would not be exempt. In that case, there is no Torah prohibition against carrying between the two sections of the public domain through the <i>karmelit</i>, and by Torah law they are not considered separate.

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said: Even</b> if they were separated by <b>a <i>karmelit</i></b> it is not considered one domain, and he is exempt. <b>However,</b> if the two sections were separated by <b>a large beam, no,</b> they are not considered separate. <b>And Rava said: Even</b> if the two sections were separated by <b>a large beam,</b> according to Rabbi Yosei, they are considered separate and he is exempt. The Gemara comments: <b>And Rava follows his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> stated elsewhere <b>as Rava said:</b> The definition of <b>domain</b> for <b>Shabbat is like</b> the definition of <b>domain</b> for <b>bills of divorce.</b> Just as with regard to bills of divorce, two areas separated by a beam are not considered one domain, so too, with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, they are not considered one domain.

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>blue eye shadow</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to paint one eye blue.</b> The Gemara asks: How could the mishna say <b>one eye?</b> Women <b>do not paint</b> only one eye <b>blue. Rav Huna said: Because modest</b> women, who cover their faces with a veil, <b>paint</b> only the <b>one eye</b> that shows <b>blue.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> For carrying out <b>blue eye shadow, if</b> it is used <b>for healing,</b> the measure for liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to paint one eye blue; if</b> it is used <b>to adorn</b> the eye, the measure that determines liability for carrying out is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>for two eyes. Hillel, son of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani, explained it: When this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught</b> it was in reference to <b>village women.</b> Because immodest behavior is less common there, women do not customarily cover their faces.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>wax</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on the opening of a small hole</b> to seal it. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Enough to place on the opening of a small hole</b> in a receptacle holding <b>wine.</b> The size of a hole that enables pouring wine is smaller than the size of the hole required when pouring more viscous liquids.

### Part 9
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>glue</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on the top of a board [<i>shafshaf</i>].</b> The Sages <b>taught:</b> This means an amount <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on the top of a board that is</b> attached <b>to the top of a hunter’s rod.</b> Hunters would spread glue to trap the birds that land on the board.

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>tar and sulfur</b> is equivalent to that which is used <b>to</b> seal a hole in a vessel and to <b>make a</b> small <b>hole</b> in that seal. Tar and sulfur were used to seal large cavities in jars. Holes were sometimes made in those seals. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: One is liable for carrying out a measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which can be used <b>to make</b> a large hole into <b>a small hole.</b>

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>crushed earthenware</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used to knead and make an opening for the bellows to be placed in a gold refiners’ crucible. Rabbi Yehuda says: An amount equivalent to that which is used to make a small tripod for the crucible. The Gemara wonders: <b>Is that to say that the measure</b> of Rabbi Yehuda <b>is greater? Don’t we maintain that the measure of the Rabbis is greater, as we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> with regard to reeds: The measure for liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to take the measure of a shoe for a child?</b> That is smaller than the measure determined by the Rabbis. The Gemara answers: Here too, <b>say</b> it does not mean sufficient material to make the entire tripod, but to <b>plaster the</b> cracks in the <b>small tripod of a small stove,</b> which requires a minimal amount of plaster.

### Part 12
We learned in the mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>bran</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to place on the opening of a gold refiners’ crucible.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC