
### Part 1
<b>even though there is</b> a different labor <b>that is similar to it,</b> the mishna <b>enumerated it.</b> Every labor that was performed in the Tabernacle is significant. The Gemara asks: <b>And let him enumerate</b> the labor of <b>pounding as well,</b> as wheat was pounded to remove its outer kernel in the Tabernacle. <b>Abaye said:</b> The labor of pounding is not one of the essential stages in the baking of bread, <b>as paupers eat their bread without pounding</b> the wheat to remove the bran. Therefore, since the <i>tanna</i> enumerated threshing, there was no need to include pounding among the labors enumerated in the breadmaking process. <b>Rava said</b> a different explanation: <b>Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>this</b> mishna? <b>It is Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who <b>said:</b> The <b>primary categories of labor are forty-less-one,</b> a number derived from a textual allusion. Therefore, the list cannot be expanded. <b>And had</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>enumerated pounding, there would be forty</b> labors rather than thirty-nine. The Gemara asks: <b>And let him take out one of these,</b> selecting or winnowing, <b>and insert pounding,</b> thereby leaving the number intact. <b>Rather,</b> the reason that the <i>tanna</i> did not include pounding <b>is clear, according to</b> the explanation of <b>Abaye.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the laws of selecting: <b>If there were</b> several <b>types of food before him,</b> and he wants to remove one or more from the mixture, <b>one selects and eats, selects and puts</b> aside. <b>And one may not select, and if one did select, he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>saying?</b> The end of this <i>baraita</i> contradicts the beginning. <b>Ulla said: It is saying as follows: One selects and eats</b> if he is doing so <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>that day,</b> Shabbat. <b>And</b> he <b>selects and puts</b> aside food <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>that day. And one may not select</b> for the purpose of <b>the next day. And if one did select</b> for the next day, <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering. Rav Ḥisda strongly objects to this</b> explanation: <b>And is it permitted to bake for that day, and is it permitted to cook for that day?</b> No other labor prohibited on Shabbat may be performed for the purpose of Shabbat, and the same should hold true for selecting.

### Part 3
<b>Rather, Rav Ḥisda said</b> it is to be understood as follows: <b>One selects and eats less than the measure</b> of a dried fig-bulk, which is the smallest amount for which one is liable by Torah law. One <b>selects and puts</b> aside <b>less than that measure. And one may not select the measure</b> of a dried fig-bulk, <b>and if one did select</b> that measure, <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering. Rav Yosef strongly objects to this</b> explanation: <b>And is it permitted to bake less than the measure for liability</b> <i>ab initio</i>? Although performing a prohibited labor on a minute measure does not engender liability, it is prohibited. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> cannot be interpreted as saying that one may <i>ab initio</i> select an amount that is less than the measure for liability. <b>Rather, Rav Yosef said: One selects and eats by hand, selects and put</b> aside <b>by hand.</b> However, <b>with a basket [<i>kanon</i>] or with a plate,</b> both of which are large, flat vessels used for sorting sizeable quantities, <b>one may not select</b> <i>ab initio</i>. <b>And if he did select, he is exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering if he did so unwittingly. If he did so intentionally he is exempt from stoning. <b>However, it is prohibited. And one may not select with a sieve or with a sifter. And if he did select</b> with those utensils, <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Hamnuna strongly objects to this: Does</b> the mishna <b>teach anything</b> about <b>a basket or a plate?</b> Rav Yosef’s explanation is based on the addition of details that do not appear in the <i>baraita</i> either. <b>Rather, Rav Hamnuna said: One selects and eats</b> if he is removing <b>food from the waste,</b> and similarly, <b>selects and puts</b> aside if he is removing <b>food from the waste.</b> However, <b>one may not select waste from food, and if he did select</b> in that manner, <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> The typical method of selecting is the removal of waste from the food. An individual who alters the procedure is not liable. <b>Abaye strongly objects to this: Does</b> the mishna <b>teach anything</b> about <b>food from waste?</b> That detail is not mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> either. <b>Rather, Abaye said: One selects and eats</b> if he is removing food for <b>immediate</b> use, and similarly <b>one selects and puts</b> aside for <b>immediate</b> use. However, <b>one may not select for</b> use later <b>that same day. And if he did select, he is considered like one who selects for storage, and he is liable to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> This explanation requires no emendation of the mishna. It is merely an interpretation of the phrase: One selects and eats, as referring to selecting for immediate use. The Gemara relates that <b>the Sages stated</b> Abaye’s explanation of the <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rava. He said to them: Naḥmani,</b> Abaye, <b>spoke well.</b>

### Part 5
Until this point, the Gemara discussed selecting food from waste. The Gemara proceeds to discuss a different case. If <b>there were two types of foods before him, and he selected and ate</b> one type, <b>and selected and put</b> aside one type, <b>Rav Ashi taught:</b> He is <b>exempt. Rav Yirmeya from Difti taught:</b> He is <b>liable. Rav Ashi taught:</b> He is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that in that case <b>he is liable?</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult: This,</b> where Rav Ashi said that he is exempt, is referring to a case where he selects <b>by</b> means of <b>a basket or a plate,</b> as that method of selecting is not considered expert work; and <b>that,</b> where the <i>baraita</i> said he is liable, is in a case where he selects <b>by</b> means of <b>a sieve or a sifter,</b> as that method of selecting is considered expert work.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said: It was the Shabbat</b> of <b>Rav Beivai</b> to serve food to the students, <b>and Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi happened</b> to come to his house. <b>He placed before them a basket of fruits</b> without removing the leaves and the stems. <b>And I do not know whether</b> he did so <b>because he holds</b> that it <b>is prohibited</b> to select <b>food from waste</b> when it is not for immediate consumption, <b>or whether</b> he did so <b>because he intended to</b> show <b>generosity to</b> his guests by creating the impression that the basket was full. A fruit-filled basket conveys to the guests that there is plenty and that they may take as much as they wish. Therefore, there is no clear proof from this incident.

### Part 7
<b>Ḥizkiya said: One who selects lupines from their waste</b> after boiling them <b>is liable</b> for performing the prohibited labor of selecting. The Gemara asks: <b>Let us say,</b> based on this statement, that <b>Ḥizkiya holds</b> that even selecting <b>food from waste is prohibited.</b> The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Lupines are different,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC