
### Part 1
<b>Why did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that <b>one may not insulate</b> hot water for Shabbat <b>in something that adds heat, even while it is still day?</b> It is <b>a decree lest one come to cover it in hot ashes that contain</b> a glowing <b>ember.</b> People may not differentiate between addition of heat by means of hot ashes and other additions of heat. <b>Abaye said to him: Let him insulate</b> it with hot ashes, what is the problem? Rava answered him: It is <b>a decree lest one come to stoke the coals</b> in order to make them burn on Shabbat and thereby violate a Torah prohibition.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> which discusses the range of problems that arise with regard to the twilight period. <b>Twilight</b> is a period of <b>uncertainty.</b> It is uncertain whether it consists of both <b>day and night,</b> it is <b>uncertain</b> whether <b>it is completely day,</b> and it is <b>uncertain</b> whether it is <b>completely night.</b> Therefore, the Sages <b>impose the stringencies of both days upon it</b>. If there is a stringency that applies on either of the days, one is obligated to adhere to it during the twilight period.

### Part 3
Nevertheless, the definition of twilight is uncertain. <b>And what is twilight? From when the sun sets, as long as the eastern face</b> of the sky <b>is reddened</b> by the light of the sun. If <b>the lower</b> segment of the sky has <b>lost</b> its <b>color, and the upper</b> segment <b>has not</b> yet <b>lost</b> its <b>color,</b> that is the <b>twilight</b> period. If <b>the upper</b> segment <b>has lost</b> its <b>color, and</b> its color <b>equals</b> that of <b>the lower</b> one<b>, it is night;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Neḥemya says:</b> The duration of the twilight period is <b>the time</b> it takes <b>for a person to walk half a <i>mil</i> after the sun sets. Rabbi Yosei says: Twilight</b> does not last for a quantifiable period of time; rather, it is <b>like the blink of an eye: This,</b> night, <b>enters and that,</b> day, <b>leaves, and it is impossible to calculate it</b> due to its brevity.

### Part 4
It was taught in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>the Master said:</b> The Sages <b>impose the stringencies of both days upon</b> twilight. The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> was this stated? <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> With regard to the <b>matter of ritual impurity, as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to a <i>zav</i> who <b>saw</b> an emission for <b>two</b> consecutive <b>days during twilight,</b> it is unclear whether it should be considered as if he only saw the emission for a single day, as perhaps twilight of the first day was part of the following day, and twilight of the second day was part of the previous day; or, whether it should be considered as two days, attributing each twilight to either the previous or the following day; or, whether it should be considered three days, as it is possible to view the twilight period as two days. By Torah law, a <i>zav</i> who saw two emissions is ritually impure, and all of the stringencies of a <i>zav</i> apply to him. If he sees a third emission, he is liable to bring an offering as part of his purification ritual. Therefore, this <i>zav</i>, with regard to whom there is uncertainty whether he saw emissions for one day, two days, or three days, has <b>uncertain</b> status <b>with regard to both ritual impurity and to sacrifice.</b> If <b>he saw</b> an emission <b>one day during twilight,</b> he has <b>uncertain</b> status <b>with regard to ritual impurity</b> because it may be considered two days.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments on the <i>baraita</i> cited by the Gemara. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is itself difficult,</b> self-contradictory. Initially <b>you said, what is twilight? From when the sun sets, as long as the eastern face</b> of the sky <b>is reddened</b> by the light of the sun. By inference, <b>if the bottom</b> segment <b>lost</b> its <b>color, and the upper</b> one <b>has not lost</b> its <b>color, it is night. And then</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught:</b> If <b>the lower</b> segment of the sky has <b>lost</b> its <b>color, and the upper</b> segment <b>has not</b> yet <b>lost</b> its <b>color,</b> that is the <b>twilight</b> period. There is an apparent internal contradiction in the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rabba said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> In order to resolve the contradiction, <b>unify</b> the two statements <b>and teach</b> it as follows: <b>What is twilight? From when the sun sets, as long as the eastern face</b> of the sky <b>is reddened</b> by the light of the sun. If <b>the lower</b> segment of the sky has <b>lost</b> its <b>color and the upper</b> segment <b>has not</b> yet <b>lost</b> its <b>color,</b> that is <b>also</b> the <b>twilight</b> period. Only if <b>the upper</b> segment <b>lost</b> its <b>color, and</b> it <b>equals</b> that of <b>the lower</b> one, is it <b>night. And Rav Yosef</b> said that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said</b> otherwise: <b>From when the sun sets, as long as the eastern face</b> of the sky <b>is reddened</b> by the light of the sun, it is <b>day.</b> If <b>the lower</b> segment of the sky has <b>lost</b> its <b>color, and the upper</b> segment <b>has not</b> yet <b>lost</b> its <b>color,</b> that is the <b>twilight</b> period. If <b>the upper</b> segment <b>lost</b> its <b>color and</b> it <b>equals</b> that of <b>the lower</b> one, it is <b>night.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> the Gemara remarks: In this dispute over the precise definition of twilight both Rabba and Rav Yosef <b>follow their</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> stated elsewhere. <b>As it was stated: What is the measure</b> of the duration <b>of twilight? Rabba said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The time it takes to walk <b>three parts of a <i>mil</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>three parts of a <i>mil</i>? If you say</b> that it refers to <b>three halves of a <i>mil</i>, let him say a <i>mil</i> and a half. Rather,</b> if you say that it means <b>three-thirds of a <i>mil</i>, let him</b> simply <b>say</b> one <b><i>mil</i>. Rather,</b> it means <b>three-quarters of a <i>mil</i>. And Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The duration of twilight is <b>two parts of a <i>mil</i>.</b> Again the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>two parts of a <i>mil</i>? If you say</b> that it means <b>two halves of a <i>mil</i>, let him</b> simply <b>say</b> one <b><i>mil</i>. Rather,</b> if you say that it means <b>two-quarters of a <i>mil</i>, let him say</b> instead: <b>Half of a <i>mil</i>. Rather,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC