
### Part 1
<b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. And this</b> leniency <b>applies only</b> in a case <b>where one alters</b> the way that he kneads. The Gemara asks: <b>How does one alter</b> the manner in which he kneads? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> One does not knead the dough all at once but rather <b>a little bit at a time.</b>

### Part 2
It was also taught: <b>And they agree that one may mix the <i>shatit</i>,</b> roasted barley to which honey is added, <b>on Shabbat, and drink Egyptian beer,</b> as it is not considered to be for medicinal purposes. The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you say: One may not knead?</b> That contradicts the statement that they agree that it is permitted to stir the <i>shatit</i>. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as there is a distinction between the cases. <b>This</b> dispute with regard to <i>shatit</i> is referring <b>to</b> mixing a <b>thick</b> mixture, which is similar to kneading. However, <b>that</b> statement where they agree that mixing is permitted is referring <b>to</b> a <b>soft,</b> thin mixture that cannot be kneaded. <b>And</b> all of <b>these</b> statements are referring to a case <b>where one alters</b> the way he kneads or stirs.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>How does one alter</b> the manner in which he performs these actions? <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> On a <b>weekday one</b> first <b>places the vinegar</b> in a vessel <b>and then places the <i>shatit</i>. On Shabbat one</b> first <b>places the <i>shatit</i> and then places the vinegar.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>Levi, son of Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya, found the one who kneads in his parents’ home kneading</b> bran on Shabbat <b>and feeding it to his ox. He kicked him</b> so that he would stop. When <b>his father came</b> and <b>found him,</b> he <b>said to him: This</b> is what <b>your mother’s father said in the name of Rav.</b> The Gemara interjects: <b>And who is</b> his mother’s father? It is <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba,</b> who said: <b>One may knead but not feed</b> animals, <b>and</b> a calf <b>that does not take</b> the food <b>with its tongue may be fed</b> on Shabbat. <b>And this applies</b> only <b>when one alters</b> the manner in which he does so.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>How does one alter</b> the manner in which he does so? <b>Rav Yeimar bar Shelamya said in the name of Abaye:</b> One moves the ladle or stirring utensil in the directions of <b>warp and woof.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> it the case that <b>it will not mix well,</b> so what is the point of stirring it that way? <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> It means that <b>one pours it into</b> another <b>vessel</b> and in the process it is mixed.

### Part 5
<b>It was written in Ze’eiri’s notebook: I said before my rabbi, and</b> the Gemara asks: <b>And who is</b> his rabbi? It is <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya.</b> And Ze’eiri said before him: <b>What is</b> the ruling? Is it permitted <b>to knead</b> on Shabbat? <b>He said:</b> It is <b>prohibited. What is</b> the ruling with regard to <b>emptying</b> food from a vessel before one animal to place it before another animal? <b>He said:</b> It is <b>permitted. Rav Menashya said:</b> Placing <b>one</b> trough <b>before one</b> animal or <b>two</b> troughs <b>before two</b> animals, one may <b>well</b> do so. Placing <b>three</b> troughs <b>before two</b> animals <b>is prohibited,</b> because it is considered to be superfluous labor as he is bringing the animals more food than they need. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> It is permitted to add <b>a <i>kav</i></b> of additional food <b>or even two <i>kav</i>. Ulla said:</b> One may add <b>a <i>kor</i> or even two <i>kor</i></b> and there is no need for concern.

### Part 6
<b>It was written in Levi’s notebook: I said before my rabbi, and</b> the Gemara asks: <b>And who is</b> his rabbi? It is <b>our holy Rabbi,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. Levi spoke <b>about</b> the fact that <b>people would knead <i>shatit</i> in Babylonia, and my rabbi, and who is it, our holy Rabbi, cried</b> in protest over the fact that <b>people would knead <i>shatit</i>. And</b> there was <b>no one who listened to him, and he did not have the power to prohibit</b> it <b>due to</b> the people’s reliance on the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who permitted doing so.

### Part 7
After citing relevant <i>halakhot</i> written in the notebooks of various Sages, the Gemara relates that <b>it was written in Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi’s notebook: One who</b> was born <b>on the first day of the week,</b> Sunday, <b>will be a person and there will not be one in him.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>There will not be one in him? If you say</b> that <b>there is not one</b> quality <b>for the best,</b> that cannot be, <b>as Rav Ashi said: I was</b> born <b>on the first day of the week,</b> and one cannot say that there was nothing good about him. <b>Rather,</b> it must mean that <b>there is not one</b> quality <b>for the worst. Didn’t Rav Ashi say: I and Dimi bar Kakuzta were</b> both born <b>on the first day of the week. I</b> became <b>a king,</b> the head of a yeshiva, <b>and he became the head of</b> a gang of <b>thieves,</b> clearly a negative quality. <b>Rather,</b> one born on a Sunday <b>is either completely for the best or completely for the worst. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>because</b> both <b>light and darkness were created</b> on the first day of Creation.

### Part 9
<b>One who was</b> born <b>on the second day of the week,</b> Monday, <b>will be a short-tempered person. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>because on that day,</b> the second day of Creation, <b>the</b> upper and lower <b>waters were divided.</b> Therefore, it is a day of contentiousness. <br> <b>One who was</b> born <b>on the third day of the week will be a rich man and a promiscuous</b> person. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>because on that day,</b> the third day, <b>vegetation was created.</b> It grows abundantly but is also mixed together without boundaries between the grass and the plants. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>on the fourth day of the week will be a wise and enlightened person. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>because the</b> heavenly <b>lights were hung</b> in the heavens <b>on that day,</b> and wisdom is likened to light.

### Part 10
<b>One who was</b> born <b>on the fifth day of the week will be a person who performs acts of kindness. What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>because on that day the fish and fowl were created,</b> and they do not receive their sustenance by performing work for people. They are sustained by the kindness of God alone. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>on the sixth day of the week will be a seeker. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that this means that he will be <b>one who seeks out mitzvot,</b> as most of the activity on Friday involves preparation for Shabbat. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>on Shabbat will die on Shabbat, because they desecrated the great day of Shabbat on his</b> behalf. <b>Rava bar Rav Sheila said: And he will be called a</b> person of <b>great sanctity</b> because he was born on the sacred day of Shabbat.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina said to</b> his students who heard all this: <b>Go</b> and <b>tell the son of Leiva’i,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: <b>It is not the constellation of the day</b> of the week <b>that determines</b> a person’s nature; <b>rather,</b> it is <b>the constellation of the hour</b> that <b>determines</b> his nature. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>the sun will be a radiant person; he will eat from his own</b> resources <b>and drink from his own</b> resources, <b>and his secrets will be exposed. If he steals he will not succeed,</b> because he will be like the sun that shines and is revealed to all. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Venus will be a rich and promiscuous person. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Because fire was born</b> during the hour of Venus, he will be subject the fire of the evil inclination, which burns perpetually. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Mercury will be an enlightened and expert man, because</b> Mercury <b>is the sun’s scribe,</b> as it is closest to the sun. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>the moon will be a man who suffers pains, who builds and destroys, and destroys and builds.</b> He will be a man <b>who eats not from his own</b> resources <b>and drinks not from his own</b> resources, <b>and whose secrets are hidden. If he steals he will succeed,</b> as he is like the moon that constantly changes form, whose light is not its own, and who is at times exposed and at times hidden. <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Saturn will be a man whose thoughts are for naught. And some say</b> that <b>everything that</b> others <b>think about him</b> and plan to do to him <b>is for naught.</b> <br> <b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Jupiter [<i>tzedek</i>] will be a just</b> person <b>[<i>tzadkan</i>]. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: And just</b> in this context means just <b>in</b> the performance of <b>mitzvot.</b> <br><b>One who was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Mars will be one who spills blood. Rav Ashi said:</b> He will be <b>either a blood letter, or a thief, or a slaughterer</b> of animals, <b>or a circumciser. Rabba said: I was</b> born <b>under</b> the influence of <b>Mars</b> and I do not perform any of those activities. <b>Abaye said: My Master also punishes and kills</b> as a judge.

### Part 12
<b>It was stated</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: A constellation makes one wise</b> and <b>a constellation makes one wealthy, and there is a constellation for the Jewish people</b> that influences them. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: There is no constellation for the Jewish people</b> that influences them. The Jewish people are not subject to the influence of astrology. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan follows his</b> own <b>reasoning,</b> as <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that there is no constellation for the Jewish people? As it is stated: “Thus said the Lord: Learn not the way of the nations, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the nations are dismayed at them”</b> (Jeremiah 10:2). <b>The nations will be dismayed</b> by them, <b>but not the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And Rav also holds</b> that <b>there is no constellation for the Jewish people, as Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that there is no constellation for the Jewish people? As it is stated</b> with regard to Abraham: <b>“And He brought him outside,</b> and said: Look now toward heaven, and count the stars, if you are able to count them; and He said unto him: So shall your offspring be” (Genesis 15:5). The Sages derived from this that <b>Abraham said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe,</b> “Behold, You have given me no offspring, and <b>one born in my house is to be my heir”</b> (Genesis 15:3). The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to him: No.</b> “And, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, saying: This man shall not be your heir; <b>rather, one that will come forth from your own innards shall be your heir”</b> (Genesis 15:4).

### Part 14
Abraham <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, I looked at my astrological</b> map, <b>and</b> according to the configuration of my constellations <b>I am not fit to have a son.</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to him: Emerge from your astrology,</b> as the verse states: “And He brought him outside,” <b>as there is no constellation for Israel. What is your thinking?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC