
### Part 1
<b>A Hanukkah lamp that one placed above twenty cubits is invalid, just as</b> a <b><i>sukka</i></b> whose roofing is more than twenty cubits high, <b>and just as an alleyway</b> whose beam, its symbolic fourth partition in order to place an <i>eiruv</i>, is more than twenty cubits high, are invalid. The reason is the same in all three cases: People do not usually raise their heads and see objects at a height above twenty cubits. As there is a requirement to see all of these, they are deemed invalid when placed above that height. <b>And</b> the Gemara cites another statement that <b>Rav Kahana said</b> that <b>Rav Natan bar Manyumi taught in the name</b> of <b>Rav Tanḥum: What</b> is the meaning of the verse <b>that is written</b> with regard to Joseph: “And they took him, and cast him into the pit; <b>and the pit was empty, there was no water in it”</b> (Genesis 37:24)? <b>By inference from that which is stated: And the pit was empty, don’t I know that there was no water in it? Rather, why does the verse say: There was no water in it?</b> The verse comes to emphasize and teach that <b>there was no water in it, but there were snakes and scorpions in it.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabba said: It is a mitzva to place the Hanukkah lamp within the handbreadth adjacent to the entrance.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And where,</b> on which side, <b>does he place it?</b> There is a difference of opinion: <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said: On</b> the <b>right</b> side of the entrance. <b>Rav Shmuel from Difti said: On</b> the <b>left. And the <i>halakha</i> is</b> to place it <b>on the left so that the Hanukkah lamp will be on the left and the <i>mezuza</i> on the right.</b> One who enters the house will be surrounded by mitzvot (<i>ge’onim</i>).

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is prohibited to count money opposite a Hanukkah light.</b> Rav Yehuda relates: <b>When I said this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>before Shmuel, he said to me: Does the Hanukkah light have sanctity</b> that would prohibit one from using its light? <b>Rav Yosef strongly objected to this</b> question: What kind of question is that; <b>does the blood</b> of a slaughtered undomesticated animal or fowl <b>have sanctity? As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the Sages interpreted the verse: “<b>He shall spill</b> its blood <b>and cover</b> it with dust” (Leviticus 17:13): <b>With that which he spilled, he shall cover.</b> Just as a person spills the blood of a slaughtered animal with his hand, so too, he is obligated to cover the blood with this hand and <b>not cover it with his foot.</b> The reason is so <b>that mitzvot will not be contemptible to him. Here too,</b> one should treat the Hanukkah lights as if they were sacred and refrain from utilizing them for other purposes, so that <b>mitzvot will not be contemptible to him.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates that <b>they raised a dilemma before Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>using decorations of a <i>sukka</i> all seven</b> days of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>? <b>He said to them: They</b> already <b>said</b> in a similar vein that <b>it is prohibited to count money opposite the Hanukkah light,</b> which proves that one may not use the object of a mitzva for another purpose. <b>Rav Yosef</b> replied in surprise: <b>Master</b> of <b>Abraham! He makes</b> that <b>which was taught dependent upon</b> that <b>which was not taught. As,</b> with regard to <b><i>sukka</i>,</b> the prohibition to enjoy use of its decorations <b>was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, and the prohibition to enjoy use of the <b>Hanukkah</b> lights <b>was not taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> at all. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i> in tractate <i>Sukka</i>: With regard to <b>one who roofed</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>in accordance with its halakhic</b> requirements, <b>and decorated it with colorful curtains and sheets, and hung in it</b> ornamental <b>nuts, peaches, almonds, and pomegranates, and grape branches [<i>parkilei</i>], and wreaths of stalks</b> of grain, <b>wines, oils, and</b> vessels full of <b>flour, it is prohibited to use them until the conclusion of the last day of the Festival. And, if</b> before he hung the decorations <b>he stipulated with regard to them</b> that he will be permitted to use them even during the Festival, <b>everything is according to his stipulation,</b> and he is permitted to use them. In any case, since the prohibition to benefit from the Hanukkah light is not explicitly taught, a proof should not be cited from there to resolve the dilemma with regard to <i>sukka</i> decorations. <b>Rather, Rav Yosef said:</b> There is no need to bring a proof for the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>sukka</i> from the Hanukkah light. Rather, <b>the paradigm of them all is blood.</b> The verse with regard to the covering of the blood of slaughter is the original source from which the prohibition to treat mitzvot with contempt is derived.

### Part 5
<b>It was stated</b> in a dispute between <i>amora</i>’<i>im</i> that <b>Rav said: One may not light from</b> one Hanukkah <b>lamp to</b> another <b>lamp. And Shmuel said: One may light</b> in that manner. The Gemara cites additional disputes between Rav and Shmuel. <b>Rav said: One may not untie ritual fringes from</b> one <b>garment</b> in order <b>to</b> affix them to another <b>garment. And Shmuel said: One may untie</b> them <b>from one garment</b> and affix them <b>to</b> another <b>garment.</b> And <b>Rav said: The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance</b> with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in</b> the case of <b>dragging,</b> as Rabbi Shimon permitted dragging objects on Shabbat, even if, as a result, a furrow would be dug in the ground, as it was not the person’s intent to dig that hole. <b>Shmuel said</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in</b> the case of <b>dragging.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said:</b> In <b>all</b> halakhic <b>matters of the Master,</b> Rabba, <b>he conducted himself in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav, except these three where he conducted himself in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b> He ruled: <b>One may light from</b> one Hanukkah <b>lamp to</b> another <b>lamp, and one may untie</b> ritual fringes <b>from garment to garment, and the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in</b> the case of <b>dragging. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: A person may drag a bed, chair, and bench</b> on the ground, <b>as long as he does not intend to make a furrow</b> in the ground. Even if a furrow is formed inadvertently, one need not be concerned.

### Part 7
<b>One of the Sages sat before Rav Adda bar Ahava, and he sat and said: The reason</b> for the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> who prohibited lighting from one Hanukkah lamp to another, is <b>due to contempt for the mitzva.</b> Using the light for a purpose other than illumination demeans the mitzva of Hanukkah lights. Rav Adda bar Ahava <b>said to</b> his students: <b>Do not listen to him,</b> as <b>the reason</b> for <b>Rav’s</b> opinion is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he</b> thereby <b>weakens the mitzva.</b> By lighting from lamp to lamp he slightly diminishes the oil and wick designated for the purpose of the mitzva. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical difference <b>between them?</b> The Gemara answers: The practical difference <b>between them</b> is in a case <b>where he lights</b> directly <b>from lamp to lamp,</b> without using a wood chip or another lamp to light the second lamp. According to the <b>one who said</b> that Rav’s reason <b>is due to contempt for the mitzva,</b> directly <b>from lamp to lamp he may</b> even <b>light</b> <i>ab initio</i>, as, by lighting another Hanukkah lamp, he does not thereby demean the sanctity of the mitzva because the second lamp is also a mitzva. According to the <b>one who said</b> that Rav’s reason <b>is because he weakens the mitzva,</b> lighting directly <b>from lamp to lamp is also prohibited,</b> as ultimately, he utilizes the mitzva lamp for a task that he could have accomplished with a non-sacred lamp.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Avya raised an objection</b> from that which was taught in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>A <i>sela</i> of</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC