
### Part 1
<b>And it is</b> derived through <b>an</b> <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference:</b> We know that small vessels do not become ritually impure through the impurity of a <i>zav</i> because they are not designated for sitting, and are too small for the <i>zav</i> to insert his finger into their airspace. <b>If small</b> earthenware <b>pitchers</b> remain <b>pure</b> and are not susceptible <b>to</b> the impurity of <b>a <i>zav</i>,</b> but they do <b>become ritually impure from</b> contact with <b>a corpse; is it not logical that a</b> reed <b>mat,</b> which contracts <b>impurity from a <i>zav</i>, will</b> become <b>ritually impure from</b> contact with <b>a corpse? And why</b> should the reed mat become impure? <b>Isn’t it</b> true that <b>it does not have</b> the possibility of <b>purification in a ritual bath? Rabbi Ḥanina said to him: There,</b> in the case of the mat, <b>it is different because there is</b> purification <b>in</b> other vessels <b>of its kind,</b> i.e., other wooden vessels that are made from materials that grow from the earth can be purified in a ritual bath.

### Part 2
Rabbi Ila <b>said to</b> Rabbi Ḥanina: <b>May the all-Merciful save us from this opinion.</b> Rabbi Ḥanina responded: <b>On the contrary, may the all-Merciful save us from your opinion. And what is the reason</b> that this is relevant? What is the significance of the fact that other vessels of its kind can be purified in a ritual bath if the vessel itself cannot be purified in a ritual bath? It is because <b>two verses are written.</b> In one verse <b>it is written: “And whoever touches his bed</b> shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 15:5). The verse juxtaposes his bed to himself. Just as he has the possibility of purification through immersion in a ritual bath, so too, his bed has the possibility of purification in a ritual bath. This teaches that his bed has the same legal status as he does; in order for a bed on which a <i>zav</i> lies to be subject to the impurity imparted by lying, it must be immersible in a ritual bath. <b>And</b> in another verse <b>it is written: “Every bed on which the <i>zav</i> lies shall be impure;</b> and every vessel on which he sits shall be impure” (Leviticus 15:4). This verse includes all beds on which a <i>zav</i> might lie, even one that cannot be purified in a ritual bath. <b>How</b> can <b>these</b> two verses be reconciled? If <b>there is</b> purification <b>in</b> other vessels <b>of its kind, even though it</b> itself <b>does not have purification in a ritual bath,</b> it is subject to the impurity imparted by lying. However, if <b>there is no</b> purification <b>in</b> other vessels <b>of its kind,</b> the verse <b>juxtaposes his bed to himself.</b> Any vessel that is not like him in the sense that it cannot be purified in a ritual bath, is not subject to impurity imparted by lying.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said:</b> The fact that with regard to impurity imparted by <b>treading, an earthenware vessel is ritually pure</b> is derived <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“And any open vessel that does not have a sealed cover on it</b> becomes impure” (Numbers 19:15). By inference, if <b>there is a sealed cover on it, it is pure. Are we not dealing</b> even with a case <b>where one designated</b> the vessel <b>for</b> use by <b>his wife,</b> when she has the status of a <b>menstruating woman? And</b> even so, <b>the Torah states</b> that it is <b>ritually pure?</b> Apparently, an earthenware vessel with a sealed cover is not subject to impurity from any source.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The Gemara continues to discuss an additional <i>halakha</i> based on a biblical allusion. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> in <b>a garden bed that is six by six handbreadths, that one may plant five</b> different types of <b>seeds in it?</b> He may do so without violating the prohibition of sowing a mixture of diverse kinds of seeds in the following manner. One sows <b>four</b> types of plants <b>on</b> each of <b>the four sides of the garden bed and one in the middle.</b> There is an allusion to this in the text, <b>as it is stated: “For as the earth brings forth its growth, and as a garden causes its seeds to grow,</b> so will the Lord God cause justice and praise to spring forth before all the nations” (Isaiah 61:11). <b>Its seed,</b> in the singular, <b>is not stated; rather, its seeds,</b> written in the plural. Apparently, it is possible that several seeds may be planted in a small garden.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara questions this allusion: <b>From where is it inferred</b> that the verse refers to five types of seeds? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that it is derived as follows: <b>“For as the earth brings forth its growth”</b> indicates five types of seeds because <b>“brings forth”</b> represents <b>one</b> and <b>“its vegetation”</b> represents <b>one,</b> and <b>that</b> totals <b>two. “Its seeds,”</b> written in the plural, represents at least <b>two,</b> and <b>that</b> totals <b>four. “Cause to grow” is one</b> more. This verse includes terms connoting planting and seeds in a single garden bed that total <b>five</b> species of seeds.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC