
### Part 1
If he throws it <b>less than four cubits,</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> as he is neither liable for carrying from domain to domain nor for carrying in the public domain. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he teaching us</b> with this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>He is teaching us the following</b> two things. First, that <b>domains join</b> together; even though one public domain is separated from the other by a private domain, they are treated as one domain. <b>And</b> second, <b>that we do not say</b> that <b>an object in airspace is considered at rest.</b> The object is not considered to have landed in a private domain, and therefore the one who threw it is exempt.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said: One who carries</b> an object <b>four cubits in the covered public domain is exempt because it is not similar to the flags of</b> the camp of Israel in <b>the desert,</b> which were not covered. The Gemara wonders: <b>Is that so? Weren’t</b> the <b>wagons</b> on which they transported the beams of the Tabernacle <b>covered?</b> The beams formed a covering over the wagons. <b>And</b> even so, <b>Rav said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> The areas that were <b>beneath the wagons, and between them, and</b> on <b>their sides</b> are all considered to have been <b>the public domain.</b> Apparently, even a covered public domain, like the space beneath the wagons, has the legal status of a public domain. The Gemara answers: <b>When Rav said</b> that the space beneath the wagons had the legal status of a public domain, he was referring to when the beams were arranged <b>in stacks.</b> The beams did not cover the entire area of the wagon. There was space between the stacks.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>After all, how much was the length of</b> a <b>wagon?</b> It was <b>five cubits. How much was the width of</b> a <b>beam?</b> It was <b>a cubit and a half. How many</b> beams could one <b>place</b> on a wagon? One could place <b>three</b> stacks of beams, totaling four and a half cubits. If so, <b>half a cubit</b> of open space <b>remained. When the Master distributes</b> half a cubit <b>between</b> the stacks of beams <b>it is considered <i>lavud</i>,</b> attached, as the space between each stack was less than three handbreadths. The Gemara answers: <b>Do you maintain</b> that they <b>would place the beams on their width? They would place them on their depth,</b> which was one cubit wide, and therefore there was a greater distance between the rows.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Ultimately, how much was the depth of a beam?</b> It was <b>one cubit. How many</b> stacks <b>would</b> they <b>place?</b> They would place <b>four</b> stacks. <b>One cubit</b> of open space <b>remained. When the Master distributes</b> one cubit <b>between</b> the four stacks of beams <b>it is considered <i>lavud</i>,</b> as two handbreadths separated each stack. The Gemara adds: <b>This</b> statement of Rav works out <b>well according to</b> the opinion of <b>the one who said</b> that <b>the beams</b> in the Tabernacle <b>were one cubit thick at the bottom,</b> and <b>they narrowed to a fingerbreadth as they reached the top.</b> According to that opinion, there was a space larger than three handbreadths at least between the tops of the beams, and therefore the area beneath that part of the wagon was not covered. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>the one who said</b> that <b>just as they were one cubit thick at the bottom, so too,</b> the beams <b>were one cubit thick on top, what can be said?</b> In that case, the space between the stacks was less than three handbreadths, and area beneath the wagon had the legal status of a covered public domain.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Kahana said:</b> When we said that the underside of the wagon was considered to be a public domain, the statement was not referring to when the beams were stacked on them. When the wagon was empty and consisted of the <b>frames</b> that held the beams in place, beneath the wagon was an uncovered public domain. The Gemara asks: But <b>where would</b> they <b>place</b> the frames? <b>On top</b> of the <b>wagon</b> when the beams were already stacked on it and the <b>wagon itself was</b> already <b>covered</b> by the beams, as stated above (<i>ge’onim</i>).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC