
### Part 1
that performing <b>immersion at its</b> designated <b>time is not a mitzva, and we seek</b> a reed to wrap around God’s name even if it means postponing immersion to the next day, <b>and Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that <b>immersion at its</b> designated <b>time is a mitzva, and</b> therefore <b>we do not seek</b> a reed, since immersion cannot be postponed.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And does Rabbi Yosei hold</b> that <b>immersion at its</b> designated <b>time is a mitzva? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a <i>zav</i> and a <i>zava</i>, a male and female leper, one who has relations with a menstruating woman, and a person impure</b> with impurity imparted by <b>a corpse, their immersion is during the day.</b> They immerse at the designated time even on Yom Kippur, when bathing is prohibited. <b>A menstruating woman and a woman after childbirth immerse at night. A man who has had a seminal emission immerses</b> at any point <b>during the entire day</b> after the emission. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: From</b> the time that he recited <b>the afternoon prayer and on he does not immerse.</b> Since he already recited the afternoon prayer, he waits until after Yom Kippur to immerse, and then recites the evening prayer in a state of purity. Apparently, Rabbi Yosei holds that immersion at the designated time is not a mitzva. The Gemara rejects this: In <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> the reference is not to the Rabbi Yosei most commonly cited in tannaitic literature without a patronymic, Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, but it <b>is</b> to <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who said: Her latest immersion is sufficient.</b> A woman who is uncertain with regard to the correct time for her immersion need not immerse multiple times. She may postpone her immersion until a time when she will be certain to fulfill her obligation, even though it might not be immersion at the designated time.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>a gentile comes to extinguish</b> a Jew’s fire on Shabbat, <b>one may not say to him: Extinguish, and: Do not extinguish, because</b> responsibility for <b>his rest is not</b> incumbent <b>upon</b> the Jew. <b>However,</b> if <b>a</b> Jewish <b>child comes to extinguish</b> a fire on Shabbat, <b>they do not listen to him</b> and allow him to extinguish it, even though he is not yet obligated in mitzva observance, <b>because</b> responsibility for <b>his rest is</b> incumbent <b>upon</b> the Jew.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Ami said:</b> During <b>a fire, the</b> Sages <b>permitted to say</b> in the presence of gentiles: <b>Anyone who extinguishes</b> the fire <b>will not lose,</b> so that the gentiles will come and extinguish the fire; it is only prohibited to tell gentiles to do so explicitly. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>supports his</b> statement: If <b>a gentile comes to extinguish</b> a Jew’s fire on Shabbat, <b>one may not say to him: Extinguish, and: Do not extinguish, because</b> responsibility for <b>his rest is not</b> incumbent <b>upon</b> the Jew. It can be inferred from the language of the mishna: <b>It is</b> a direct command, e.g., <b>extinguish, that we may not say to him; however, anyone who extinguishes will not lose, we</b> may <b>tell him,</b> which supports Rabbi Ami’s statement. The Gemara rejects this. <b>Say</b> the <b>latter</b> clause of the mishna: <b>Do not extinguish, we do not tell him.</b> It can be inferred that <b>neither do we say to him: Anyone who extinguishes will not lose. Rather, nothing can be inferred from this</b> mishna.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There was an incident that a fire ignited</b> on Shabbat <b>in the courtyard of Yosef ben Simai in</b> a place called <b>Shiḥin. And men came from the fortress [<i>gistera</i>] of Tzippori to extinguish</b> the fire, <b>because he was a steward [<i>apotropos</i>] of the king</b> and they wanted to help him. <b>However,</b> Yosef ben Simai <b>would not allow them</b> to extinguish the fire <b>in deference to Shabbat; and a miracle transpired for him and rain fell and extinguished</b> the fire. <b>That evening</b> after Shabbat <b>he sent two <i>sela</i> to each one of</b> the soldiers who came to his aid, <b>and fifty to their commander [<i>iparkhos</i>]. And when the Sages heard about this, they said: He need not</b> have prevented them from extinguishing the fire, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>a gentile comes to extinguish</b> a Jew’s fire on Shabbat, <b>one may not say to him: Extinguish, and: Do not extinguish, because</b> responsibility for <b>his rest is not</b> incumbent <b>upon</b> the Jew; rather, the gentile may do as he pleases.

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: <b>However,</b> if <b>a</b> Jewish <b>child comes to extinguish</b> a fire on Shabbat, <b>they do not listen to him</b> and allow him to extinguish it, even though he is not yet obligated in mitzva observance, <b>because</b> responsibility for <b>his rest is</b> incumbent <b>upon</b> the Jew. The Gemara seeks to conclude: <b>Learn</b> from <b>this</b> that <b>a child who eats</b> meat from <b>unslaughtered animals</b> or violates other prohibitions, <b>the court is commanded to prevent him</b> from eating it. This mishna would resolve a dilemma that arose regarding that issue. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This mishna is referring to <b>a child who is acting with</b> the intention of fulfilling <b>his father’s will,</b> and therefore one is obligated to prevent him from doing so. However, if a child sins of his own volition, one is not obligated to prevent him from doing so. The Gemara asks: If so, the case <b>with regard to a gentile</b> in the mishna must be interpreted in a <b>similar</b> manner as referring to a case where <b>he is acting with</b> the intention to fulfill the <b>will</b> of <b>a Jew. Is</b> that <b>permitted?</b> It is prohibited to derive benefit from an action performed by a gentile for a Jew on Shabbat. The Gemara responds: This is not the case; <b>the gentile</b> is <b>acting of his own volition.</b> Because he is paid for extinguishing the fire he is not doing so in order to help the Jew.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may overturn a bowl on top of a lamp so that</b> fire <b>will not take hold in the</b> ceiling <b>beam</b> on Shabbat. <b>And</b> similarly, one may overturn a bowl <b>on top of a child’s feces</b> inside the house so he will not touch it and dirty himself, <b>and on top of a scorpion so that it will not bite. Rabbi Yehuda said: An incident came before Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai in</b> his village of <b>Arav,</b> where a person covered a scorpion on Shabbat, <b>and</b> Rabban Yoḥanan <b>said: I am concerned</b> that <b>he</b> is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering</b> because he might have violated a Torah prohibition.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yehuda and Rav Yirmeya bar Abba and Rav Ḥanan bar Rava happened to come to the house of Avin from</b> a place called <b>Nashikiya. For Rav Yehuda and Rav Yirmeya bar Abba,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC