
### Part 1
<b>And even according to the one who said</b> that <b>one is flogged</b> for violating a prohibition that was given as a warning of court-imposed capital punishment, the <i>halakha</i> with regard to driving a laden animal can be derived by means of an inference from the language of the verse. <b>Let the Torah write: “You shall not perform any manner of labor…and</b> neither shall <b>your animal.” Why do I need</b> the superfluous word <b>you</b> in the phrase: You and your animal? Rather it is to teach that <b>it is he</b> himself <b>who is liable</b> for performing a prohibited labor on Shabbat; however, for a prohibited labor performed by <b>his animal, he is not liable.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: Once <b>he reached the outer courtyard,</b> he may untie the ropes that attach his bags to the donkey, <b>and the bags</b> of vessels that may not be moved on Shabbat fall on their own. <b>Rav Huna said:</b> If <b>one’s animal was laden with glass vessels,</b> which would break if he let them fall to the ground, <b>he may bring cushions and blankets and place</b> them <b>beneath</b> the animal <b>and untie the ropes and</b> let <b>the bags fall</b> onto the cushions.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: Why is it necessary to unload glass vessels in so complicated a manner? <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>He takes the vessels that may be moved on Shabbat</b> off the donkey? As glass vessels fall into that category, why not simply remove the glass vessels and then untie the bags?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>When Rav Huna stated</b> this <i>halakha</i>, he was referring <b>to the horns of a blood letter, which are not suitable</b> for any other purpose and are therefore set-aside on Shabbat due to prohibition and repulsiveness. The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t he</b> thereby <b>negating a vessel’s preparedness?</b> Initially, the cushion was available for any use. Since it now has the set-aside vessels on it, the cushion, too, may no longer be moved. The Sages ruled that one may not place a vessel in a circumstance that will render it prohibited to move. The Gemara answers: This mishna is referring <b>to small bundles</b> of glass vessels that will not break if the cushions are subsequently removed from beneath them.

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one’s animal was laden with untithed produce and chunks of</b> glass [<i>ashashiot</i>], <b>one unties the ropes and the bags fall</b> on their own, <b>even though they break.</b> Apparently, placing cushions beneath the animal is prohibited. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is not referring to vessels but rather <b>to chunks [<i>kulsa</i>] of glass</b> that are designated to be broken so that they can be melted and crafted into vessels. The Gemara adds: The language of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>also precise, as it teaches</b> that chunks are <b>similar</b> to <b>untithed produce: Just as untithed produce is not fit for his</b> use, <b>here too,</b> the chunks <b>are also not fit for his</b> use.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>Even though they break?</b> If the mishna is indeed referring to chunks of glass, they are designated to be broken. Rather, <b>lest you say</b> that the Sages <b>were also concerned</b> about a <b>minimal loss,</b> as certainly some small slivers of glass will be lost when the chunks fall and break, the <i>tanna</i> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that the Sages did not consider minimal loss a reason significant enough to permit carrying the prohibited glass.

### Part 7
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says:</b> If <b>one’s animal was loaded with a burden of</b> untithed <b>grain, he may place his head beneath</b> the pile <b>and move it to a different side</b> of the animal, <b>and it falls by itself.</b> The Sages prohibited moving set-aside objects in the typical manner, but there is no concern about doing so in an unusual manner.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabban Gamliel’s donkey was laden with honey and he did not want to unload</b> the donkey <b>until the conclusion of Shabbat. At the conclusion of Shabbat,</b> the donkey <b>died</b> of fatigue. The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>He takes the vessels that may be moved</b> on Shabbat off the donkey? Why, then, did Rabban Gamliel not unload the honey? The Gemara answers: This is a case <b>where the honey had spoiled.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> use <b>is spoiled honey suited?</b> Why did Rabban Gamliel bring it? The Gemara answers: It can be used <b>to</b> rub on <b>the wounds of camels.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> let Rabban Gamliel <b>untie</b> the <b>ropes and</b> the <b>bags will fall</b> on their own. The Gemara answers: It was due to the concern that <b>the jugs</b> containing the honey would <b>crack.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> let <b>him bring cushions and blankets and place them beneath</b> the jugs. The Gemara answers: He was concerned lest <b>they become soiled and he</b> would thereby <b>negate the vessel’s preparedness,</b> i.e., the cushions and blankets would be rendered unusable. The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t there</b> the matter of <b>the suffering of a living creature?</b> He should suffer monetary loss rather than cause the animal to suffer. The Gemara answers: Rabban Gamliel <b>holds</b> that causing <b>a living creature to suffer</b> is prohibited not by Torah law but rather <b>by rabbinic law.</b> Therefore, he need not suffer monetary loss due to the rabbinic prohibition (Ramban).

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Abaye found Rabba sliding his son on the back of a donkey</b> on Shabbat to entertain him. <b>He said to him: The Master is making use of living creatures</b> on Shabbat, and the Sages prohibited doing so. Rabba <b>said to him:</b> I placed my son on the side of the donkey, and as <b>they are sides, the Sages did not issue a decree</b> prohibiting making use of <b>them. From where do you say</b> that this is so? <b>As we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>One may untie</b> the <b>ropes and the bags fall</b> on their own. What, <b>is it not</b> referring to a case <b>where one attached</b> the bags by means of <b><i>guvalaki</i>,</b> where the bags are strapped to the animal and the only way to loosen them involves leaning against the sides of animal in order to unstrap them? <b>That is</b> because it is a case of making use of the <b>sides, and the Sages did not issue a decree prohibiting making use</b> of an animal’s <b>sides.</b>

### Part 11
Abaye answered: <b>No,</b> this is a case <b>where one attached</b> the bags by means of <b><i>agalavki</i>,</b> i.e., where the bags were not tightly strapped to the animal, but rather attached by means of a hook. In such a case, <b>there is</b> no need to make use of <b>the sides</b> of the animal in order to unhook the strap. <b>Alternatively,</b> the bags were tied to the sides of the animal <b>with a rope,</b> which could likewise be untied with ease and without leaning against the animal.

### Part 12
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rabba’s opinion based on that which was taught in a mishna: A <i>sukka</i> that had <b>two</b> of its walls on the ground, built <b>by a person, and one</b> wall <b>on a tree</b> is <b>valid</b> and can be used to fulfill the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>. <b>However, one may not enter it on the festival</b> day of <i>Sukkot</i> because it is prohibited to use trees rooted in the ground on Shabbat or a Festival. <b>What,</b> is this <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where one carved</b> a hole <b>in the tree</b> and inserted a beam into the hole for support, in which case <b>these are sides</b> of the tree that are being used, and apparently, using the <b>sides</b> of the tree is <b>prohibited?</b>

### Part 13
Rabba rejected this: <b>No,</b> it is referring to a case <b>where one bent the tree</b> over <b>and placed the roofing atop it, as</b> in that case, <b>he is making use of the tree</b> itself and not its sides. Abaye asked: <b>If so, say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If there are <b>three</b> walls built <b>by a person and one on a tree,</b> it is a <b>valid</b> <i>sukka</i> <b>and one may enter it on a Festival. And if one bent a tree</b> and placed the roofing atop it, <b>why may one enter it on a Festival?</b>

### Part 14
Rabba rejected this question: <b>Rather, what</b> would you say? Making use of <b>sides is prohibited.</b> If so, the same problem still exists, why is the <i>sukka</i> fit for use in the latter case? <b>Ultimately, why may one enter it on a Festival? Rather, there</b> it is referring to a case <b>where the branches [<i>gavaza</i>] are spread out and where one made the tree itself into a wall,</b> not where he leaned a wall against it. The language of the mishna <b>is also precise.</b> The wall may not be used if it is an integral part of the <i>sukka</i>, meaning that it is one of the three required walls. However, if it serves as a fourth wall, one may use the <i>sukka</i> on a Festival <b>as it is taught</b> that <b>this is the principle:</b> In <b>any</b> case where <b>if the tree was taken</b> the <i>sukka</i> would still <b>be able to stand, one may enter it on a Festival.</b> Then it is clear that the walls are not leaning against the tree; rather, the tree itself serves as a wall. The Gemara says in summary: <b>Learn from here</b> that this is so.

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that these <i>amora’im</i> disagree in a dispute <b>parallel</b> to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> with regard to making use of the sides of a tree, as it was taught in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may not enter</b> a <i>sukka</i> whose walls are leaning against a tree <b>on a Festival. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says in the name of Rabbi Meir: One may enter it on a Festival. What, is it not that they are disagreeing about this</b> issue, <b>as this Master,</b> meaning the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that making use of the <b>sides is prohibited, and this Master,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that <b>they are permitted?</b>

### Part 16
<b>Abaye said: No. Everyone agrees</b> that the <b>sides are prohibited, and it is</b> with regard to the <b>sides of the sides,</b> i.e., not a wall leaning against the tree itself, but a wall that is supported by a beam that is placed in the hole carved in the tree, that <b>they disagree. This Master,</b> meaning the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that the <b>sides of the sides are prohibited, and this Master,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that the <b>sides of the sides are permitted.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rava said: The one who prohibited</b> making use of the <b>sides also prohibited</b> making use of the <b>sides of the sides,</b> and <b>the one who permitted</b> making use of the <b>sides also permitted</b> making use of the <b>sides of the sides. Rav Mesharshiyya raised an objection</b> to the opinion of Rava: If one <b>drove</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC