
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If the interior of the boat is <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>deep and it is not ten</b> handbreadths <b>above</b> the surface of the water, <b>one may carry from it into the sea, but not from the sea into it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about carrying <b>from the sea into</b> the ship <b>that</b> one may <b>not</b> do so? Is it <b>because</b> in doing so <b>one is carrying from a <i>karmelit</i> into the private domain?</b> In carrying <b>from</b> the ship <b>into the sea, one is also carrying from the private domain into a <i>karmelit</i>. Rather, is it not</b> that from the ship to the sea is permitted because one throws the object onto <b>the edge</b> of the boat and it falls into the sea on its own, <b>and learn from it</b> that the Sages did <b>not issue a decree</b> prohibiting an action caused indirectly by <b>one’s power in a <i>karmelit</i>?</b> The Gemara summarizes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Huna said:</b> With regard to <b>those small boats of Meishan,</b> which are wide on top and narrow at the bottom, <b>one may carry in them only within four</b> cubits. Because they are less than four handbreadths wide at the bottom, they are not a private domain. <b>And we only said</b> this <i>halakha</i> in a case where the width of the boat does <b>not</b> reach <b>four</b> handbreadths <b>less than three</b> handbreadths from the bottom of the boat. <b>However, if</b> the width of the boat reaches <b>four</b> handbreadths <b>less than three</b> handbreadths from the bottom, <b>we do not have</b> this <i>halakha</i>, as those are considered full-fledged partitions which create a private domain. <b>And,</b> similarly, <b>if one fills</b> the bottom of the boat <b>with reeds and</b> thin <b>willow branches</b> up to the point where the boat reaches four handbreadths, <b>we do not have</b> this <i>halakha</i>. If there are ten handbreadths above the point where the boat reaches four handbreadths, it is a private domain.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Naḥman strongly objects to this: And let us say: Lower the partition.</b> The upper part of the raft is sufficiently wide and its partitions are sufficiently high; why not consider it as if the partitions of the boat descend from the top of the raft in a straight line to the bottom? <b>Was it not taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: One who stuck a stick</b> into the ground <b>in the public domain, and</b> hung <b>a basket atop it</b> that is four by four handbreadths wide, and <b>threw</b> an object from the public domain <b>and it landed upon it, he is liable,</b> like one who carried an object into a private domain? <b>Apparently, we say: Lower the partition</b> of the basket and treat it as if it reaches the ground, creating a column that is considered a private domain. <b>Here, too, let us say: Lower the partition.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef strongly objects to this</b> statement of Rav Naḥman: <b>And</b> did <b>they not hear that</b> which <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said, and</b> there are those who <b>determined</b> that <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> was stated <b>in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And the Rabbis deem</b> one <b>exempt</b> in the case of a reed stuck in the ground of a public domain? Apparently, the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, is an individual opinion and was not accepted as <i>halakha</i>. <b>Abaye said to him: And do you not hold</b> the principle of extending partitions? <b>Was it not taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a column in the public domain</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and four</b> handbreadths <b>wide, and its base</b> is <b>not four</b> handbreadths wide, <b>and its narrowest</b> point <b>is</b> more than <b>three</b> handbreadths high; <b>and</b> if <b>one threw</b> an object from the public domain <b>and it came to rest atop</b> the column, <b>he is liable? Apparently, we say: Lower the partition.</b> Since the column’s uppermost section is sufficiently wide, its partitions are considered as if they extend to the ground. <b>Here, too,</b> say: <b>Lower the partition.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Are</b> the case of the basket and the case of the boat <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case of the basket, <b>it is a partition that goats pass through.</b> A partition that does not serve as a barrier is not considered a partition. <b>Here, it is a partition that goats do not pass through.</b> It is considered a partition. <b>Rav Aḥa, son</b> of <b>Rav Aḥa, said to Rav Ashi: In the case of a boat, too,</b> there is <b>the passage of fish,</b> as they can swim through the lowered partitions of the boat. <b>He said to him: Passage of fish is not considered passage</b> because it is not visible. <b>And from where do you say</b> that this is so? <b>As Rabbi Tavla raised a dilemma before Ravin:</b> With regard to <b>a hanging partition, what</b> is the ruling in terms of it <b>permitting</b> one to carry <b>in a ruin</b> when part of the building’s walls are still intact, and they are still considered partitions? Ravin <b>said to him: A hanging partition only permits</b> one to carry

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC