
### Part 1
<b>Unripe dates</b> that are placed in baskets to ripen and until they are ripe can only be eaten with difficulty, <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, what is</b> their legal status as far as moving them on Shabbat is concerned? Are they considered set-aside? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: There is only</b> a prohibition of <b>set-aside according to Rabbi Shimon</b> in the cases of <b>dried figs and raisins alone.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara challenges this: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>not hold</b> that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna that on a Festival, before they are slaughtered, <b>one may neither give water to,</b> in order to ease removal of their hides, <b>nor slaughter</b> non-domesticated, <b>desert</b> animals, animals that are always grazing in the fields? Since people do not generally tend to them, they are considered set-aside and may not be used. <b>However, one may give water to and slaughter domesticated animals. And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>these are</b> non-domesticated, <b>desert</b> animals: <b>Any</b> animals <b>that leave</b> their sheds <b>on Passover and</b> only <b>enter</b> their sheds with the advent of the <b>rainy season. Domesticated</b> animals are <b>any</b> animals <b>that go out to graze beyond the</b> city <b>limits, and come and sleep within the</b> city <b>limits. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: These and those are</b> both <b>domesticated. And these are</b> the non-domesticated, <b>desert</b> animals that are prohibited due to the prohibition of set-aside: <b>Any</b> animals <b>that graze in the grazing area and neither enter the town during the summer nor during the rainy season.</b> It is these animals that it is prohibited to give water to or slaughter on a Festival. Apparently, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that there is a prohibition of set-aside even in the case of animals.

### Part 3
Several resolutions are proposed to this contradiction: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>these</b> non-domesticated animals that graze in the grazing areas throughout the year <b>are also</b> considered <b>like dried figs and raisins.</b> Even Rabbi Shimon would agree to this <i>halakha</i>. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: When Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi told his son that answer, <b>he was saying it to him in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and he</b> himself <b>does not hold</b> that way.

### Part 4
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: In that <i>baraita</i>, <b>he spoke to them in accordance with the statement of the Rabbis,</b> and this is how his statement must be understood: <b>In my opinion I do not hold</b> that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside at all.</b> However, <b>according to your</b> opinion, <b>at least agree with me that</b> animals that leave their sheds <b>on Passover and</b> only <b>enter</b> their sheds with the advent of the <b>rainy season are domesticated. And the Rabbis said to him: No,</b> those <b>are non-domesticated</b> animals.

### Part 5
As to the essential dispute with regard to the laws of set-aside, <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They said that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> who holds that there is no prohibition of set-aside. The Gemara asks: <b>Did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> actually <b>say this? Didn’t an Elder</b> from <b>Keruya, and some say</b> that he was from <b>Seruya, raise a dilemma before Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> With regard to <b>a hen’s roost, what is</b> its legal status as far as <b>moving it on Shabbat</b> is concerned? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: Isn’t</b> the roost <b>made exclusively for hens</b> to be inside it? Since it is not designated for use by people, moving it is prohibited. Apparently, he holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda with regard to set-aside. The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a special case, <b>when there is a dead chick in</b> the roost. Moving the roost is prohibited due to the dead chick, which is set-aside.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues to ask: This <b>works out well according to</b> the opinion of <b>Mar bar Ameimar in the name of Rav, who said: Rabbi Shimon agreed in</b> the case of <b>animals that died</b> on Shabbat, <b>that they are prohibited</b> on Shabbat due to set-aside. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Mar, son of Rav Yosef, in the name of Rava, who said: Rabbi Shimon was in disagreement even in</b> the case of <b>animals that died,</b> and said that <b>they are permitted</b> and are not prohibited as set-aside, <b>what can be said?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where there is an egg</b> that was laid on Shabbat in the roost. Because it was laid on Shabbat it is considered set-aside, and using the egg is prohibited. The thought of using it never entered anyone’s mind before Shabbat.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t Rav Naḥman say: One who is of</b> the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside, is</b> also <b>of</b> the opinion that there is a prohibition of an object that <b>came into being</b> on Shabbat or on a Festival; and one <b>who is not of</b> the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside, is</b> also <b>not of</b> the opinion that there is a prohibition of an object that <b>came into being.</b> This case is no different than other cases of set-aside. The Gemara responds: This is referring to a case <b>where</b> the roost <b>has an egg with a chick in it.</b> Even Rabbi Shimon would agree that moving an egg of that sort is prohibited since it is fit for neither human nor animal consumption.

### Part 8
This explanation was cited to explain that Rabbi Yoḥanan could hold in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon. However, <b>when Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rabbi Yosef, came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> that there is a prohibition of set-aside. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> that there is no prohibition of set-aside. <b>Rav Yosef said: That is</b> what <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They said that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> The inference is: <b>They said; however, he</b> himself <b>does not hold</b> that <b>this</b> is the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: And you</b> yourself <b>did not hold that Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> rules <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> even before Rav Yitzḥak came and cited this statement in his name? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Abba and Rabbi Asi happen</b> to come <b>to the house of Rabbi Abba who was from</b> the city <b>Haifa, and a candelabrum fell onto Rabbi Asi’s cloak and he did not move it? What is the reason</b> that he did not lift it? <b>Is it not because Rabbi Asi was a student of Rabbi Yoḥanan, and Rabbi Yoḥanan holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who holds</b> that there is a prohibition of <b>set-aside?</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yoḥanan holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 10
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Candelabrum you say;</b> are you citing a proof from the case of a candelabrum? <b>A candelabrum is different</b> because there is a unique <i>halakha</i> in that case. <b>As Rabbi Aḥa bar</b> Rabbi <b>Ḥanina said</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Reish Lakish issued a ruling in</b> the city of <b>Sidon: A candelabrum that can be moved in one of his hands, one is permitted to move it</b> on Shabbat. However, if it is so heavy that one must move it <b>with his two hands, it is prohibited to move it. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: We have</b> permission to carry <b>only in the case of an</b> oil <b>lamp, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> However, with regard to a candelabrum, <b>both</b> one <b>that is carried in one hand</b> and one <b>that is carried in two hands, it is prohibited to move it.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that there is a unique prohibition in the case of a candelabrum? <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both said: Since a person</b> usually <b>designates</b> a fixed <b>place for it</b> due to its size and its use, it is considered a built-in part of the house, and moving the candelabrum is like dismantling the house. <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: A groom’s canopy</b> is an object <b>for</b> which <b>a person designates a</b> set <b>place, and,</b> nevertheless, <b>Shmuel said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> With regard to a <b>groom’s canopy,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC