
### Part 1
With regard to <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a spice that contains leavened bread crumbs, and <b>all kinds of <i>kutaḥ</i>, it is prohibited to sell</b> it to a gentile <b>thirty days before Passover.</b> Because <i>kutaḥ</i> is used exclusively as a spice, it lasts longer than other foods.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may,</b> <i>ab initio</i>, <b>put food before the dog in the courtyard</b> on Shabbat, and we are not concerned that the dog may lift it and carry it out to the public domain. If the dog <b>lifted it and exited</b> the courtyard, one need <b>not attend to him</b>, as he is not required to ensure that the dog will eat it specifically in that courtyard.

### Part 3
<b>On a similar note,</b> the <i>baraita</i> continued: <b>One may place food before the gentile in the courtyard</b> on Shabbat. If the gentile <b>lifted it and exited, one need not attend to him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I need this as well? This</b> case <b>is the same as that</b> case. The <i>halakhot</i> with regard to the dog and the gentile are identical, as Shabbat prohibitions do not apply to either of them. The Gemara answers: There is a distinction. <b>Lest you say</b> that in <b>this</b> case, the case of the dog, responsibility for its food <b>is incumbent upon</b> the owner of the courtyard who owns the dog. <b>And</b> in <b>this</b> case, the case of the gentile, responsibility for his food <b>is not incumbent upon</b> the owner of the courtyard. Therefore, in a situation where there is concern that Shabbat will be desecrated, there is room to say that one may not give the gentile his food. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that in that case, it is also permitted.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>A person may not rent his utensils to a gentile on Shabbat eve,</b> as it appears that the Jew is receiving payment for work performed on Shabbat. However, <b>on the fourth and on the fifth</b> days of the week <b>it is permitted. On a similar note, one may not send letters in the hand of a gentile on Shabbat eve.</b> However, <b>on the fourth and on the fifth</b> days of the week <b>it is permitted.</b> Nevertheless, <b>they said about Rabbi Yosei the priest, and some say</b> that they said this <b>about Rabbi Yosei the Ḥasid, that</b> a document in <b>his handwriting was never found in the hand of a gentile,</b> so that a gentile would not carry his letter on Shabbat.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not send a letter in the hand of a gentile</b> on <b>Shabbat eve unless he stipulates a set sum of money for him.</b> In that case, anything the gentile does with this letter is not in service of the Jew, but rather on his own, since his payment is stipulated in advance. <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> One may only give a letter to a gentile on Shabbat eve if there is sufficient time <b>for</b> the gentile <b>to reach his house</b> before dark. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> If there is sufficient time <b>for him to reach the house adjacent to the wall</b> of the city to which he was sent.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t he stipulate a set</b> price? What difference does it make whether he reaches the city on Shabbat eve or on Shabbat? <b>Rav Sheshet said,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying as follows: And if he did not stipulate a set</b> price for the task, <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> One may only give a letter to a gentile on Shabbat eve if there is sufficient time <b>for</b> the gentile <b>to reach his house</b> before dark. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> If there is sufficient time <b>for him to reach the house adjacent to the wall</b> of the city to which he was sent.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you say in the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, that <b>one may not send</b> a letter unless he stipulated a set price? Without stipulating a set price, one may not send a letter at all. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as it is possible to explain that <b>this,</b> where we learned that one is permitted to give a letter to a gentile on Shabbat eve even if he did not stipulate a set price, is in a case <b>where the house of the mail carrier [<i>bei doar</i>] is permanently located in the city. And this,</b> where it is permitted to give a letter to a gentile only if he stipulated a set price, is in a case <b>where the house of the mail carrier is not permanently located in the city.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught: One may not set sail on a ship fewer than three days before Shabbat,</b> to avoid appearances that the Jew is performing a prohibited labor on Shabbat. <b>In what case is this</b> statement <b>said?</b> In a case where he set sail <b>for a voluntary matter; however,</b> if he sailed <b>for a matter</b> involving a <b>mitzva,</b> he may <b>well</b> do so. <b>And,</b> even then, <b>he</b> must <b>stipulate with</b> the gentile ship captain that this is <b>on the condition that he rests,</b> i.e., stops the ship, <b>and</b> even if the gentile <b>does not rest. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: He need not</b> stipulate. <b>And</b> sailing on a ship that is traveling <b>from Tyre to Sidon,</b> a short journey by sea, <b>is permitted even on Shabbat eve.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One may not lay siege to cities of gentiles fewer than three days before Shabbat,</b> to avoid the need to desecrate Shabbat in establishing the siege. <b>And if they</b> already <b>began</b> establishing the siege fewer than three days before Shabbat, <b>they need not stop</b> all war-related actions even on Shabbat. <b>And so Shammai would say:</b> From that which is written: “And you should build a siege against the city that is waging war with you <b>until it falls”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:20), it is derived that the siege should be sustained “until it falls.” Consequently, the siege must continue <b>even on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said:</b> The ancestral house of my father, the dynasty of <i>Nesi’im</i> from the house of Hillel, <b>was accustomed</b> to give its white clothes to a gentile launderer no fewer than three days before Shabbat. <b>It was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>Rabbi Tzadok said: This was the custom of the house of Rabban Gamliel: They would give white clothes to the</b> gentile <b>launderer three days before Shabbat, and</b> they would give him <b>colored</b> clothes <b>even on Shabbat eve.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And from their statement we learned that white</b> garments <b>are more difficult to launder than colored ones,</b> as in white garments every stain is more conspicuous.

### Part 11
On a related note, the Gemara relates that <b>Abaye gave this dyed garment to the launderer.</b> Abaye <b>said to</b> the launderer: <b>How much do you want</b> as payment <b>to</b> wash <b>it?</b> The launderer <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Same as for a white</b> garment. Abaye <b>said to him:</b> You cannot deceive me in this matter, <b>as the Sages already preceded you,</b> as it was taught in the <i>baraita</i> which garment is more difficult to wash. On this topic, <b>Abaye said: One who gives clothing to the launderer, he should give</b> it to <b>him by measure and he should take</b> it back <b>from him by measure.</b> In <b>that</b> way, <b>if it is longer,</b> it is an indication that the launderer <b>caused him a loss</b> because <b>he stretched</b> the garment. <b>And if it is shorter, he</b> certainly <b>caused him a loss</b> because <b>he shrunk it.</b>

### Part 12
We learned in the mishna that <b>these,</b> Beit Shammai, <b>and those,</b> Beit Hillel, <b>agree</b> that <b>one may load</b> the beam of the olive press and the circular wine press. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different about all</b> of the cases in the mishna, <b>where Beit Shammai issued a decree</b> prohibiting <b>them, and what is different about the beams of the olive press and the circular wine press that</b> Beit Shammai <b>did not issue a decree</b> prohibiting them? The Gemara answers: <b>Those</b> cases, <b>where if he performed them on Shabbat he is rendered liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, Beit Shammai issued a decree</b> prohibiting <b>them</b> on <b>Shabbat eve at nightfall.</b> However, in the cases of <b>the beams of the olive press and the circular wine press,</b> where even <b>if he performed them on Shabbat he is not rendered liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering,</b> Beit Shammai <b>did not issue a decree.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who holds that <b>anything that comes on its own,</b> and not as the result of an action, it may <b>well</b> be done on Shabbat? <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>the garlic and the unripe</b> grapes, <b>and the stalks</b> of wheat <b>that he crushed while it was still day, Rabbi Yishmael says: He may</b> continue tending to them and <b>finish after it gets dark,</b> as after the crushing is completed these items are placed beneath a weight, so that the liquids will continue to seep out. <b>And Rabbi Akiva says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC