
### Part 1
<b>by inference, the first</b> clause in the mishna is referring to <b>one type</b> of food <b>and one dish.</b> The problem is then more difficult. In a case where one ate two halves of an olive-bulk <b>from one type</b> of food <b>and</b> in <b>one dish,</b> was it <b>necessary to say</b> that he is liable? That is obvious. <b>Rav Huna said: With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where he had</b> a period of <b>awareness between</b> eating the two half olive-bulks. After eating the first half of an olive-bulk, he became aware that he had eaten food that was prohibited. Then he became unaware again and ate the second half of an olive-bulk. Although, with regard to sacrifices, awareness usually serves as a line of demarcation between unwitting transgressions performed prior to the period of awareness and unwitting transgressions performed thereafter, the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel who said: There is no awareness for half a measure.</b> Since one is not liable to bring a sacrifice for half a measure, the fact that one became aware between consumption of the two halves of an olive-bulk is of no significance and does not demarcate between the two half-measures with regard to liability to bring a sin-offering.

### Part 2
A dispute between <i>amora’im</i> <b>was stated: With regard to one who ate two olive</b>-bulks <b>of forbidden fat in one lapse of awareness, and became aware of</b> the transgression of eating the <b>first</b> olive-bulk, <b>and then became aware of</b> the transgression of eating the <b>second, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He is liable</b> to bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings, one offering for each transgression. <b>And Reish Lakish said: He is liable</b> to bring <b>only one.</b> Both Sages cite proofs for their opinions. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that <b>he is liable</b> as it is stated: “And he shall offer <b>for his sin</b> that he sinned…<b>and he shall bring</b> the ox” (Leviticus 4:3-4), indicating that he is liable to bring a separate sacrifice for each sin. <b>And Reish Lakish said he is exempt,</b> as it is stated: “And the priest shall atone for him <b>from his sin, and it shall be forgiven for him”</b> (Leviticus 4:26), indicating that even if he atoned from his sin, i.e., for part of his sin and not all of his sin, the entire transgression is forgiven.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how can <b>Reish Lakish</b> say that one sin-offering is sufficient? <b>Isn’t it written: “For his sin</b>…<b>and he shall bring”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse refers to a case where he only became aware of the second sin <b>after</b> attaining <b>atonement</b> for the first. However, if he became aware prior to atonement, he is required to bring only one sin-offering. The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan, too,</b> how can he say that one is liable to bring two sin-offerings? <b>Isn’t it written: “From his sin, and it shall be forgiven for him?</b> The Gemara answers: According to Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>with what are we dealing here?</b> It is a case <b>where one ate an olive-bulk and a half, and he became aware of</b> his transgression of eating a single <b>olive-bulk, and then he ate another half of an olive</b>-bulk <b>in</b> the course of <b>the lapse of awareness of</b> the <b>second</b> half of an olive-bulk that he ate together with the whole olive-bulk. <b>Lest you say</b> that the two halves of an olive-bulk should <b>join together,</b> and he is liable to bring an additional sin-offering, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that in that case he is exempt because he has already atoned for part of his transgression.

### Part 4
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi:</b> In the dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, <b>they disagree</b> in a case <b>where one became aware</b> of the second transgression <b>prior to designating</b> an animal for the first sin-offering, <b>and this is</b> the point over which <b>they disagree: That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that periods of <b>awareness separate.</b> Since one became aware of his sins at two different stages, he is liable to bring two sin-offerings. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that only <b>designations</b> of animals for sacrifices <b>separate. However,</b> if one became aware of the second transgression <b>after designation</b> of the animal for the first sin-offering, <b>Reish Lakish agrees with Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> that <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings. <b>Or, perhaps they are disagreeing</b> in a case <b>where he became aware</b> of the second sin <b>after designating</b> an animal for the first sin-offering, <b>and this is</b> the point over which <b>they disagree: That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that <b>designations separate; and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that only <b>atonements separate.</b> Only after the sin-offering has been sacrificed on the altar and the sinner has obtained atonement can it be said that the sacrifice’s capacity to atone is spent and cannot atone for a sin of which he became aware afterward. <b>However,</b> if he became aware of the second sin <b>prior to designation</b> of the sacrifice, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan agrees with Reish Lakish</b> that <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>only one</b> sin-offering. <b>Or, perhaps,</b> the <b>dispute</b> between them is <b>both in this</b> case, before designation, <b>and in that</b> case, after designation.

### Part 5
Rav Ashi <b>said to him: It is reasonable</b> to say that <b>the dispute is both in this</b> case <b>and in that</b> case. <b>As, should it enter your mind</b> that <b>they disagree</b> only in a case where he became aware of the second sin <b>prior to designation</b> of an animal for the first sin-offering, <b>and</b> in a case where he became aware <b>after designation Reish Lakish agrees with Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> that <b>he is liable to</b> bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings, then <b>rather than establishing the verse</b> that posed a difficulty to Reish Lakish’s opinion in a case where one became aware of the second sin <b>after atonement</b> for the first, <b>let him establish it</b> in a case where one became aware of the transgression <b>after designation</b> of an animal for the first sin-offering. <b>And</b> similarly, <b>if</b> you say that <b>they disagree</b> only in a case where he became aware of the second sin <b>after designation, and</b> in a case where he became aware <b>prior to designation Rabbi Yoḥanan agrees with Reish Lakish</b> that <b>he is only liable to</b> bring <b>one</b> sin-offering, then <b>rather than establishing the verse</b> that posed a difficulty to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion in a case where he ate <b>an olive-bulk and a half, let him establish it</b> in a case where he became aware of the transgression <b>prior to designation.</b>

### Part 6
Ravina does not accept this proof, as, in his opinion, it is flawed: <b>And perhaps there is uncertainty</b> with regard to this matter, <b>and he spoke</b> employing the style of: <b>If you wish to say. If you wish to say</b> that <b>they disagree</b> in a case where he became aware of the second sin <b>prior to designation,</b> then <b>how does Rabbi Yoḥanan establish the verse?</b> He establishes the verse in a case where one ate <b>an olive-bulk and a half. And if you wish to say they disagree</b> in a case where he became aware of the second sin <b>after designation,</b> then <b>how does Reish Lakish establish the verse?</b> He establishes the verse in a case where one became aware of the second sin <b>after</b> attaining <b>atonement.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Ulla said: According to the one who said</b> that in order to designate <b>a definite guilt-offering,</b> a sacrifice brought by one who committed a robbery, misused sacred objects, or had relations with a designated maidservant, one <b>does not require prior knowledge</b> that he definitely sinned,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC