
### Part 1
because <b>the Jewish people were fruitful</b> [<b><i>paru</i></b>] <b>and multiplied in it; the Sinai Desert,</b> because <b>hatred descended upon the nations of the world on it,</b> on the mountain on which the Jewish people received the Torah. <b>And what is</b> the mountain’s true <b>name? Horeb is its name. And</b> that <b>disputes</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Abbahu, as Rabbi Abbahu said: Mount Sinai is its name. And why is it called Mount Horeb?</b> It is because <b>destruction [<i>ḥurba</i>] of the nations of the world descended upon it.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that one ties a scarlet strip</b> of wool to the scapegoat? As it says: “If your sins be like scarlet [<i>kashanim</i>], they will become white like snow” (Isaiah 1:18). The Gemara wonders at this: Why does the verse use the plural form: <b><i>Kashanim</i>? It should have</b> used the singular form: <b><i>Kashani</i>. Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to the Jewish people:</b> Even <b>if your sins are</b> as numerous <b>as those years [<i>kashanim</i>] that have proceeded continuously from the six days of Creation until now, they will become white like snow. Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Go please and let us reason together, the Lord will say”</b> (Isaiah 1:18)? Why does the verse say: <b>Go please? It should have</b> said: <b>Come please.</b> And why does the verse say: <b>The Lord will say?</b> The prophet’s message is based on something that God already said. Therefore, the verse <b>should have</b> said: <b>God said.</b> Rather, the explanation of this verse is that <b>in the future</b> that will surely <b>come, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will say to the Jewish people: Go please to your Patriarchs, and they will rebuke you.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And</b> the Jewish people <b>will say before Him: Master of the Universe, to whom shall we go?</b> Shall we go <b>to Abraham, to whom You said: “Know certainly</b> that your seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years” (Genesis 15:13), <b>and he did not ask for mercy on our behalf?</b> Or perhaps we should go <b>to Isaac, who blessed Esau</b> and said: <b>“And it shall come to pass when you shall break loose,</b> that you shall shake his yoke from off your neck” (Genesis 27:40), <b>and he did not ask for mercy on our behalf.</b> Or perhaps we should go <b>to Jacob, to whom You said: “I will go down to Egypt with you”</b> (Genesis 46:4), <b>and he did not ask for mercy on our behalf.</b> And if so, <b>to whom shall we go?</b> Shall we go to our Patriarchs, who do not have mercy on us? Rather, <b>now God</b> Himself <b>says</b> what punishment we deserve. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to them: Since you made yourselves dependent on Me, “If your sins be like scarlet, they will become white like snow.”</b>

### Part 4
Apropos the Jewish people assessing their forefathers, the Gemara cites a related teaching. <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For You are our Father; for Abraham knows us not, and Israel does not acknowledge us; You, Lord, are our Father, our Redeemer, everlasting is Your name”</b> (Isaiah 63:16). <b>In the future</b> that will surely <b>come, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will say to Abraham: Your children have sinned against Me.</b> Abraham will <b>say before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> if so, <b>let them be eradicated to sanctify Your name.</b> God <b>said: I will say it to Jacob.</b> Since he experienced <b>the pain of raising children,</b> perhaps <b>he will ask for mercy on their behalf.</b> He <b>said to</b> Jacob: <b>Your children have sinned.</b> Jacob <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> if so, <b>let them be eradicated to sanctify Your name.</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said: There is no reason in elders and no wisdom in youth.</b> Neither Abraham nor Jacob knew how to respond properly. He <b>said to Isaac: Your children have sinned against Me.</b> Isaac <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> are they <b>my children and not Your children? At</b> Sinai, <b>when they accorded precedence to “We will do” over “We will listen” before You,</b> didn’t You <b>call them, “My son, My firstborn son</b> Israel” (Exodus 4:22)? <b>Now</b> that they have sinned, are they <b>my children and not Your children?</b>

### Part 5
<b>And furthermore, how much did they</b> actually <b>sin? How long is a person’s life? Seventy years. Subtract</b> the first <b>twenty</b> years of his life. One <b>is not punished for</b> sins committed then, as in heavenly matters, a person is only punished from age twenty. <b>Fifty</b> years <b>remain for them. Subtract twenty-five</b> years <b>of nights,</b> and <b>twenty-five</b> years <b>remain for them. Subtract twelve and a half</b> years during which <b>one prays and eats and</b> uses <b>the bathroom,</b> and <b>twelve and a half</b> years <b>remain for them. If You</b> can <b>endure them all</b> and forgive the sins committed during those years, <b>excellent. And if not, half</b> of the sins are <b>upon me</b> to bear <b>and half upon You. And if You say</b> that <b>all of them,</b> the sins of all twelve and a half years that remain, are <b>upon me, I sacrificed my soul before You</b> and You should forgive them due to my merit. The Jewish people <b>began to say</b> to Isaac: <b>You are our father.</b> Only Isaac defended the Jewish people as a father would and displayed compassion toward his children. <b>Isaac said to them: Before you praise me, praise the Holy One, Blessed be He. And Isaac points to the Holy One, Blessed be He, before their eyes. Immediately they lifted their eyes to the heavens and say: “You, Lord, are our Father, our Redeemer, everlasting is Your name.”</b>

### Part 6
And since the Gemara mentioned Jacob’s descent to Egypt, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Our father Jacob should have gone down to Egypt in iron chains</b> as would an exile against his will, as decreed by God and related to Abraham. <b>However, his merit caused him</b> to descend without suffering, <b>as it is written: “I drew them with cords of man, with bands of love, and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I fed them gently”</b> (Hosea 11:4).

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> After an extended digression for a discussion of matters unrelated to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, this mishna resumes treatment of the <i>halakhot</i> of carrying from domain to domain on Shabbat. <b>One who carries out wood</b> on Shabbat is liable for a measure <b>equivalent</b> to the amount of wood necessary <b>to cook an easily</b> cooked <b>egg.</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>spices</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to season an easily</b> cooked <b>egg. And</b> all types of spices <b>join together with one another</b> to constitute the measure for liability. The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>nutshells, pomegranate peels, safflower, and madder,</b> which are used to produce dyes, is <b>equivalent</b> to the amount that is used <b>to dye a small garment</b> placed <b>atop a</b> woman’s <b>hairnet.</b> The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>urine, natron, and <i>borit</i>, cimolian earth [<i>Kimoleya</i>], and potash,</b> all of which are abrasive materials used for laundry, is <b>equivalent</b> to the amount that is used <b>to launder a small garment</b> placed <b>atop a</b> woman’s <b>hairnet. And Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The measure that determines liability for these materials is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to remove a stain.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the measure of wood, the Gemara asks: Didn’t <b>we</b> already <b>learn it once?</b> As we learned in a mishna: The measure that determines liability for carrying out <b>a reed</b> is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to make a quill. And if</b> the reed <b>was thick</b> and unfit for writing, <b>or</b> if it was <b>fragmented,</b> the measure that determines its liability is <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to cook an egg most easily</b> cooked, one that is already <b>beaten and placed in a stew pot.</b> The measure of firewood is clearly delineated. The Gemara answers: Still, this mishna is necessary. <b>You might have said: There,</b> the measure of the crushed reed reflects the fact that <b>it is not suitable for anything</b> other than kindling. <b>However,</b> regarding <b>wood that is suitable to</b> be used <b>as a tooth of a key [<i>aklida</i>],</b> the measure that determines its liability should be <b>even any</b> small <b>amount.</b> Therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> that wood is typically designated for burning, and that determines the measure for liability for carrying out wood on Shabbat.

### Part 9
We learned in the mishna that all types of <b>spices</b> join together with one another to constitute the measure <b>equivalent</b> to that which is used <b>to season an easily</b> cooked <b>egg. The</b> Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from that which we learned elsewhere: <b>Spices,</b> which are prohibited due to <b>two or three</b> different <b>prohibitions,</b> e.g., one is prohibited due to <i>orla</i>, and one due to the prohibition of untithed produce, and they were all <b>of a single species</b> (<i>Tosafot</i>), <b>or</b> if they were <b>of three</b> different <b>species, are prohibited, and they join together with each other</b> to constitute a complete measure. <b>And Ḥizkiya said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC