
### Part 1
inside such an enclosure <b>whose trapping is inadequate,</b> meaning that the enclosure is large and contains hiding places so that it is still necessary to pursue and apprehend the animal, it <b>is prohibited</b> for one to catch it; <b>and</b> with regard to any animal <b>whose trapping is not inadequate,</b> as it is possible to seize it immediately without having to engage in further pursuit, it <b>is permitted</b> for one to catch it.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from what is stated in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>From enclosures of animals and of birds, one may not trap</b> animals or birds <b>on a Festival, nor may one place food before them.</b> This is <b>difficult</b> due to a contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>. This is similarly <b>difficult</b> due to a contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara resolves the first contradiction: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to the contradiction between the ruling concerning <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling concerning <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>, it is <b>not difficult,</b> because <b>this,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that prohibits trapping and feeding animals in the enclosures, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that an animal trapped in an enclosure whose trapping is inadequate, i.e., it is still necessary to pursue and apprehend the animal, is not considered trapped, and therefore one may not trap it from the enclosure on a Festival. Whereas <b>that,</b> the mishna that permits trapping and feeding the animals in the enclosures, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that an animal in an enclosure is considered trapped, and therefore removing it from there is not considered an act of hunting.

### Part 4
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One who</b> drives and <b>traps a bird into a closet or a deer into a house is liable.</b> The Gemara infers from this: <b>It is</b> only if he traps the animal <b>into a house that he is liable, but</b> if he traps it <b>into an enclosure,</b> he is <b>not</b> liable. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> One is liable for trapping <b>a bird into a closet, and</b> for trapping <b>a deer into a garden, or into a courtyard, or into an enclosure.</b> This demonstrates that according to the Rabbis, an animal found inside an enclosure is regarded as already captured, whereas Rabbi Yehuda disagrees. From this it follows that Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis similarly disagree about catching an animal inside an enclosure and removing it from there on a Festival.

### Part 5
<b>However,</b> concerning the contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>birds</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>, it is <b>difficult,</b> as all agree that they may not be caught, even in one’s house. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>this</b> contradiction is <b>also not difficult,</b> because <b>this,</b> the mishna that permits trapping, is referring to <b>a roofed enclosure,</b> in which a bird is considered captured, and therefore there is no prohibition against apprehending it on a Festival, and <b>that,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that prohibits trapping, is referring to <b>an unroofed enclosure,</b> in which a bird is not considered trapped and apprehending it is prohibited, that does not resolve the contradiction.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains why the proposed resolution must be rejected: <b>As</b> with regard to <b>a house, which is like a roofed enclosure,</b> there is no dispute. <b>And according to both Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis, a bird</b> trapped <b>into a closet, yes,</b> it is considered trapped, while a bird <b>into a house, no,</b> it is not considered trapped.

### Part 7
<b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said: Here,</b> in the mishna, according to which a bird in a house is not considered trapped, <b>we are dealing with a free bird,</b> a sparrow, <b>which does not accept authority.</b> That bird is not intimidated and evades capture even in a house. <b>As the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Why is it called a free</b> [<b><i>dror</i></b>] <b>bird</b>? <b>Because it dwells</b> [<b><i>dara</i></b>] <b>in a house as it does in a field,</b> flittering from place to place. For this reason, it is not considered captured when it is inside a house. Therefore, the distinction between a roofed and an unroofed enclosure resolves the apparent contradiction between the mishna and the <i>Tosefta</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> understanding, that the difference between the rulings in the two sources is predicated on different circumstances and not on a tannaitic dispute, the apparent contradiction between the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the mishna and the ruling with regard to <b>an animal</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> is <b>also not difficult. This,</b> the ruling in the mishna that permits apprehending the animal, is referring to <b>a small enclosure,</b> in which the animal cannot evade its pursuers and requires no further trapping. <b>That,</b> the ruling in the <i>Tosefta</i> that prohibits apprehending the animal, is referring to <b>a large enclosure,</b> from which the animal cannot escape, but it can still avoid being caught.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>a small enclosure,</b> and <b>what are the circumstances</b> of <b>a large enclosure? Rav Ashi said: Any</b> enclosure <b>where one can run after</b> an animal <b>and reach it in one stoop</b> is <b>a small enclosure. And</b> any <b>other</b> is <b>a large enclosure. Or perhaps, any</b> enclosure <b>that has a series of corners</b> in which the animal could hide and evade capture is <b>a large enclosure, and</b> any <b>other</b> is <b>a small enclosure. Or perhaps, any</b> enclosure <b>where the shadows from the</b> different <b>walls fall upon each other,</b> because the walls are close together, is <b>a small enclosure. And</b> any <b>other,</b> a larger area where the walls are further apart, is <b>a large enclosure.</b>

### Part 10
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Not all enclosures are identical.</b> If the animal is inadequately trapped in the enclosure, it is prohibited for one to catch it; whereas if it is adequately trapped, he is permitted to do so. <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: If one rules that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with his opinion, does that mean <b>by inference</b> that the Rabbis <b>disagree,</b> or perhaps there is no dispute and everyone accepts the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel?

### Part 11
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: And what difference is there to you</b> whether or not the Rabbis disagree? In either case the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. Why then does it matter whether or not the issue was in dispute? Abaye <b>said to him,</b> invoking a folk expression with regard to one who learns without reaching understanding: Is it simply <b>learn the lesson;</b> let <b>it be</b> like <b>a song?</b> In other words, is it sufficient to simply parrot the halakhic ruling? Rather, it is necessary to examine the issue to understand it even if it does not yield a practical halakhic difference.

### Part 12
It was further taught in the mishna: <b>This is the principle: Any</b> animal inside such an enclosure <b>whose trapping is inadequate</b> may not be caught and removed from there on a Festival, whereas any animal whose trapping is not inadequate may be apprehended and removed from there. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of an animal <b>whose trapping is inadequate? Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Any</b> animal <b>with regard to which one would say: Bring a trap so that we may catch it,</b> as the animal cannot be apprehended without the aid of a trap.

### Part 13
<b>Abaye said to him: But aren’t geese and chickens</b> that are loose in a courtyard creatures <b>with regard to which one would say: Bring a trap so that we may catch it,</b> as they freely roam about and evade capture? <b>And</b> nevertheless, <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps geese, chickens, or domestic doves is exempt,</b> as they are considered already trapped.

### Part 14
<b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> There is a difference between the two cases: <b>These,</b> the geese and chickens, <b>enter their coop in the evening</b> and use it as their fixed dwelling place and are therefore considered trapped, <b>while these</b> animals in the enclosure <b>do not enter their coop in the evening</b> and therefore flee from those trying to seize them.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges this argument: <b>But don’t doves of a dovecote and doves of a loft enter their coop in the evening, and</b> yet <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who traps doves of a dovecote, doves of a loft, or birds that are nesting in pitchers in buildings is liable</b> for their capture, although they enter their coop in the evening?

### Part 16
<b>Rather, Rabba bar Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> A distinction can be made as follows: <b>These,</b> the geese and chickens, <b>enter their coop in the evening, and</b> providing them with <b>their feed is your</b> responsibility. They are therefore accustomed to their owners and considered as trapped. <b>Whereas these,</b> the doves of a dovecote and the other birds mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>, admittedly <b>enter their coop in the evening, but feeding them is not your</b> responsibility.

### Part 17
<b>Rav Mari said</b> an alternative distinction: <b>These,</b> the doves of a dovecote, <b>are likely to flee</b> from people, and therefore require trapping, <b>while these,</b> the geese, chickens, and domestic doves, <b>are not likely to flee</b> from them. The Gemara asks: <b>All of them are also likely to flee</b> when being pursued, even chickens. The Gemara answers: <b>We</b> meant to <b>say</b> that <b>they are likely to flee to their coop.</b> In other words, even when they reach their coop they do not remain still but continue in their attempts to escape, and are therefore not considered trapped.

### Part 18
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>traps for animals, birds, and fish were set on the eve of a Festival, one may not take</b> anything <b>from them on the Festival, unless he knows that</b> the animals found in the traps <b>had</b> already <b>been caught on the eve of the Festival. And an incident</b> is related <b>where a certain gentile brought fish to Rabban Gamliel, and</b> the latter <b>said:</b> The fish <b>are permitted, but I do not wish to accept</b> them <b>from him,</b> as I despise him.

### Part 19
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara raises a question about the story involving Rabban Gamliel. Was <b>an incident</b> cited above <b>to contradict</b> a previously stated <i>halakha</i>? The mishna first teaches that one may not eat an animal caught on a Festival, and then relates an incident in which Rabban Gamliel ruled that this is permitted. The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is incomplete;</b> it is missing an important element, <b>and it teaches the following:</b> Even in a case where it is <b>uncertain</b> whether or not the animal was <b>prepared</b> before the Festival, as it is unclear whether it was caught today or on the previous day, it <b>is prohibited; and Rabban Gamliel permits</b> it. <b>And an incident</b> is <b>also</b> related <b>where a certain gentile brought fish to Rabban Gamliel, and</b> the latter <b>said:</b> The fish <b>are permitted, but I do not wish to accept</b> them <b>from him.</b>

### Part 20
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel. Some teach this</b> halakhic ruling <b>with regard to this</b> <i>baraita</i>, <b>as it is taught:</b> With regard to something about which <b>an uncertainty</b> exists whether or not it was <b>prepared</b> before the Festival, <b>Rabban Gamliel permits</b> it, <b>and Rabbi Yehoshua prohibits</b> it. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua. And</b> others <b>teach it in reference to this</b> <i>baraita</i>, <b>as it is taught:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC