
### Part 1
<b>but only from the granary and the winepress, so too, <i>teruma</i> of the tithe is separated only from the granary and the winepress.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: If the mishna is referring to produce from which <i>teruma gedola</i> has not been separated, it is appropriate to use the term: Calculates. However, according to the suggestion that it is referring to a first tithe, from which <i>teruma</i> of the tithe must be separated, why does the mishna state: <b>Calculates?</b> The <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>should have said: Measures.</b> The amount of <i>teruma gedola</i> to be separated is calculated by estimation, as there is no fixed amount for this <i>teruma</i> according to Torah law. With regard to the <i>teruma</i> separated from first tithe, however, the Torah established the fixed amount of one-tenth, and one is required to measure precisely.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? It is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Abba Elazar ben Gimmel, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Abba Elazar ben Gimmel says:</b> The verse states: <b>“And your <i>teruma</i></b> shall be reckoned to you as though it were the corn of the granary and as the fullness of the winepress” (Numbers 18:27). <b>The verse speaks of two <i>terumot</i>. One</b> is <b><i>teruma gedola</i>, and</b> the other <b>one is <i>teruma</i> of the tithe. Just as <i>teruma gedola</i> is separated by estimation</b> and is not measured exactly, <b>and</b> it is enough to separate it <b>by thought,</b> as the word “reckoned” implies that the mere intention to separate a particular portion serves to remove the rest of the produce from its untithed state, <b>so too, <i>teruma</i> of the tithe</b> can also <b>be separated by estimation and by thought.</b>

### Part 4
§ Since it was mentioned incidentally, the Gemara discusses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said:</b> With regard to <b>first tithe, in a case in which</b> the Levite <b>preceded</b> the priest while the grain was still <b>on the stalks, its name renders it untithed produce,</b> until he separates from it the <b><i>teruma</i> of the tithe.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rava said: Since the name of</b> the first <b>tithe was called upon it,</b> the obligation of the <i>teruma</i> of the tithe takes effect as well.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites a similar <i>halakha</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said:</b> With regard to <b>first tithe, in a case in which</b> the Levite <b>preceded</b> the priest while the grain was still <b>on the stalks,</b> before it was threshed and turned into a pile, the owner separated first tithe before <i>teruma</i>. In that case, the separated tithe is <b>exempt from <i>teruma gedola</i>.</b> Although <i>teruma gedola</i> should have been separated from the produce first, and it should have included some of the produce taken as the first tithe, the Levite is nevertheless exempt from separating this <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 6
This is because <b>it is stated: “And you shall set apart from it a <i>teruma</i> for the Lord, even a tenth part of the tithe”</b> (Numbers 18:26), which indicates: <b>A tenth part of the tithe,</b> i.e., the <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, <b>I,</b> God, <b>said to you</b> that you must separate it, <b>and</b> you are <b>not</b> obligated in both <b><i>teruma gedola</i> and <i>teruma</i> of the tithe from the</b> first <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: If so,</b> if there is a source for this <i>halakha</i> in the Torah, <b>even if</b> the Levite <b>preceded</b> the priest, i.e., first tithe was separated after the grain had been threshed and the kernels of grain placed <b>in a pile,</b> then it should <b>also be exempt</b> from <i>teruma gedola</i>. Abaye <b>said to</b> Rav Pappa: <b>With regard to your</b> claim, <b>the verse states: “From all that is given you, you shall set apart that which is the Lord’s <i>teruma</i>”</b> (Numbers 18:29). This verse indicates that God’s <i>teruma</i>, i.e., <i>teruma gedola</i>, must be taken from all the produce, including the tithe.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> that led you to require the separation of <i>teruma gedola</i> from first tithe that was taken from processed grain piled in the granary but not from first tithe that was taken from grain on stalks? Abaye answers: <b>This,</b> grain that has been threshed and placed into piles, is completely processed and <b>has become grain, and that,</b> grain that remains on the stalk, <b>has not</b> yet <b>become grain.</b> Until the grain is threshed and assembled in a pile, the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> does not take effect, as it is not considered grain. When such unprocessed grain is designated first tithe, it ceases to be untithed produce and the opportunity to separate <i>teruma</i> from it has been missed. However, once the grain has been processed, and the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> has taken effect, it is as if the <i>teruma</i> is already mixed in, and the obligation to separate it cannot be overridden by the fact that this produce has been designated first tithe.

### Part 9
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 4:5): <b>One who peels</b> grains of <b>barley</b> to eat them raw <b>may peel them one</b> by <b>one and eat them</b> immediately without tithing them, as this is considered a casual manner of eating. <b>But if he peeled and placed</b> several of them <b>into his hand, he is obligated</b> to separate tithes. <b>Rabbi Elazar said: And a similar</b> <i>halakha</i> applies <b>to Shabbat.</b> Peeling grains of barley one by one is not considered threshing, and it is permitted; if a whole handful of grains are peeled together, this does constitute the prohibited labor of threshing.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rav’s wife peel for him</b> barley on Shabbat <b>by the cupful? And</b> likewise <b>Rav Ḥiyya’s wife</b> would <b>peel</b> barley <b>for him</b> on Shabbat <b>by the cupful. Rather, if</b> Rabbi Elazar’s comment <b>was stated</b> in this context, <b>it was stated with regard to the latter clause</b> of that same mishna (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 4:5): With regard to <b>one who husks kernels of wheat</b> by hand, <b>he may blow</b> onto the chaff to disperse it <b>a little at a time and eat</b> the kernels without separating tithes. <b>But if he blows</b> on the kernels <b>and puts</b> a large amount of them <b>into his lap,</b> he is <b>obligated</b> to separate tithes from the food. It was with regard to this teaching that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: And a similar</b> <i>halakha</i> applies <b>to Shabbat.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Abba bar Memel strongly objects to this: And</b> with regard to <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, one should conclude: <b>Yes,</b> if one peeled a handful of barley, it is considered prepared <b>with regard to tithes,</b> but <b>no,</b> it is not considered threshing <b>with regard to Shabbat? But is there anything</b> that, <b>with regard to Shabbat, is not</b> considered the <b>completion of the labor</b> and may be performed; <b>and</b> yet, <b>with regard to tithes, it is</b> considered the <b>completion of the labor?</b> Isn’t the prohibition against work on Shabbat far more stringent than tithes in all its details?

### Part 12
<b>Rav Sheshet, son of Rav Idi, strongly objects to this</b> claim: <b>And</b> is there <b>no</b> example of a <i>halakha</i> in which tithes are treated more stringently than Shabbat? <b>And is</b> there not the <i>halakha</i> of <b>their granary for tithes, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 1:5): <b>What is</b> the equivalent of <b>their granary,</b> i.e., the point at which the processing of various vegetable is completed so that they become obligated <b>in tithes?</b> With regard to <b>cucumbers and gourds,</b> they become obligated <b>from when one trims</b> the thin hairs that cover them <b>[<i>misheyefaksu</i>], and</b> for those <b>he did not trim, from when he assembles them in a pile. And we also learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 1:6), <b>with regard to onions,</b> that it is <b>from when one assembles them in a pile. Whereas with regard to Shabbat,</b> one who <b>assembles</b> produce <b>in a pile is exempt,</b> as this is not a prohibited labor on Shabbat.

### Part 13
<b>Rather, what have you to say?</b> Why is one exempt if he forms a pile on Shabbat? <b>The Torah prohibited</b> only <b>planned,</b> constructive <b>labor</b> on Shabbat, the type of work that involves the creation of something new, and the formation of a pile is not considered that kind of labor. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to peeling barley, <b>the Torah prohibited creative work.</b> Although collecting the peeled barley in one’s hand is considered the completion of the labor in respect to tithes, it is not prohibited labor on Shabbat.

### Part 14
Apropos husking kernels on Shabbat, the Gemara asks: <b>How may one husk</b> grain on a Festival? <b>Abaye said in the name of Rav Yosef: One</b> finger <b>on another,</b> i.e., one may place the kernels between two fingers and rub. <b>And Rav Avya said in the name of Rav Yosef:</b> One may even do so <b>one on two,</b> i.e., between the thumb and two fingers. <b>Rava said: Since he alters</b> the manner in which he performs the activity, <b>he may even</b> do so with <b>one</b> finger <b>on all</b> the rest.

### Part 15
The Gemara further asks: <b>How</b> may one <b>blow</b> on the grain, to winnow it in a permitted manner on Shabbat? <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said</b> that <b>Rav said: One blows</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC