
### Part 1
<b>And similarly,</b> if one wishes to place <b>eggs</b> on the mouth of a hollow vessel or on a grill sitting above coals, he must first hold the vessel in his hands and put the eggs on it, and only afterward position them both on the coals. <b>And similarly,</b> with regard to <b>a pot</b> placed on barrels, one must hold the pot above the barrels before placing them underneath it. <b>And similarly,</b> in the case of a collapsible <b>bed,</b> whose legs and cover are separate pieces, one must first stretch the upper part, then add the legs. <b>And similarly,</b> in the case of <b>barrels</b> positioned one on top of the other, the upper one must be held in place first and then the others added below.

### Part 2
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>And one may not prop a pot with a piece of wood, and similarly a door.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to a door,</b> can this <b>enter your mind?</b> Is it possible to prop a pot by means of a door? <b>Rather, say</b> and correct the wording as follows: <b>And similarly,</b> one may not prop <b>a door</b> with a piece of wood. <b>The Sages taught: One may not prop a pot with a piece of wood, and similarly a door, as wood is</b> to be used <b>only for kindling.</b> With regard to any use other than kindling, wood is considered <i>muktze</i>. <b>And Rabbi Shimon,</b> who does not accept the prohibition of <i>muktze</i>, <b>permits</b> it.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And one may not lead an animal with a stick on a Festival, but Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, permits</b> it. The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>his father,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>who is not</b> of the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b><i>muktze</i>,</b> and he therefore permits one to take any stick and lead an animal with it? The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> there is no issue of <i>muktze</i> here at all, for in <b>this</b> case <b>even Rabbi Shimon concedes</b> to the first <i>tanna</i> that this activity is prohibited, not due to <i>muktze</i> but <b>because</b> one who does so <b>looks like one who is going to the market [<i>ḥinga</i>]</b> in the manner of a weekday. On a Festival, one must therefore lead the animal in an unusual fashion.

### Part 4
§ In a case where one takes <b>a bamboo</b> branch to use as a skewer, <b>Rav Naḥman prohibits it</b> because it is <i>muktze</i>, since it was not made into a vessel the day before, <b>and Rav Sheshet permits it.</b> The Gemara elaborates: In the case <b>of a wet</b> branch, <b>everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>prohibited;</b> it is unfit for kindling and is therefore <i>muktze</i>. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is in the case <b>of a dry</b> branch. <b>The one</b> who <b>prohibits</b> handling it, Rav Naḥman, could have <b>said to you: Wood is only for kindling,</b> but it is considered <i>muktze</i> with regard to any other use. <b>And the one</b> who <b>permits</b> handling it, Rav Sheshet, could have <b>said to you:</b> Since all wood is to be used for roasting, <b>what is it to me to roast with it</b> when it is inserted into meat? <b>What is it to me to roast with its coals?</b> Just as it is permitted to burn the bamboo as coal, so it is permitted to use it as a skewer for cooking.

### Part 5
<b>Some say</b> a different version of the explanation of this dispute: <b>In the case of a dry</b> branch, <b>everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>permitted; when they disagree,</b> it is <b>in the case of a wet</b> one. <b>The one</b> who <b>prohibits</b> handling it does so because <b>it is not fit for kindling. And the one</b> who <b>permits</b> it could have <b>said to you: Isn’t it</b> at least <b>fit for a large fire,</b> which will dry out the branch and enable it to burn as well? The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>a dry</b> one <b>is permitted</b> and <b>a wet</b> one <b>is prohibited.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rava taught: A woman may not enter a storehouse of wood</b> in order <b>to take from them a firebrand,</b> a partly burnt piece of wood used for turning over the wood of the bonfire, because this piece of wood was not made into a vessel the day before and it is therefore <i>muktze</i>. <b>And a firebrand that broke may not be kindled on a Festival, for one may kindle</b> fire <b>with vessels but one may not kindle</b> fire <b>with shards of vessels,</b> and this firebrand was considered a vessel before it broke.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that</b> in this case <b>Rava holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who is</b> of the opinion that there is a prohibition of <b><i>muktze</i>? But didn’t Rava say to his attendant: Roast a duck for me, and throw its innards</b> to the cat? According to Rabbi Yehuda, it is prohibited to give the innards to animals, as they were not prepared for this purpose the day before. The Gemara answers: <b>There, since</b> the innards <b>become rancid</b> when they were left, <b>from yesterday,</b> the Festival eve, <b>his mind was on them.</b> At that point in time, he already intended to give them to the cats in his house.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> On a Festival, <b>a person may remove a sliver</b> from a pile of straw or from similar material <b>that is before him, in order to clean with it</b> between <b>his teeth. And he may collect</b> straw <b>from a courtyard and kindle</b> it, <b>for anything in a courtyard is</b> considered <b>prepared</b> for all purposes. <b>The Rabbis say: He may collect</b> these materials only <b>from</b> things placed <b>before him</b> in his house, as they are certainly prepared for all uses, <b>and kindle</b> them. With regard to objects lying in his courtyard, however, as their collection takes great effort, he certainly did not have them in mind the day before, and they are therefore <i>muktze</i>.

### Part 9
The mishna states a different <i>halakha</i>: <b>One may not produce fire, neither from wood,</b> by rubbing one piece against another; <b>nor from stones</b> knocked against each other; <b>nor from</b> hot <b>dirt; nor from tiles</b> struck against each other; <b>nor from water</b> placed in round, glass vessels, which produces fire by focusing the rays of the sun. <b>And</b> similarly, <b>one may not whiten tiles</b> with a burning-hot heat in order <b>to roast upon them</b> afterward.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC