
### Part 1
<b>A person’s entire livelihood is allocated to him</b> during the period <b>from Rosh HaShana to Yom Kippur.</b> During that time, as each individual is judged, it is decreed exactly how much money he will earn for all his expenditures of the coming year, <b>except for expenditures for <i>Shabbatot</i>, and expenditures for Festivals, and expenditures for</b> the school fees of <b>his sons’ Torah study.</b> In these areas, no exact amount is determined at the beginning of the year; rather, <b>if he reduced</b> the amount he spends for these purposes, <b>his</b> income <b>is reduced</b> and he earns that much less money in that year, <b>and if he increased</b> his expenditures in these areas, <b>his</b> income <b>is increased</b> to ensure that he can cover the expense. Therefore, one may borrow for these purposes, since he is guaranteed to have enough income to cover whatever he spends for them.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said: What is the verse</b> from which this dictum is derived? The source is: <b>“Blow the <i>shofar</i> at the New Moon, at the concealed</b> time <b>for our Festival day”</b> (Psalms 81:4). <b>On which Festival is the new moon concealed?</b> You <b>must say</b> that <b>it is Rosh HaShana,</b> which occurs on the first of the month, when the moon is not yet visible, while the moon is visible during the other Festivals, which occur in the middle of the month. <b>And it is written</b> in the next verse: <b>“For it is a statute [<i>ḥok</i>] for Israel, a judgment of the God of Jacob”</b> (Psalms 81:5).

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>From where</b> may it <b>be inferred that this</b> word <b>“statute [<i>ḥok</i>]” is a term</b> relating <b>to food? As it is written: “And they ate their allotment [<i>ḥukkam</i>], which Pharaoh gave them”</b> (Genesis 47:22). <b>Mar Zutra said:</b> One can learn that <i>ḥok</i> is referring to food <b>from here: “Feed me with my allotted [<i>ḥukki</i>] bread”</b> (Proverbs 30:8).

### Part 4
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They said about Shammai the Elder</b> that <b>all his days he would eat in honor of Shabbat.</b> How so? If <b>he found a choice animal, he</b> would <b>say: This is for Shabbat.</b> If <b>he</b> subsequently <b>found another one choicer than it, he</b> would <b>set aside the second</b> for Shabbat <b>and eat the first.</b> He would eat the first to leave the better-quality animal for Shabbat, which continually rendered his eating an act of honoring Shabbat.

### Part 5
<b>However, Hillel the Elder had a different trait, that all his actions,</b> including those on a weekday, <b>were for the sake of Heaven, as it is stated: “Blessed be the Lord, day by day;</b> He bears our burden, our God who is our salvation; Selah” (Psalms 68:20), meaning that God gives a blessing for each and every day. <b>That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in more general terms: <b>Beit Shammai say: From the first</b> day <b>of the week,</b> Sunday, start preparing already <b>for your Shabbat. And Beit Hillel say: “Blessed be the Lord, day by day.”</b>

### Part 6
§ Apropos the statements about honoring Shabbat, the Gemara cites another statement on the same topic. <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: One who gives a gift to his friend need not inform him</b> that he has given it to him, and he need not concern himself that the recipient might not realize who gave it to him. <b>As it is stated: “And Moses did not know that the skin of his face was radiant”</b> (Exodus 34:29); Moses received this gift unawares.

### Part 7
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this. Isn’t it written: “Nevertheless, you must keep My <i>Shabbatot</i>, for this is a sign between Me and you throughout your generations, <b>that you may know that I am the Lord Who sanctifies you”</b> (Exodus 31:13), which the Sages expounded as follows: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Moses, I have a good gift in My treasury, and its name is Shabbat, and I wish to give it to the Jewish people. Go and inform them</b> of this intention of Mine. <b>And from here Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: One who gives</b> a gift of <b>a piece of bread to a child must inform his mother</b> of his actions, so that the child’s parents will be aware of the giver’s fond feelings for them, thereby enhancing friendly relations and companionship among Jews. This appears to be in direct contradiction to Rabbi Ḥama’s statement.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult; this</b> case, where one need not inform the recipient, <b>is referring to a gift that is likely to be revealed,</b> such as Moses’ shining face, which everyone would point out to him; <b>that</b> case, where one must inform the recipient, <b>is referring to a gift that is not likely to be revealed</b> in the natural course of events. The Gemara challenges: Isn’t <b>Shabbat also a gift that is likely to be revealed,</b> as the Jews would eventually be instructed with regard to the time and nature of Shabbat? The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, <b>its reward is not likely to be revealed.</b> Therefore, God told Moses to inform the Jews of the gift of Shabbat and its reward.

### Part 9
<b>The Master said</b> earlier that <b>from here Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: One who gives a piece of bread to a child must inform his mother.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What does he do to him;</b> how does he inform the child’s mother? <b>He rubs oil on him and paints his eyes blue,</b> so that when the child arrives home his mother will ask him who did this to him and he will reply that it was a person who also gave him a piece of bread. The Gemara comments: <b>And nowadays, when we are concerned about witchcraft,</b> i.e., that painting the child’s eyes might have been performed as an act of sorcery, <b>what</b> should one do? <b>Rav Pappa said: He rubs on</b> the child a little <b>of that same type</b> of food that he put on the bread, such as butter or cheese, and this will cause the child’s mother to notice that he received a present.

### Part 10
The Gemara cites a further statement with regard to the gift of Shabbat to the Jewish people. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: All</b> the <b>mitzvot that the Holy One, Blessed be He, gave to the Jewish people, He gave to them in public [<i>parhesya</i>] except for Shabbat, which he gave to them in private. As it is stated: “It is a sign between Me and the children of Israel forever”</b> (Exodus 31:17), meaning that in a sense, it is a secret between God and the Jewish people.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that it was given in secret so that not everyone knew about it, <b>the gentiles should not be punished for</b> not wanting to accept <b>it;</b> they are liable to receive punishment for refusing to accept the other mitzvot of the Torah. The Gemara answers: The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>did inform them</b> of the concept of <b>Shabbat,</b> but He <b>did not inform them</b> of <b>the reward</b> for the fulfillment of the mitzva. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>He also informed</b> the gentiles of <b>its reward,</b> but about the idea of the <b>additional soul</b> given to each person on Shabbat <b>He did not inform them.</b>

### Part 12
<b>As Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: The Holy One, Blessed be He, gives a person an additional soul on Shabbat eve, and at the conclusion of Shabbat removes it from him, as it is stated: “He ceased from work and was refreshed [<i>vayinafash</i>]”</b> (Exodus 31:17). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish expounds the verse as follows: <b>Since he ceased from work,</b> and now Shabbat has concluded and his additional soul is removed from him, <b>woe [<i>vai</i>]</b> for the additional <b>soul [<i>nefesh</i>]</b> that is <b>lost.</b>

### Part 13
It was taught in the mishna that <b>a person may prepare a cooked dish on a Festival eve</b> and rely on it for Shabbat for the joining of cooked foods. <b>Abaye said: They taught</b> that the joining of cooked foods allows one to cook on a Festival for Shabbat <b>only</b> when it is made from <b>a cooked dish; however,</b> if it is composed of <b>bread</b> alone, <b>no,</b> this is not sufficient.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>bread that</b> makes it <b>not</b> fit for this purpose? <b>If we say</b> that <b>we require something that accompanies</b> bread, <b>and bread does not accompany</b> itself, the following difficulty arises: <b>Porridge also does not accompany</b> bread, as <b>Rabbi Zeira said: Those foolish Babylonians eat bread with bread,</b> referring to their custom of eating bread with porridge. This shows that porridge is no better accompaniment to bread than bread itself, <b>and</b> yet <b>Rav Neḥumi bar Zekharya said in the name of Abaye: One may establish an <i>eiruv</i> with porridge. Rather,</b> one must say as follows: <b>We require something that is not routine,</b> so that it will be clear that one is setting it aside for the purpose of an <i>eiruv</i>, <b>and bread is routine,</b> whereas <b>porridge is not routine.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Some say</b> a different version of this discussion: <b>Abaye said: They taught</b> that a joining of cooked foods allows one to cook on a Festival for Shabbat <b>only</b> when it is made from <b>a cooked dish; however,</b> if it is composed of <b>bread, no,</b> that is not sufficient. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>If we say that we require something that is not routine, and bread is routine,</b> the following difficulty arises: <b>Isn’t porridge not</b> particularly <b>routine? And</b> yet <b>Rav Neḥumi bar Zekharya said in the name of Abaye: One may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> with porridge. Rather,</b> one should say as follows: <b>We require something that accompanies</b> bread, <b>and bread does not accompany</b> itself, <b>and porridge, too, does not accompany</b> bread, <b>as Rabbi Zeira said: Those foolish Babylonians eat bread with bread,</b> from which it is clear that like bread, porridge does not accompany bread and consequently cannot constitute an <i>eiruv</i>.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya taught:</b> With regard to <b>lentils that</b> remain <b>at the bottom of a pot</b> on the eve of a Festival, <b>one may rely on them for</b> the <b>joining of cooked foods.</b> Although they were not prepared with this purpose in mind, they are nevertheless considered a cooked dish. <b>And this applies only</b> if <b>there is an olive-bulk</b> of lentils in total. Similarly, <b>Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rav Yehuda, said:</b> With regard to <b>fat</b> of meat and the like <b>that is on a knife, one may scrape it</b> off the knife <b>and rely on it for the joining of cooked foods; and this applies only</b> if <b>there is an olive-bulk</b> of fat in total.

### Part 17
<b>Rav Asi said</b> that <b>Rav said: Small salted fish</b> that a gentile then cooked <b>are not considered the cooked food of gentiles</b> because cooking does not prepare them to be food any more than they already were, as they can be eaten in their salted state. <b>Rav Yosef said: And</b> even <b>if a gentile roasted them,</b> a Jew may <b>rely on them for the joining of cooked foods,</b> as they are not considered the cooked food of a gentile and are indeed already edible. However, <b>if</b> the <b>gentile made them</b> into <b>fish fried with oil and flour [<i>kasa deharsena</i>], it is prohibited</b> to eat them. In this case they are considered the cooked food of a gentile, since his actions have made them into noteworthy food.

### Part 18
The Gemara challenges: <b>It is obvious</b> that this is the case; it need not be taught. The Gemara answers: The justification for teaching it is <b>lest you say</b> that

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC