
### Part 1
And then when <b>their cooking is finished, they</b> once again <b>become fit</b> for eating. This demonstrates that even food that had temporarily been set aside because it had become inedible does not remain prohibited for the entire day.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said to him: And according to your reasoning</b> that foods are temporarily considered <i>muktze</i> while being cooked, <b>cooked dishes in general</b> present <b>a difficulty for you</b> on Shabbat as well. <b>As ordinary cooked dishes in general are</b> still <b>bubbling at twilight</b> and not yet edible, <b>and</b> yet <b>we partake of them</b> later <b>in the evening.</b> This demonstrates that although the food was considered <i>muktze</i> at the critical moment of twilight, it is not prohibited for the duration of Shabbat.

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>we have no dilemma</b> with regard to a food <b>whose completion, which</b> brings it to its finished and edible form, <b>is</b> entirely <b>in the hands of a person,</b> e.g., beans and lentils. Such foods are certainly not considered as <i>muktze</i> for all of Shabbat simply because they had become temporarily unfit for eating. <b>Where we have a dilemma</b> is with regard to an item <b>whose completion is in the hands of Heaven,</b> such as figs and grapes, which dry by the heat of the sun. This dilemma remains unresolved.

### Part 4
§ The Gemara returns to the issue of permitting firstborn animals. <b>Rabbi Yehuda Nesia had a firstborn</b> animal that acquired a blemish on a Festival, and he wished to serve it to priests staying at his house. <b>He sent it to</b> be presented <b>before Rabbi Ami</b> for examination, and Rabbi Ami <b>thought</b> that he should <b>not examine it,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon. <b>Rabbi Zerika said to him, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yirmeya:</b> The principle is that in cases of dispute between <b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon,</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who in this case permits examination of the firstborn. Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>then sent</b> the firstborn <b>to</b> be presented <b>before Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa,</b> who likewise <b>thought</b> that he should <b>not examine it. Rabbi Yirmeya said to him, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Zerika:</b> The principle is that in cases where <b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon</b> disagree, the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Abba said to</b> Rabbi Yirmeya: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>you did not allow the Sages to act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon? He said to him: And you, what do you have?</b> Do you have a tradition that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon? Rabbi Abba <b>said to him</b> that <b>Rabbi Zeira said as follows:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> in this case <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>a certain</b> unidentified <b>person</b> in Babylonia <b>said:</b> May it be His will that <b>I merit to go up there</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>and</b> that <b>I learn</b> this <b>teaching from the mouth of its Master;</b> I will ask Rabbi Zeira himself for his opinion on this matter. <b>When he went up there</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>he found Rabbi Zeira</b> and <b>said to him:</b> Did <b>the Master say</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon?</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: No,</b> that is not what I said; rather, <b>I said: It stands to reason</b> that this is so. It is reasonable to rule in accordance with Rabbi Shimon on this issue, although I do not have a definitive tradition to this effect.

### Part 7
Rabbi Zeira explains: Why do I think so? <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it teaches in the mishna</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Any</b> firstborn animal <b>whose blemish is not perceptible while it is still day is not</b> considered to be <b>among</b> the animals <b>prepared</b> prior to the Festival for use on the Festival. <b>And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> the same ruling <b>in the name of the Sages,</b> indicating that this is the majority opinion. One should therefore <b>learn from this that it stands to reason</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is ruled <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of Rabbi Shimon.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: In the final analysis, <b>what</b> conclusion <b>was</b> reached <b>about</b> this matter? Whose opinion does the <i>halakha</i> follow? <b>Rav Yosef said: Come</b> and <b>hear, as</b> this matter <b>hangs on great trees,</b> meaning it is the subject of a dispute among the early Sages. <b>As Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei ben Shaul said</b> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said in the name of the holy community in Jerusalem: Rabbi Shimon</b> ben Menasya <b>and his colleagues said</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara wonders at the wording of this report: How could the holy community in Jerusalem have reported that Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya and his colleagues <b>said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir? <b>Aren’t they much older than he?</b> Why, then, would they have reported a <i>halakha</i> in his name? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the holy community in Jerusalem said the following: Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya and his colleagues, who said that one may not examine blemishes on a Festival, <b>spoke in</b> accordance with <b>the opinion of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 10
To which teaching of Rabbi Meir is the Gemara referring? It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 28a): If <b>one slaughtered a firstborn</b> before it was shown to a Sage and deemed permitted, <b>and afterward he showed its blemish</b> to a Sage, who confirmed that it was indeed a permanent blemish that permitted the animal to be slaughtered, <b>Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> it, as it had been established that the animal was blemished. <b>And Rabbi Meir says: Since it was slaughtered without</b> the permission <b>of an expert, it is prohibited. Apparently Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>the examination of a firstborn is not</b> as simple a process <b>as the examination of a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> since it involves more than a mere examination of the body of the animal. <b>The examination of a firstborn</b> must be conducted <b>when</b> the animal is <b>alive,</b> whereas <b>the examination of a <i>tereifa</i></b> may be performed even <b>after slaughtering.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And from this</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya and his colleagues inferred that <b>the examination of a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> which consists merely of clarifying the facts of the animal’s physical state, may be done <b>even on a Festival.</b> On the other hand, <b>the</b> more stringent <b>examination of a firstborn,</b> which can be likened to the rendering of a judgment, a process with principles of its own, must be performed <b>on the eve of the Festival.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Abaye said</b> to Rav Yosef: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>there,</b> in that mishna, Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Meir <b>disagree</b> about whether or not one may <b>examine blemishes</b> on a Festival? That was not their dispute; rather, <b>they disagree with regard to</b> the question of whether or not there is a <b>penalty</b> for one who acted improperly. <b>As Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If the blemish was <b>in the eyelids,</b> e.g., if a fissure developed there that disqualifies the animal, <b>everyone,</b> including Rabbi Meir, <b>agrees</b> that the animal <b>is prohibited, because</b> such a blemish <b>changes</b> its appearance after the slaughter. It is possible that after slaughter what was a temporary blemish will then look like a permanent one, and the animal will incorrectly be permitted retroactively.

### Part 13
<b>When they disagree</b> is in a case of <b>blemishes in the body,</b> e.g., if an ear had been cut off or a foreleg broken, which are prominent blemishes whose appearance does not change after death. <b>Rabbi Meir holds that we issue a decree</b> that <b>blemishes in the body</b> are prohibited <b>due to blemishes in the eye, and Rabbi Yehuda holds that we do not issue</b> such a <b>decree.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The wording of <b>the mishna</b> in tractate <i>Bekhorot</i> <b>is also precise</b> according to this explanation, <b>as it teaches</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir says: Since it was slaughtered without</b> the permission of <b>an expert</b> who confirmed that this is a permanent blemish, <b>it is prohibited. Learn from this</b> that this is <b>a penalty</b> that Rabbi Meir <b>imposes</b> and nothing else. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that this is the correct understanding of the mishna.

### Part 15
§ The Gemara relates that <b>Ami of Vardina</b> was <b>the examiner of firstborns in the household of the <i>Nasi</i>. On Festivals he would not examine</b> firstborn blemishes. <b>They came and told Rabbi Ami</b> about this. <b>He said to them: He does well not to examine</b> them. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rabbi Ami himself examine</b> firstborns for blemishes on a Festival? The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabbi Ami would examine</b> the blemishes of firstborns, it was <b>on the day before</b> the Festival that <b>he would examine</b> them, to see whether the blemishes were permanent or temporary.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC