
### Part 1
<b>on Shabbat eve during the Sabbatical Year,</b> during which no tithes are separated, which means one may take fruit on the following day without the need for any corrective measure, <b>and say: From here,</b> from these fruits, <b>I will eat tomorrow. And the Rabbis say:</b> He may not eat <b>unless he marks</b> the pile of fruit the day before <b>and</b> explicitly <b>says: From here to there</b> I will take.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there:</b> (Ma'asrot 4:2) <b>Children who hid figs</b> for themselves in a field <b>on Shabbat eve</b> in order to eat them on Shabbat, <b>and they forgot and did not separate tithes,</b> not only are they prohibited from eating them on Shabbat, for eating on Shabbat is always considered a fixed meal that obligates the produce in tithes, but even <b>after the conclusion of Shabbat, they may not eat until they have separated tithes. And we also learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One who transfers figs in his courtyard in order to</b> make them into <b>dry</b> figs, <b>his children and the members of his household may</b> in the meantime <b>partake of them</b> in <b>a casual</b> manner, <b>and they are exempt</b> from tithes. The fact that the fruit has reached his courtyard, as opposed to his house, is not enough to cause it to be liable for tithing.

### Part 3
Based on these two sources, <b>Rava inquired of Rav Naḥman:</b> With regard to <b>Shabbat, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in terms of <b>whether it establish</b>es an obligation <b>to tithe</b> food that has been <b><i>muktze</i></b> on Shabbat? Specifically, in the case of <b>an item whose labor has not been completed,</b>does the fact that the food is <i>muktze</i> on Shabbat give it the status of completely prepared food, or not? <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since it is written: “And call Shabbat a delight”</b> (Isaiah 58:13), this implies that any food one eats on Shabbat is considered a delight and not a casual meal, and therefore Shabbat <b>establishes</b> an obligation to tithe, as if the food were fully completed and fit to be eaten as a fixed meal, <b>even for an item that has not</b> had its <b>labor completed? Or perhaps</b> Shabbat <b>establishes</b> an obligation to tithe <b>an item whose labor is completed,</b> but regarding <b>an item whose labor is not completed it does not establish</b> an obligation to tithe?

### Part 4
Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>Shabbat establishes</b> the obligation for tithes, <b>both</b> with regard to <b>an item whose work is completed and things whose work is not completed.</b> Rava <b>said to</b> Rav Naḥman and challenged: <b>But say</b> that the law of <b>Shabbat</b> should be <b>similar</b> to that of <b>a courtyard: Just as a courtyard establishes</b> food placed inside it as a fixed meal with regard to tithes <b>only</b> when <b>the work on an item is completed, so too, Shabbat</b> should <b>establish only an item whose work is completed</b> as liable for tithing. Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> Rava: I did not say this based on my own logic, which can be countered by logic of your own. Rather, <b>we have it as an ordered teaching that Shabbat establishes both things whose work is completed and things whose work is not completed.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Naḥman, said: We, too, have learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And Rabbi Eliezer further stated</b> that <b>a person may stand over</b> objects in the <b>storage</b> area <b>on Shabbat eve during the Sabbatical Year</b> and say: I will eat from here and here. <b>The reason is that</b> it is fruit of the <b>Sabbatical Year,</b> with regard to <b>which</b> one <b>is not obligated to</b> separate <b>tithes. However, if</b> it occurred <b>in the other years of the Sabbatical</b> cycle, <b>so too,</b> you will say that it is <b>prohibited</b> to eat them without separating tithes. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Is it not because Shabbat establishes</b> them with regard to tithes, and consequently they not be eaten until tithes have been separated?

### Part 6
The Gemara refutes this: This is no proof, for <b>there it is different: Since he said: From here I will eat tomorrow, he has</b> immediately <b>established for himself</b> a meal <b>with them,</b> by stating his intention to eat the food as it is. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, why</b> does the mishna mention <b>particularly Shabbat? Even</b> if one said so <b>on a weekday</b> the same should <b>also</b> apply. Since he has set them aside for his meal, they are considered finished and are liable to tithes. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> comes to <b>teach us</b> the following: One should not conclude <b>that untithed produce</b> is inherently <i>muktze</i> because one may not separate the tithes and eat it; rather, <b>it is</b> considered <b>prepared with regard to Shabbat, in that if one transgressed</b> the words of the Sages <b>and corrected it</b> by separating the tithes, <b>it is</b> considered <b>corrected.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC