
### Part 1
<b>This</b> source, the <i>baraita</i>, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who holds that one must separate <i>teruma</i> from kernels of grain on the stalk, and one may separate <i>terumot</i> on a Festival. <b>That</b> source, the mishna, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who maintains that there is no need to separate <i>teruma</i> from kernels of grain on the stalk, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>brought inside</b> his house <b>stalks</b> of grain in order to grind them into flour and <b>to make dough from them, he may eat from them, as a snack,</b> before they are ground, <b>and he is exempt</b> from <i>teruma</i>. Provided that the grain has not yet been fully processed, the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> does not apply. The Sages decreed that such produce may only be consumed casually and not as part of a regular meal.

### Part 2
However, if from the outset one brought in the stalks of grain not to grind them but <b>to husk the kernels</b> and eat them a little at a time, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>obligates</b> him to separate <i>teruma</i> from them and prohibits him from partaking of the grain until he has done so. <b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, exempts</b> him from the obligation of <i>teruma</i>. He maintains that not even this intention renders one obligated to separate <i>teruma</i>, as the obligation for <i>teruma</i> applies only to fully processed grain.

### Part 3
The Gemara challenges this: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> you can <b>also find</b> a case when one must separate <i>teruma</i> from grain that has not been fully processed. How so? <b>For example, if one brought inside</b> his house <b>stalks of grain to make dough from them,</b> thereby rendering himself obligated to separate <i>teruma</i> from them, <b>and he reconsidered</b> and decided <b>to husk them</b> in order to eat the kernels <b>on a Festival.</b> In <b>that</b> case, the prohibition of <b>untithed</b> produce takes effect <b>on that day</b> and one is obligated to separate <i>teruma</i>, only afterward is he permitted to eat the kernels.

### Part 4
<b>Rather,</b> one must say: <b>What is</b> the <b><i>teruma</i></b> that Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel agree may not be separated on a Festival? It is referring to <b>most <i>teruma</i>,</b> e.g., grain that has been threshed and gathered into piles on the eve of the Festival. They do, however, admit that there are exceptional cases in which one may separate <i>teruma</i> on a Festival.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said:</b> This <b>dispute,</b> concerning when the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> and the prohibition of untithed produce takes effect, is referring only <b>to stalks</b> of grain, which are typically brought into a granary, where they are processed in a standard manner. Until that point, the grain is not prohibited as untithed produce. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>legumes, everyone agrees</b> that the <b>bundles</b> are already regarded as <b>untithed produce,</b> and <i>teruma</i> must be separated from them at that stage.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that</b> the following mishna <b>supports him</b> (<i>Terumot</i> 10:6): With regard to <b>one who had bundles of fenugreek,</b> a type of legume, <b>of untithed produce, he may pound</b> these bundles to remove the seeds from them. <b>And he calculates how many seeds</b> the bundles <b>contain and separates <i>teruma</i></b> based <b>on the</b> quantity of <b>seeds, but</b> he <b>does not</b> calculate and <b>separate</b> <i>teruma</i> based <b>on the</b> quantity of <b>stalks.</b> Although the stalks and leaves are also used for cooking, it is not necessary to separate <i>teruma</i> from them. <b>What, is it not</b> the case that this <i>halakha</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who said: There,</b> with regard to stalks of grain, it is <b>not</b> yet ready to be tithed, and therefore not prohibited as <b>untithed produce,</b> whereas <b>here,</b> i.e., with regard to the bundles of fenugreek, it is ready to be tithed and therefore prohibited as <b>untithed produce?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>No,</b> this is no proof, as it can be claimed that the mishna dealing with fenugreek <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who obligates one to separate <i>teruma</i> in the case of stalks of grain. The Gemara challenges this: <b>If it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, what novel element does the mishna provide? <b>Why specifically</b> discuss <b>fenugreek?</b> According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the same <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even to stalks</b> of grain <b>as well.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Rather, what</b> then? Is the mishna in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda?</b> If so, <b>let him teach us</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>other types of legumes,</b> i.e., that they have the status of untithed produce when placed in bundles. <b>And all the more so</b> this would apply to <b>fenugreek,</b> which is eaten only in small quantities and is not processed in the manner of grain.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it cannot be proven that the mishna follows either the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, or that of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, as it <b>was necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> to state the case of <b>fenugreek</b> for a different reason: It could <b>enter your mind to say: Since</b> in the case of fenugreek <b>the taste of its stalk and its fruit</b> are <b>identical,</b> as the branches of the fenugreek add flavor to a dish, perhaps one should <b>also separate</b> <i>teruma</i> based <b>on</b> the quantity of fenugreek <b>stalks,</b> as well. The <i>tanna</i> of the mishna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that there is no obligation to do so, and this is the novel element of his statement.

### Part 10
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Abaye said</b> the following: This <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi is referring <b>to stalks</b> of grain; <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>legumes, everyone agrees</b> that the <b>bundles</b> are not yet ready to be tithed and are therefore <b>not</b> prohibited as <b>untithed produce.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this: With regard to <b>one who had bundles of fenugreek of untithed produce, he may pound</b> them <b>and calculate how many seeds they contain and separate <i>teruma</i></b> based <b>on the</b> quantity of <b>seeds, but he does not separate</b> based <b>on the</b> quantity of <b>stalks. What, is this not</b> referring to the normal case of <b>untithed produce of <i>teruma</i>,</b> i.e., produce from which the regular <i>teruma</i>, the initial portion taken from produce as the priests’ portion, must be separated?

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is referring to a different case, that of first tithe that is still regarded as <b>untithed produce,</b> because <b>of <i>teruma</i> of the tithe</b> that must still be separated from it. First tithe is given to the Levites, who must separate ten percent as <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, to give to the priests. Before <i>teruma</i> of the tithe is separated, the first tithe may not be eaten.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> this statement is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>that Rabbi Abbahu</b> said that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said, as Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said:</b> It can occur that a Levite might take the <b>first tithe before</b> the <i>teruma</i> is separated, <b>while</b> the grain is still <b>on the stalks.</b> The correct procedure is: After collecting the grain in a pile in the granary, one first separates <i>teruma</i>, and only afterward separates first tithe to give to the Levites.

### Part 13
If this order was not followed, and the first tithe was separated first while the grain was still attached to the stalks, Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish maintains that the following <i>halakha</i> applies: <b>Its name,</b> i.e., the fact that it has been designated first tithe, <b>renders it</b> ready to be tithed and therefore prohibited as <b>untithed produce,</b> as pertains <b>to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe</b> that must still be separated from it. This shows that there can be a separation of a type of <i>teruma</i>, specifically the <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, even before work on the produce has been completed, and this is the case to which the previously quoted mishna is referring.

### Part 14
The Gemara challenges this interpretation: If first tithe is considered untithed produce when it is named, <b>why do I</b> need the act of <b>pounding? Let</b> the Levite <b>say to</b> the priest: <b>As they gave to me</b> stalks of grain, or unprepared bundles, <b>so I am giving</b> them <b>to you</b> in the same state. <b>Rava said:</b> It is <b>a penalty.</b> In other words, the Levite should indeed be entitled to issue this claim; however, as he acted improperly by taking his tithe prematurely, the Sages decreed that he may not separate the priest’s portion in its current state, but must first improve it.

### Part 15
The Gemara comments: <b>That</b> opinion <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>. With regard to <b>a Levite who was given stalks</b> of grain <b>as his tithes, he renders them</b> into <b>a granary,</b> i.e., he must thresh and process them in the usual manner. Similarly, if he was given <b>grapes, he renders them wine;</b> if he was given <b>olives, he renders them oil; and</b> afterward he <b>separates <i>teruma</i> of the tithe for them and gives them to a priest. For just as <i>teruma gedola</i>,</b> i.e., standard <i>teruma</i>, <b>is not separated</b> from unprocessed produce,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC