
### Part 1
<b>this is the corruption</b> that might result from a ruling that renders it prohibited to prepare an <i>eiruv</i> the day before. Therefore, this cannot serve as proof of the conclusive ruling. <b>Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>to prohibit</b> one from preparing either type of <i>eiruv</i>. One may not prepare an <i>eiruv</i> either for courtyards or for boundaries, as the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Rabbi Elazar’s version of the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a Festival that occurs on Shabbat, Beit Shammai say: One must recite</b> an <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer</b> that includes <b>eight</b> blessings, inserting two additional blessings between the standard opening three and concluding three. As for the two middle blessings, <b>one recites</b> one <b>for Shabbat as an independent</b> blessing <b>and</b> a second <b>for the Festival as an independent</b> blessing. <b>And Beit Hillel say: One must pray</b> an <i>Amida</i> comprising only <b>seven blessings,</b> i.e., the three opening ones, the three concluding ones, and one in between. <b>One begins</b> the middle blessing <b>with Shabbat and concludes</b> it <b>with Shabbat, and he recites</b> a passage referring to <b>the sanctity of the day</b> of the Festival <b>in the middle. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: He even concludes</b> this blessing with mention of both Shabbat and the Festival, saying: <b>Who sanctifies Shabbat, the Jewish people, and the seasons.</b>

### Part 3
<b>A <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Ravina</b> with a slightly different reading: He concludes the blessing with: <b>Who sanctifies the Jewish people, Shabbat, and the seasons.</b> Ravina <b>said to</b> that <i>tanna</i>: <b>Is that to say that the Jewish people sanctify Shabbat? Isn’t Shabbat already sanctified</b> from the six days of Creation? Every seventh day is automatically Shabbat, without the need for any declaration on the part of the Jewish people. <b>Rather,</b> amend it and <b>say</b> as follows: <b>Who sanctifies Shabbat, the Jewish people, and the seasons,</b> as the Jewish people indeed sanctify the New Moon and the Festival days. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> with regard to the conclusion of the blessing <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and as</b> the difficulty was <b>resolved</b> by <b>Ravina.</b>

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>Shabbat that occurs on a New Moon or on</b> one of <b>the intermediate days of a Festival,</b> for <b>the evening, morning, and afternoon prayers, one prays</b> in his usual manner, reciting <b>seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i>, <b>and recites</b> a passage <b>pertaining to the event</b> of the day, i.e.: May there rise and come [<i>ya’aleh veyavo</i>], <b>during</b> the blessing of <b>the Temple service,</b> known as <i>retze</i>; <b>and if he did not recite</b> it, <b>he is required to return</b> to the beginning of the <i>Amida</i> prayer and repeat it. <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> disagrees and <b>says:</b> This passage is recited <b>during</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving,</b> known as <i>modim</i>. <b>And in the additional prayer one begins</b> the fourth blessing, the special blessing for the additional service, <b>with Shabbat, and concludes</b> it <b>with Shabbat, and recites</b> a passage pertaining to <b>the sanctity of the day</b> of the New Moon or the Festival <b>in the middle.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka,</b> disagree and <b>say: Wherever</b> one is <b>required to</b> recite <b>seven</b> blessings, whether in the evening, morning, or afternoon prayers, <b>he begins</b> the fourth blessing <b>with Shabbat and concludes</b> it <b>with Shabbat, and recites</b> a passage referring to <b>the sanctity of the day</b> of the New Moon or the Festival <b>in the middle. Rav Huna said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that pair</b> of scholars; rather, it is in accordance with the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i>, that in the evening, morning, and afternoon prayers one recites the usual seven blessings and recites a passage pertaining to the event of the day during the blessing of the Temple service.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If <b>a person</b> forgot to place an <i>eiruv</i> before a Festival occurring on Thursday and Friday in the Diaspora, he may act as follows: He may <b>place</b> an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of</b> Shabbat <b>boundaries on</b> the first <b>Festival day for the next,</b> i.e., on the first Festival day for the second Festival day kept in the Diaspora, based on a doubt as to which day is the real day of the Festival, <b>and stipulate</b> as follows: If today is in fact the Festival, then tomorrow is a weekday, on which I may walk as far as I wish in all directions; and if today is a weekday and tomorrow is the Festival, I hereby place an <i>eiruv</i> for the joining of Shabbat boundaries for tomorrow. On the following day he makes a similar stipulation with the same <i>eiruv</i>, so that he will have an <i>eiruv</i> for Shabbat.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: A person may place</b> an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods on</b> the first <b>Festival day for the next</b> day <b>and stipulate</b> as follows: If today is a weekday and tomorrow is the Festival, this is my joining of cooked foods, so that I may rely on it to cook tomorrow for Shabbat; and if today is in fact the Festival and tomorrow is a weekday, I may cook tomorrow as on a regular weekday.

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: With regard to <b>the one who said</b> this <i>halakha</i> concerning an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of</b> Shabbat <b>boundaries, all the more so</b> would he permit one to act in this manner concerning an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods.</b> On the other hand, <b>the one who said</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods</b> spoke only with regard to the joining of cooked foods; <b>however,</b> as for an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of</b> Shabbat <b>boundaries,</b> this is <b>not</b> permitted. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this difference? It is <b>that</b> they did <b>not</b> permit <b>the acquisition of residence on</b> a day of <b>rest,</b> even in a case of uncertainty. However, with regard to an <i>eiruv</i> for the joining of cooked foods, since it is merely symbolic, it is permitted for the sake of the honor of Shabbat.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not bake</b> bread <b>on</b> one <b>Festival day for the next,</b> i.e., on the first Festival day for the second Festival day kept in the Diaspora. Nevertheless, <b>actually, they said</b> the following established <i>halakha</i>: <b>A woman may fill an entire pot</b> with <b>meat</b> to cook on a Festival, <b>although she requires only one piece</b> for that day, and all the remainder will be for the following day. Similarly, <b>a baker may fill</b> an entire <b>barrel with water</b> in order to heat it up <b>although he requires only a jug</b> of hot water. <b>But with regard to baking, he may bake only that which he requires</b> for that day.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: A woman may fill the entire oven</b> with <b>bread,</b> although she does not intend to use it all on that day, <b>because bread bakes well when the oven is full.</b> A full oven has less empty space and is therefore hotter; consequently, filling the oven with bread serves not only to provide bread for the next day but also to improve the bread to be eaten that same day. <b>Rava said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.</b>

### Part 11
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: In the case of <b>one who did not prepare</b> an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods,</b> is <b>he prohibited</b> from cooking for Shabbat and <b>his flour is</b> likewise <b>prohibited,</b> meaning that none of his food may be prepared for Shabbat? <b>Or perhaps</b> only <b>he is prohibited</b> from performing this type of labor, <b>but his flour is not prohibited.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <b>practical</b> halakhic <b>difference</b> that emerges from this question? The Gemara explains: There is a difference with respect to whether or not he must <b>transfer</b> ownership of <b>his flour to others. If you say</b> that <b>he is prohibited and his flour is</b> also <b>prohibited, he must transfer his flour to others</b> so that they are able to bake for him if they so desire. <b>But if you say</b> that only <b>he is prohibited but his flour is not prohibited, he need not transfer his flour to others,</b> as they may bake for him even if the flour is not theirs. The Gemara asks: <b>What,</b> then, is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who did not prepare</b> an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods</b> on a Festival eve <b>may neither bake, nor cook, nor insulate</b> food on the Festival for Shabbat that occurs on the following day, <b>neither for himself nor for others, and others may neither bake nor cook for him. What</b> should <b>he do</b> so that he will have food to eat on Shabbat? <b>He</b> must <b>transfer his flour to others, and they may</b> then <b>bake and cook for him. Learn from here,</b> from the fact that the <i>baraita</i> states that he must transfer his flour to others, that <b>he is prohibited and his flour is</b> also <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from here</b> that this is the case.

### Part 14
Another <b>dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: In the case of <b>one who transgressed</b> this prohibition <b>and baked</b> on a Festival for Shabbat without having placed an <i>eiruv</i> for the joining of cooked foods on the eve of the Festival, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is it permitted to partake of his bread and his cooking? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this question from the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who did not prepare</b> an <i>eiruv</i> for <b>the joining of cooked foods, what</b> should <b>he do</b> so that he will have food to eat on Shabbat? <b>He must transfer his flour to others, and they may</b> then <b>bake and cook for him.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC