
### Part 1
<b>Animal fodder,</b> such as straw and reed branches, <b>does not have</b> any associated prohibition <b>due to the preparing of a vessel.</b> One may therefore trim it on Shabbat and use it as one wishes.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Kahana raised an objection to Rav Yehuda</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may handle</b> wood of <b>a spice tree</b> on Shabbat in order <b>to smell them and to wave them before a sick person</b> to fan him. <b>And he may crush it</b> between his fingers to release its fragrance, <b>and he may smell it.</b> However, <b>he may not cut it</b> from the branch in order to produce a moist spot on the branch that will emit a strong fragrance, so as <b>to smell it; and if he did cut it, he is exempt</b> from punishment according to Torah law, <b>but it is prohibited</b> to do so. If he intends <b>to clean his teeth with it, he may not cut it, and if he did cut it, he is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering</b> for transgressing a prohibited labor on Shabbat. This indicates that although some wood of a spice tree was used as animal fodder, it is nevertheless prohibited to cut it. This appears to contradict Rav Yehuda.

### Part 3
Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> Rav Kahana: <b>Now,</b> even the statement <b>exempt but prohibited</b> poses <b>a difficulty to my</b> opinion, and it is not reasonable. <b>Is it required</b> to say the opposite, i.e., <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering?</b> This teaching cannot be understood at face value; <b>rather,</b> it must be understood as follows: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught,</b> it was referring to <b>hard</b> pieces of wood such as beams, with regard to which there is a concern that one might perform a prohibited labor. The Gemara questions this: And can <b>hard</b> branches <b>be crushed</b> by hand?

### Part 4
The Gemara replies: The <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and is teaching the following:</b> With regard to wood of a spice tree, <b>one may crush it and smell it</b> and <b>cut it and smell it. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? With regard to soft</b> pieces of wood, <b>but with regard to hard ones, one may not cut them. And if he did cut it he is exempt, but it is prohibited</b> to do so. If he intended <b>to clean his teeth with it, he may not cut it, and if he did cut it, he is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 5
Similarly, it <b>is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may cut it and smell it, and</b> it <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not cut it to smell it. Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This <b>is not difficult.</b> In <b>this</b> case, when it is permitted, it is referring <b>to soft</b> wood. In <b>that</b> case, where the <i>baraita</i> prohibits it, it is referring <b>to hard</b> pieces of wood.

### Part 6
With regard to the <i>halakha</i> itself, <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov strongly objects to this: With hard ones, why not?</b> In <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from that which we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A person may break a barrel</b> in order <b>to eat dried figs from it, provided that he does not</b> thereby <b>intend to make a vessel,</b> and he may use the barrel afterward. Breaking off wood in order to smell it is certainly not more of a prohibited labor than breaking a barrel. <b>And furthermore,</b> it is <b>Rava bar Rav Adda and Ravin bar Rav Adda, who both say: When we were at the house of Rav Yehuda, he would break and give us many sticks</b> of wood of a spice tree, although <b>they were</b> hard enough to be <b>fit for handles of axes and hatches.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: This <b>is not difficult; this</b> case is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> whereas <b>that</b> case follows <b>the Rabbis. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> On Shabbat or a Festival, <b>a person may take a sliver</b> of wood <b>from before him to clean his teeth with it, and the Rabbis say: One may take</b> a toothpick <b>only from an animal’s trough;</b> since it is fit for animal fodder, it is considered prepared for all purposes. <b>And they agree that he may not pluck it. And if he did pluck it to clean his teeth with it</b> or <b>to</b> use it as a key and <b>open a door with it,</b> if he did so <b>unwittingly on Shabbat, he is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b> If he did so <b>intentionally on a Festival, he receives the forty</b> lashes administered to one who desecrates the Festival by performing labor. These are <b>the words of Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And the Rabbis say: Both this and this,</b> whether one did so on Shabbat or a Festival, even if he plucked it by hand to use it as a key, <b>it is</b> prohibited <b>only due to a rabbinic decree.</b> Therefore, <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who states there</b> that one who plucks a toothpick on Shabbat unwittingly in order to make a vessel such as a key is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering,</b> then <b>here,</b> in the case of one who cuts a sliver of wood in order to smell it, he is <b>exempt, but it is prohibited.</b> However, <b>the Rabbis who state there,</b> in the case of plucking a toothpick, that he is <b>exempt but it is prohibited,</b> then <b>here,</b> when one cuts a sliver of wood for purposes of smelling, it is <b>permitted <i>ab initio</i>.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Eliezer not accept this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A person may break a barrel</b> in order <b>to eat dried figs from it, provided that he does not</b> thereby <b>intend to make a vessel?</b> This shows that if one does not intend to make a vessel, it is permitted <i>ab initio</i>; whereas Rabbi Eliezer maintains that he is exempt, but it is prohibited. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Ashi said: When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught,</b> its lenient ruling was <b>with regard to a vessel patched with pitch [<i>mustaki</i>],</b> meaning a vessel that had previously been broken and its pieces glued together with pitch. If one breaks it for his own needs, he does not smash a complete vessel, and he is therefore not considered to have fashioned a vessel.

### Part 10
§ It is taught in the mishna: <b>And one may collect</b> straw <b>from the courtyard</b> on a Festival. <b>The Sages taught: One may collect</b> materials <b>from a courtyard and kindle</b> a fire because <b>everything in a courtyard is</b> considered <b>prepared, provided he does not arrange it in piles, and Rabbi Shimon permits</b> it even in such a manner. The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do they disagree;</b> what is the basis of their dispute? <b>One Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, who are stringent, <b>holds: It looks as though he is collecting for tomorrow and another day,</b> and it is therefore prohibited, so that one will not be suspected of preparing from a Festival to a weekday. <b>And one Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds: His pot proves his</b> intention. When onlookers see that he is using the straw for cooking, they will not suspect him of preparing for after the Festival.

### Part 11
§ It is taught in the mishna that <b>one may not produce</b> new <b>fire</b> on a Festival in any manner. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? The Gemara explains: <b>Because he creates</b> something new <b>on a Festival.</b> This is similar to an act of creation, and it is therefore prohibited.

### Part 12
§ The mishna states that <b>one may not whiten tiles</b> by heating them, in order to roast food on them. The Gemara asks: <b>What does one</b> thereby <b>do;</b> since his intention is to prepare food, how does this differ from any other manner of roasting? <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Here we are dealing with new tiles,</b> and it is prohibited <b>because</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC