
### Part 1
<b>lest one</b> come to <b>pick up</b> the vessel <b>in his hand and carry it four cubits in the public domain</b> to a ritual bath. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rabba: If <b>one has a pit</b> full of water of a ritual bath <b>in his courtyard,</b> so that this decree should not apply, <b>what is there to say?</b> Rabba <b>said to him:</b> The Sages issued <b>a decree</b> against immersing vessels even in <b>a pit</b> of water <b>in one’s</b> own <b>courtyard due to a pit</b> situated <b>in the public domain.</b>

### Part 2
Abaye posed another challenge: This works out <b>well</b> with regard to <b>Shabbat,</b> but <b>with regard to a Festival,</b> when there is no prohibition against carrying from one domain to another, <b>what is there to say?</b> Rabba replied: The Sages <b>issued a decree</b> that it is prohibited to immerse a vessel on <b>a Festival, due to</b> the prohibition against immersing it <b>on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And do we issue a decree</b> in such a case? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>And</b> Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel both <b>agree that one may bring</b> ritually impure <b>water into contact</b> with ritually pure water <b>in stone vessels in order to purify</b> the water. <b>However, one may not immerse</b> the impure water in a ritually impure vessel in order to purify the vessel at the same time. <b>And if it is so</b> that such a decree was issued, <b>let us</b> also <b>decree</b> here that <b>bringing</b> ritually impure water <b>into contact</b> with ritually pure water is prohibited <b>due to</b> the prohibition against <b>immersing</b> a ritually impure vessel in a ritual bath.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this challenge: <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> that there is substance to this question? <b>If he has</b> other <b>good,</b> ritually pure, <b>water</b> to drink, <b>why do I</b> need <b>to bring this</b> ritually impure water <b>into contact</b> with the ritually pure water? <b>Rather,</b> one must say <b>that he does not have</b> suitable drinking water, <b>and since he does not have</b> other water, <b>he is</b> particularly <b>careful about</b> this water, so that it not become impure. Therefore, perforce, this must be an exceptional case, as the water became impure despite the precautions that were taken; and the Sages did not apply their decrees to unusual cases.

### Part 5
Abaye <b>raised an objection</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may draw water</b> from a spring or a ritual bath on a Festival <b>with a</b> ritually <b>impure pail, and</b> the pail becomes ritually <b>pure</b> because while being filled with water, the bucket is completely immersed in the ritual bath. <b>And if it is so</b> that the Sages issued such a decree, <b>let us</b> also <b>decree</b> here that it is prohibited to draw water on Festival with a ritually impure pail <b>lest one come to immerse</b> the pail <b>by itself.</b> Rabba answered: <b>It is different there; since it is permitted for him</b> to immerse the pail <b>only by drawing</b> water with it, <b>he remembers</b> that it is prohibited to immerse a vessel by itself, and therefore there is no reason to issue a decree.

### Part 6
Abaye <b>raised an objection</b> from a different <i>baraita</i>, in which it was taught: With regard to <b>a vessel that was rendered ritually impure on the eve of a Festival, one may not immerse it on the Festival;</b> however, if it became impure <b>on</b> the <b>Festival</b> itself, <b>one may immerse it on the Festival. And if it is so</b> that the Sages issued such a decree, <b>let us</b> also <b>decree</b> here <b>that</b> it is prohibited to immerse a vessel that became impure on <b>a Festival due to</b> the prohibition against immersing a vessel that became impure on the <b>eve of a Festival.</b> Rabba answered: Contracting ritual <b>impurity on a Festival,</b> when all are ritually pure, <b>is an uncommon occurrence, and</b> the general principle is that in the case of <b>an uncommon occurrence, the Sages did not issue a decree</b> as a preventive measure.

### Part 7
Abaye <b>raised</b> yet another <b>objection</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a vessel that was rendered</b> ritually <b>impure by a primary source of impurity, one may not immerse it on a Festival.</b> However, if it was rendered impure only <b>by a derivative source of impurity,</b> meaning that the vessel came into contact with an object that was rendered impure by a primary source of impurity, so that the object has the status of first-degree ritual impurity and confers upon the vessel the status of second-degree ritual impurity, a type of impurity that applies to vessels only by rabbinic decree; in such a case, <b>one may immerse</b> the vessel <b>on a Festival. And if it is so</b> that the Sages issued such a decree, <b>let us</b> also <b>decree</b> here that it is prohibited to immerse <b>this,</b> a vessel rendered impure by a derivative source of impurity, <b>due to</b> the prohibition to immerse <b>that,</b> a vessel rendered impure by a primary source of impurity.

### Part 8
Rabba replied: <b>Where do you find</b> a case where people are particular about purifying a vessel that contracted ritual impurity from <b>a derivative source of impurity?</b> It is only in one situation, namely, <b>with regard to priests,</b> since they eat <i>teruma</i>, and <i>teruma</i> contracts ritual impurity even from a vessel that came into contact with only a derivative source of impurity. An ordinary person, who eats non-consecrated produce, does not go to the trouble of purifying such a vessel, since regular produce contracts ritual impurity only from a vessel that came into contact with a primary source of impurity, but not from a vessel that came into contact with a derivative source of impurity. And as for priests, the general principle is that <b>priests are vigilant;</b> they are careful not to allow their vessels to become impure. Therefore, impurity in the case of priests is considered a rare occurrence, with regard to which the Sages did not issue a decree.

### Part 9
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a different proof, <b>as Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: A menstruating woman who has no</b> ritually pure <b>clothes</b> to wear after she immerses herself in a ritual bath to purify herself, as all her clothes had become impure, and it is Shabbat or a Festival, when she is unable to immerse them, <b>may employ an artifice</b> to circumvent the prohibition <b>and immerse</b> herself <b>in her clothes.</b> She is permitted to purify herself, and when she immerses herself while wearing her garments, they become purified at the same time. <b>And if it is so</b> that the Sages issued such a decree, <b>let us</b> also <b>decree</b> that it is prohibited for the woman to immerse herself in her clothes <b>lest she come to immerse</b> the clothes by <b>themselves.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there; since it is permitted for her</b> to immerse the clothes <b>only by</b> wearing them as <b>garments, she remembers</b> that it is prohibited to immerse them by themselves and will not come to violate this prohibition.

### Part 11
Apropos Rabba’s view that one may not immerse a vessel on Shabbat lest he come to carry it four cubits in the public domain, <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that it is prohibited to immerse a vessel on Shabbat for a different reason: It is <b>a decree</b> issued by the Sages as a preventive measure <b>due to</b> the prohibition against <b>wringing.</b> After immersing certain items, such as clothes, one might come to wring them, and this is prohibited on Shabbat and Festivals as a subcategory of the biblically prohibited labor of threshing.

### Part 12
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: This works out <b>well</b> with regard to <b>vessels that are fit for wringing,</b> such as clothes, but with regard to <b>vessels that are not fit for wringing, what is there to say?</b> Rav Yosef <b>said</b> to him: The Sages issued <b>a decree</b> against <b>these</b> vessels, which cannot be wrung, <b>due to those</b> vessels, which can be wrung. Abaye <b>raised</b> against Rav Yosef <b>all of these objections</b> that he had raised against Rabba, in an attempt to prove that the Sages did not issue such a decree, <b>and</b> Rav Yosef <b>answered him as we answered</b> in the name of Rabba.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Beivai said</b> a different reason: The prohibition against immersing a vessel on a Festival is <b>a decree</b> issued by the Sages <b>lest one</b> come to <b>delay</b> the immersion of his impure vessels. Were the Sages to permit him to immerse vessels on a Festival, he might delay immersing all of his impure vessels until the Festival, when he has more free time; and were he to leave ritually impure vessels in his possession for a lengthy period, he might come to defile items that must be kept ritually pure, such as <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Beivai:</b> With regard to <b>a vessel that became ritually impure on the eve of a Festival, one may not immerse it on a Festival,</b> due to <b>a decree lest he</b> come to <b>delay</b> and keep impure vessels in his home in order to immerse them on the Festival.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said</b> yet a different reason: It is prohibited to immerse a vessel on Shabbat <b>because it looks as if he is repairing the vessel.</b> Since the vessel was previously unfit for use, and the act of immersion renders it usable, this is similar to the repair of a vessel, which is Torah law proscribes on Shabbat and Festivals. The Gemara challenges this understanding: <b>If so, a person</b> should <b>likewise</b> be prohibited to immerse himself, because it looks as if he is repairing himself through purification. The Gemara answers: <b>A person</b> undergoing immersion <b>looks as if he is cooling</b> himself. Since it is not clearly evident that he is immersing in order to purify himself, as he might be bathing for his pleasure, there is no reason to prohibit the immersion.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges this explanation: This works out <b>well</b> in a case where he immerses himself in <b>good,</b> clean <b>water,</b> in which it would be a pleasure to bathe; but if he immerses himself in <b>bad,</b> murky <b>water,</b> as the water of a ritual bath is not always sufficiently clean, <b>what is there to say? Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> Even in that case, his actions do not prove that his intention is to purify himself, as <b>sometimes a person comes</b> home

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC