
### Part 1
<b>However,</b> with regard to <b>vow</b>-offerings <b>and gift-offerings, all agree</b> that <b>they</b> may <b>not be sacrificed on</b> the actual <b>Festival day,</b> as stated by Ulla and Rav Adda bar Ahava.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara comments that in this matter, <b>these <i>tanna’im</i> are like those <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> who also disagreed about the same issue, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not bring a thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> due to the leavened bread</b> included <b>with it,</b> as a thanks-offering must be accompanied by a meal-offering of forty loaves, ten of which are leavened bread, which may not be eaten on Passover. <b>Nor</b> may one bring this offering <b>on <i>Shavuot</i> because it is a Festival,</b> on which one may not bring any offering, even one that is eaten, if it is not part of the Festival obligations. <b>However, a person may bring his thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Shimon says: But it says: “On the festival of <i>Matzot</i>, on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>, and on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:16), to teach: <b>Any</b> offering <b>that comes on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> may come on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> and on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, and any</b> offering <b>that does not come on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> may not come on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> or on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says: A person may bring his thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> and fulfill with it his obligation</b> to bring peace-offerings of <b>rejoicing.</b> One fulfills the mitzva to rejoice on a Festival by eating the meat of offerings, and this obligation can be fulfilled with the meat of a thanks-offering. <b>But he does not fulfill</b> with it the obligation to bring <b>a Festival</b> peace-<b>offering.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i> cited above. <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>one may not bring a thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> due to the leavened bread</b> included <b>with it.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise: It is <b>obvious</b> that one may not bring this offering on Passover, as it contains leavened bread. <b>Rav Adda, son of Rav Yitzḥak, said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Shmuel bar Abba</b> who said: <b>Here,</b> this <i>baraita</i> is not discussing Passover itself; rather, <b>we are dealing with</b> a thanks-offering sacrificed on <b>the fourteenth</b> of Nisan, i.e., on Passover eve, <b>and</b> this <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>one may not bring consecrated</b> offerings <b>to a situation</b> where the time that they may be eaten is restricted, thereby increasing <b>the</b> likelihood of <b>disqualification.</b> Although it is permitted to eat leavened bread until the sixth hour of the fourteenth of Nisan, one may not bring a thanks-offering on Passover eve. The reason is that a thanks-offering may usually be eaten for one full day and the following night, and if it is brought on the eve of Passover, the time available before disqualification is reduced.

### Part 5
It was further taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Nor</b> may one bring a thanks-offering <b>on <i>Shavuot</i> because it is a Festival.</b> The Gemara explains: This <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>vow</b>-offerings <b>and gift-offerings may not be sacrificed on a Festival.</b>

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>However, a person may bring his thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>When? If we say</b> he may bring it <b>on the Festival day</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>itself,</b> this is difficult, <b>as didn’t you say: Nor</b> may one bring a thanks-offering <b>on <i>Shavuot</i> because it is a Festival,</b> indicating that a thanks-offering may not be brought on an actual Festival day? The same should apply to <i>Sukkot</i>. <b>Rather,</b> it means that one may bring it <b>on the intermediate days of the Festival.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> further taught that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: But it says: “On the festival of <i>Matzot</i>, on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>, and on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>,”</b> to teach: <b>Any</b> offering <b>that comes on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> may come on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> and on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, and any</b> offering <b>that does not come on the festival of <i>Matzot</i> may not come on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> or on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.</b> This seems to indicate that thanks-offerings may not be brought on any Festival. <b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to this: Now,</b> if <b>we may chop</b> kindling wood on the intermediate days of the Festival for the sake of the Festival, <b>is it necessary</b> to state that it is permitted to sacrifice <b>vow</b>-offerings <b>and gift-offerings</b> on the intermediate Festival days? How can it be suggested that Rabbi Shimon prohibits bringing thanks-offerings on the intermediate days of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>?

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said: With regard to sacrificing</b> these offerings on the intermediate days of a Festival, <b>everyone agrees that it is permitted. When they disagree,</b> it is not with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of a Festival but with respect <b>to determining when one is liable for</b> violating the prohibition: <b>You must not delay.</b> If one vows to bring an offering but fails to fulfill his pledge, how much time must pass before he transgresses the prohibition: “You shall not delay to pay it” (Deuteronomy 23:22)?

### Part 9
<b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>the Merciful One states three Festivals</b> in the Torah, <b>even not in their</b> proper <b>order,</b> meaning not in accordance with the yearly cycle found in the Torah: Passover, <i>Shavuot</i>, <i>Sukkot</i>. As soon as three Festivals have passed from the day a person took his vow, if he has yet to bring his offering, he has transgressed the prohibition against delaying. Therefore, the first <i>tanna</i> advises a person who vowed to bring a thanks-offering to do so on <i>Sukkot</i>, even if it is the first Festival after his vow, and even though it is not the first Festival listed by the Torah. If he fails to do so, he will have to make a special trip to Jerusalem in order to sacrifice the offering, as he will not be able to sacrifice it on Passover due to the leavened bread it contains, or on <i>Shavuot</i> because it does not have intermediate Festival days.

### Part 10
<b>But Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that if three Festivals have passed <b>in their</b> proper <b>order, yes,</b> he has violated the prohibition against delaying; but if they have passed <b>not in their</b> proper <b>order,</b> he has <b>not</b> violated the prohibition. If, for example, one vowed to bring an offering between Passover and <i>Shavuot</i>, he may put off bringing the offering until <i>Sukkot</i> of the following year, and therefore he would not be required to travel an extra time to Jerusalem specifically for this purpose.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> further taught that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says: A person may bring his thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>When? If we say</b> that he means <b>on the intermediate days of the Festival, this is</b> identical to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rather,</b> he must be referring to <b>the Festival day</b> itself, <b>and he holds</b> that <b>vow</b>-offerings <b>and gift-offerings may be sacrificed on a Festival.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>what is different</b> about <b>the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> that he cited it</b> specifically as an example of a Festival? The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon,</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning,</b> and this ruling too is related to the prohibition against delaying. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The verse did <b>not</b> have to <b>say “the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>,” of which the</b> immediately preceding <b>verse was speaking;</b> it was only necessary to add the other Festivals. <b>Why,</b> then, <b>is</b> “the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>” <b>stated?</b> It is <b>to say that this</b> Festival, i.e., <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>must be the last one</b> with regard to the prohibition against delaying; one transgresses the prohibition only if the three Festivals have passed in their proper order, so that <i>Sukkot</i> is the last of the three.

### Part 13
However, <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says:</b> It comes <b>to say that this</b> Festival is what <b>causes</b> a person to be late in fulfilling his vow. In his view, the prohibition against delaying does not depend on the number of Festivals. Rather, it means that by the time of <i>Sukkot</i>, the last Festival according to the yearly cycle found in the Torah, one must have brought all of his vow-offerings of that year. Even one who vowed to bring an offering just before <i>Sukkot</i> must bring his offering before the Festival ends.

### Part 14
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: A person may bring his thanks-offering on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>and fulfill with it his obligation</b> to bring peace-offerings of <b>rejoicing, but he does not fulfill</b> with it the obligation to bring <b>a Festival</b> peace-<b>offering.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise: It is <b>obvious</b> that one does not fulfill his obligation to bring a Festival peace-offering with his thanks-offering. The Festival peace-offering <b>is an obligatory matter,</b> as everyone is obligated to bring this offering, and the principle is that <b>anything that is an obligatory matter must come only from that which is non-sacred,</b> meaning that one cannot bring an obligatory offering from an animal that has already been consecrated for another purpose. It follows that one cannot discharge his obligation to bring a Festival peace-offering with a thanks-offering, as he is already obligated to bring the latter and has consecrated the animal for this purpose.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> in order to teach <b>that even if one specified</b> at the time of his vow that he is consecrating the animal as a thanks-offering on condition that it may be used as a Festival peace-offering as well, he nevertheless does not fulfill his obligation with it.

### Part 16
This teaching is <b>similar to</b> the question <b>that Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish asked of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> With regard to <b>one who</b> vows and <b>says:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks-offering, and I will</b> also <b>fulfill</b> my obligation to bring <b>a Festival</b> peace-<b>offering with it;</b> or if he says: <b>I am a nazirite,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC