
### Part 1
<b>If it has</b> a permanent <b>blemish,</b> owing to which it may be slaughtered and eaten, <b>he may raise it</b> from the cistern <b>and slaughter</b> it; <b>but if</b> it does <b>not</b> have a blemish, or if its blemish is temporary, <b>he may not slaughter</b> it. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> Even if it has a blemish, it is prohibited to slaughter it, as <b>any</b> firstborn animal <b>whose blemish is not perceptible while it is still day,</b> i.e., on the day before the Festival, <b>is not</b> considered to be <b>among</b> the animals <b>prepared</b> prior to the Festival for use on the Festival.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do</b> Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon <b>disagree? If we say</b> that <b>they disagree</b> about whether or not <b>one may examine blemishes on a Festival,</b> such <b>that Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>one may examine blemishes on a Festival, and Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that <b>one may not examine blemishes on a Festival,</b> if so, <b>let them disagree</b> with regard <b>to examining blemishes in general</b> on a Festival and not only with respect to the particular case of a firstborn that fell into a cistern.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to teach the disagreement with regard to the case of <b>a firstborn that fell into a cistern,</b> as <b>it could enter your mind to say</b> that <b>because of</b> the matter of <b>the suffering of living creatures, one should employ an artifice</b> to circumvent the <i>halakha</i> <b>and raise</b> the animal from the cistern. This would be <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> who states elsewhere (37a) with regard to a different case that one may employ an artifice in order to rescue an animal that fell into a cistern on a Festival. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon disagree even in the case of a firstborn that fell into a cistern.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> if the mishna mentions the case of a firstborn that fell into a cistern in order to teach that an artifice may not be employed to raise the animal from the cistern, the phrase: <b>He may not slaughter</b> it, is inaccurate. Rather, it <b>should have</b> stated: <b>He may not raise</b> the animal <b>and slaughter</b> it. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> this teaching <b>is necessary</b> in a case <b>where he transgressed</b> the prohibition and already <b>raised it,</b> as <b>it could enter your mind to say that he may</b> now <b>slaughter it.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that even then he may not do so.

### Part 5
The Gemara expresses wonder at this answer: How could one think that <b>he may</b> now <b>slaughter it? Isn’t</b> the animal <b>unblemished?</b> How could one imagine that it is permitted to slaughter a firstborn that is unblemished? The Gemara answers: This teaching <b>is necessary only</b> in a case <b>where it developed a blemish</b> after it fell. The Gemara challenges this argument: <b>But</b> how could one think that he may now slaughter the animal? <b>Doesn’t</b> it fall into the category of <b><i>muktze</i>,</b> as it was not fit to be eaten on the eve of the Festival, since at that time it was still unblemished? In that case, it should remain in the category of <i>muktze</i> for the duration of the Festival.

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> the mishna is speaking of a case <b>where</b> the animal <b>developed a temporary blemish,</b> one that might eventually heal, <b>on the eve of the Festival, and now,</b> after falling, <b>it has a permanent blemish. Lest you say</b> that <b>his mind was</b> set <b>on</b> the animal as food already before the Festival due to the temporary blemish <b>and</b> therefore <b>he should</b> now be allowed to <b>slaughter it,</b> the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that since it was not fit to be eaten before the Festival, it is not considered prepared for use on the Festival. Rather, it falls into the category of <i>muktze</i> and may not be slaughtered.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>an unblemished firstborn that fell into a cistern</b> on a Festival, <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says: An expert</b> in these matters <b>goes down</b> into the cistern <b>and examines</b> the animal. <b>If it</b> now <b>has a</b> permanent <b>blemish</b> as a result of the fall, <b>he</b> may <b>raise</b> it from the cistern <b>and slaughter</b> it; <b>but if not,</b> then even if he proceeds to raise it, <b>he</b> may <b>not slaughter</b> it, even if afterwards it develops a blemish. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya said to him:</b> The Sages of earlier generations <b>already said</b> that <b>one</b> may <b>not examine blemishes on a Festival. How so?</b> If <b>a blemish came into being on the eve of a Festival, one</b> may <b>not examine it on the Festival</b> itself to see whether it is in fact of the type that permits the animal to be slaughtered. And if the <b>blemish came into being</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC