
### Part 1
<b>and kindle a lamp for him. They said in the name of Rabbi Yitzḥak: They may even roast a small fish for him. That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who did not prepare an <i>eiruv tavshilin</i>,</b> others <b>may bake one loaf</b> of bread <b>for him, and insulate one pot</b> of food <b>for him, and kindle a lamp for him, and heat one</b> small <b>jug [<i>kiton</i>]</b> of water <b>for him. And some say: They may even roast a small fish for him.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rava said: Actually,</b> one can say that the mishna is referring to a case <b>where one prepared</b> an <i>eiruv tavshilin</i>, and nevertheless, if he did not insulate hot food on the eve of the Festival for Shabbat he may not do so on the Festival itself, because <b>insulating</b> hot food <b>is different, as it is evident that he is acting with Shabbat in mind</b> and not for the Festival. Beit Shammai view this as a desecration of the sanctity of the Festival.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava’s opinion from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ḥananya says</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say: One may not bake</b> on a Festival for Shabbat that occurs on the following day <b>unless he established a joining</b> of cooked foods <b>with bread, and he may not cook</b> for Shabbat <b>unless he established a joining</b> of cooked foods <b>with a cooked dish, and he may not insulate</b> hot food for Shabbat <b>unless he</b> already <b>had hot food insulated from the eve of the Festival. But</b> this indicates that if <b>he had hot food insulated, he may in any case act</b> in that manner and insulate hot food for Shabbat, even though <b>it is evident that he is acting with Shabbat in mind.</b> This shows that even according to Ḥananya, who rules in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai, it is permitted to insulate hot food on a Festival for Shabbat.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Abaye said</b> that the mishna is referring to a case <b>where he established a joining</b> of cooked foods <b>for this,</b> meaning he baked and cooked before the Festival for the sake of an <i>eiruv</i>, <b>but he did not establish a joining</b> of cooked foods <b>for this,</b> i.e., he did not insulate hot food for Shabbat on the Festival eve. <b>And</b> the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Ḥananya, according to Beit Shammai,</b> with Rabban Gamliel’s household being stringent upon themselves in this regard.

### Part 5
§ The mishna states that one of the three stringencies that Rabban Gamliel practiced in accordance with Beit Shammai was that on a Festival <b>one may not set up a candelabrum</b> that fell. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> prohibited act <b>does one perform</b> when he sets a candelabrum upright? <b>Rav Ḥinnana bar Bisna said: Here, we are dealing with a candelabrum</b> composed <b>of segments</b> that come apart; it is prohibited to reassemble such a candelabrum <b>because it looks like building. As Beit Shammai hold</b> that <b>there is</b> a prohibition against <b>building with regard to vessels,</b> and therefore the pieces of this candelabrum may not be reconnected, whereas <b>Beit Hillel hold</b> that <b>there is no</b> prohibition against <b>building with regard to vessels, and there is</b> also <b>no</b> prohibition against <b>dismantling with regard to vessels.</b> One may therefore reattach the pieces of the candelabrum if they came apart.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>Ulla</b> once <b>happened to</b> come to <b>the house of Rav Yehuda</b> on a Festival. Ulla’s <b>servant stood and tilted the</b> oil <b>lamp [<i>sheragga</i>],</b> diverting most of the oil to one side, with the intention of preventing the oil from reaching the wick so that the light would be extinguished more quickly. <b>Rav Yehuda raised an objection to Ulla</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>, in which it is taught: <b>One who adds oil to a lamp</b> on Shabbat <b>is liable for</b> performing the prohibited labor of <b>kindling</b> on Shabbat, <b>and one who supplies himself</b> with oil <b>from</b> a lit lamp on Shabbat <b>is liable for</b> performing the prohibited labor of <b>extinguishing,</b> as he causes the light to be extinguished more quickly. This indicates that any action, even an indirect one, that causes a lamp be extinguished earlier than it would have otherwise is considered extinguishing. Here too, by tilting the lamp, the servant extinguished a light on the Festival, which is prohibited. Ulla <b>said to him:</b> You are indeed correct; the act was performed by my servant <b>without my knowledge.</b>

### Part 7
With regard to the <i>halakha</i> governing extinguishing on a Festival, <b>Rav said: It is permitted to trim the end of a wick</b> that has become charcoal, so that it will burn better; this is not considered extinguishing.

### Part 8
With regard to this same issue, <b>Abba bar Marta raised a dilemma before Abaye: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>extinguishing a lamp</b> that is burning in a room on a Festival <b>for another matter,</b> a euphemism for marital relations? Since it is prohibited to have relations in a room where a lamp is burning, may one extinguish a lamp for this purpose? Abaye <b>said to him:</b> One may not extinguish it, as <b>it is possible</b> to have relations <b>in a different room.</b>

### Part 9
Abba bar Marta continued: If <b>he does not have a different room, what</b> should he do? Abaye replied: <b>It is possible to erect for oneself a partition</b> out of sheets and engage in relations on the other side of the partition. Abba bar Marta asked further: If he <b>does not have</b> sheets <b>to erect a partition, what</b> should he do? Abaye answered: <b>It is possible to invert a vessel over</b> the lamp in order to hide the light. Abba bar Marta further inquired: If <b>he does not have a vessel, what</b> should he do? Abaye <b>said to him: It is prohibited;</b> one may not extinguish the lamp.

### Part 10
Abba bar Marta <b>raised an objection to</b> Abaye’s opinion from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not extinguish a piece of wood in order to save it</b> from being needlessly burned, <b>but if</b> he extinguishes it <b>so that the house or a pot not become smoky, it is permitted.</b> This shows that it is permitted to extinguish a fire on a Festival if it serves people’s needs. Abaye <b>said to him: That</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who permits the performance of prohibited labors on a Festival for all of one’s needs and not only for the preparation of food; <b>when I spoke,</b> it was <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree.

### Part 11
Further on the topic of extinguishing, <b>Abaye raised a dilemma before Rabba: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to extinguishing a fire on a Festival?</b> He clarified his question: <b>Where there is danger to life, I have no dilemma, as</b> in that case <b>it is permitted even on Shabbat. When I raised the dilemma,</b> it was with regard to a case <b>involving</b> only <b>monetary loss. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabba <b>said to him: It is prohibited.</b>

### Part 12
Abaye <b>raised an objection to his</b> opinion from the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>One may not extinguish a piece of wood in order to save it</b> from being needlessly burned, <b>but if</b> he extinguishes it <b>so that the house or a pot not become smoky, it is permitted.</b> This indicates that extinguishing a fire on a Festival is permitted even if only to prevent a small loss. Rabba replied: <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda; when I spoke,</b> it was <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 13
§ <b>Rav Ashi raised a dilemma before Ameimar: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>painting an eye</b> with a medicinal ointment <b>on a Festival?</b> He elaborated on his question: <b>Where there is a danger</b> to the eye, <b>for example,</b> the illnesses called <b><i>rira</i>, <i>ditza</i>, <i>dema</i>, <i>dimata</i>, and <i>kadaḥta</i>,</b> or the <b>beginning of an inflammation, I have no dilemma, as</b> in such cases <b>it is permitted</b> to apply an ointment <b>even on Shabbat. When I raised the dilemma,</b> it was with regard to less serious ailments, such as at the <b>end of an inflammation, or</b> in order to <b>brighten one’s eyesight. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> in such cases? Ameimar <b>said to him: It is prohibited.</b>

### Part 14
Rav Ashi <b>raised an objection to him</b> from the same <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not extinguish a piece of wood</b> in order to save it from being needlessly burned, but if he extinguishes it so that the house or a pot not become smoky, it is permitted. This indicates that a prohibited labor is permitted on a Festival, if it is performed for the sake of a bodily need. <b>And</b> Ameimar <b>answered him as we answered</b> before, that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates that <b>Ameimar permitted painting an eye</b> for medicinal purposes <b>on Shabbat by</b> means of <b>a gentile. Some say</b> that <b>Ameimar himself painted</b> his <b>eye on Shabbat by</b> means of <b>a gentile. Rav Ashi said to Ameimar: What is your reasoning</b> in permitting this practice? You must rely upon that which <b>Ulla, son of Rav Ilai, said: All the needs of an ill person</b> whose life is not in danger <b>are performed by means of a gentile on Shabbat. And</b> similarly, <b>Rav Hamnuna said:</b> With regard to <b>any matter in which there is no</b> life-threatening <b>danger</b> but only potential illness, <b>one says to the gentile</b> to perform the act, <b>and</b> the gentile <b>performs</b> the act for him.

### Part 16
However, <b>this applies</b> only <b>where</b> the ill person, or any other Jew, <b>does not assist</b> the gentile. <b>But</b> in this case <b>the Master,</b> Ameimar, <b>assists</b> the gentile while the ointment is being applied, <b>as he closes and opens</b> his <b>eye,</b> thereby allowing the ointment to penetrate more deeply. Therefore, this should be prohibited. Ameimar <b>said to</b> Rav Ashi: <b>There is</b> also the opinion of <b>Rav Zevid, who holds in accordance with your</b> opinion; he, too, raised the objection that it should be prohibited due to the fact that the Jew assists the gentile. <b>And I</b> already <b>answered him:</b> The assistance provided by one who <b>assists</b> another in performing a task that the other could essentially have performed himself <b>is insubstantial.</b> Inasmuch as the action is primarily performed by the gentile, the minor assistance given by the Jew may be overlooked.

### Part 17
The Gemara further relates that <b>Ameimar permitted painting an eye</b> with a medicinal ointment <b>on the second day of the festival of Rosh HaShana</b> if the eye is causing pain and requires treatment. <b>Rav Ashi said to Ameimar: But didn’t Rava say</b> that if a person <b>died on the first day of a Festival, gentiles may attend to his</b> burial; if he died <b>on the second day of a Festival</b> observed in the Diaspora, <b>Jews may attend to his</b> burial? <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even on the second day of the festival of Rosh HaShana,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC