
### Part 1
<b>due to</b> the prohibition of <b>kindling</b> a fire on a Festival.

### Part 2
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> that <i>tanna</i>: <b>Leave and teach it outside,</b> i.e., this <i>baraita</i> is not fit for discussion in the study hall. The opinion that there is a prohibition against <b>kindling and cooking</b> on a Festival <b>is not a mishna</b> worthy of serious consideration. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>it is a mishna</b> rather than an error, this statement is still not in accordance with the <i>halakha</i>, as <b>it is</b> following the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, who say: We do not say: Since carrying out was permitted</b> on a Festival <b>for the purposes</b> of food preparation, it <b>was also permitted</b> when performed <b>not for</b> these <b>purposes. Here, too,</b> we do <b>not</b> say: <b>Since kindling was permitted</b> on a Festival <b>for the purposes</b> of food preparation, <b>it was also permitted</b> when performed <b>not for</b> these <b>purposes.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains why the <i>baraita</i> cannot be attributed to Beit Hillel. <b>If</b> one were to suggest that this <i>baraita</i> follows the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel,</b> this cannot be the case, <b>as they say: Since carrying out was permitted for the purposes</b> of food preparation, <b>it was also permitted</b> when performed <b>not for</b> these <b>purposes. Here, too, since kindling was permitted for</b> the <b>purposes</b> of food preparation, <b>it was also permitted</b> when performed <b>not for</b> these <b>purposes.</b> Therefore, according to the opinion of Beit Hillel, kindling cannot be included amongst those prohibitions for which one is liable on a Festival.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The separation of <i>ḥalla</i> is permitted on a Festival, as one is permitted to prepare dough and bake it on a Festival, and bread may not be eaten without first separating <i>ḥalla</i>. <b>Beit Shammai say: One may not bring</b> separated <b><i>ḥalla</i> or</b> any of the other priestly <b>gifts,</b> i.e., the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw of a slaughtered animal, <b>to a priest on a Festival,</b> though it is permitted to separate them from an animal slaughtered on a Festival. This is prohibited regardless of <b>whether they were separated last evening,</b> i.e., before the Festival, <b>or whether they were separated today. And Beit Hillel permit</b> it.

### Part 5
<b>Beit Shammai said to</b> Beit Hillel: This <i>halakha</i> can be derived by <b>an analogy: <i>Ḥalla</i> and</b> the other <b>gifts</b> are both considered <b>a gift to the priest, and</b> likewise <b><i>teruma</i></b> separated from produce is also <b>a gift to the priest. Just as</b> you agree <b>that one may not bring <i>teruma</i></b> to a priest on a Festival, <b>so too, one may not bring the</b> other <b>gifts.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Beit Hillel said to them: No,</b> this analogy is incorrect. <b>If you said</b> that you derive the halakha from <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> where <b>its separation is not allowed</b> on the Festival, how <b>will you say</b> the same <b>with regard to the gifts</b> from an animal or <i>ḥalla</i>, concerning <b>which their separation is allowed</b> on the Festival? Since it is not prohibited to separate these gifts, they may likewise be brought to a priest.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It enters your mind</b> to explain <b>that</b> when the mishna states: <b>They were separated today,</b> it means: From animals <b>slaughtered today. And</b> the phrase: <b>They were separated last evening,</b> is referring to animals <b>slaughtered last evening.</b> The Gemara asks: If so, <b>whose opinion is</b> expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>not Rabbi Yosei nor Rabbi Yehuda, but</b> the opinion of <b><i>Aḥerim</i>, as it is taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not dispute with regard to gifts separated on the eve of a Festival, that one may bring</b> them to a priest on a Festival day itself along <b>with gifts separated that day and</b> from <b>those</b> animals <b>slaughtered that day. They disputed only</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of bringing</b> gifts separated the day before <b>by themselves, as Beit Shammai say: One may not bring</b> these gifts by themselves, <b>and Beit Hillel say: One may bring</b> them.

### Part 8
<b>And Beit Shammai would reason as follows: <i>Ḥalla</i> and gifts</b> from a slaughtered animal are <b>a gift to the priest, and <i>teruma</i></b> is <b>a gift to the priest. Just as one may not bring <i>teruma</i></b> to a priest on a Festival, <b>so too, one may not bring the</b> other <b>gifts. Beit Hillel said to them: No,</b> granted, <b>if you said</b> so <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i>,</b> the reason is <b>that separation is not allowed</b> on a Festival, but how <b>will you say</b> the same <b>with regard to the</b> other <b>gifts,</b> concerning <b>which separation is allowed</b> on the Festival? It is therefore permitted to bring these gifts to a priest as well. This is Rabbi Yehuda’s interpretation of the dispute between Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, according to which Beit Shammai prohibit bringing even gifts separated on the Festival itself.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei said:</b> That is not the correct record of the dispute, as <b>Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not dispute about</b> the fact <b>that one may bring the gifts</b> from an animal to a priest on a Festival. <b>They disputed only with regard to <i>teruma</i>, as Beit Shammai say: One may not bring</b> it, <b>and Beit Hillel say: One may</b> even <b>bring</b> <i>teruma</i>. <b>And Beit Hillel would reason</b> as follows: <b><i>Ḥalla</i> and gifts</b> are <b>a gift to the priest, and <i>teruma</i></b> is <b>a gift to the priest. Just as one may bring the</b> other <b>gifts</b> on a Festival, <b>so too, one may bring <i>teruma</i>. Beit Shammai said to them: No; if you said</b> so <b>with regard to the</b> other <b>gifts,</b> concerning <b>which their separation is allowed</b> on the Festival, <b>will you say</b> the same <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i>, whose separation is not allowed?</b>

### Part 10
<b><i>Aḥerim</i> say</b> that the dispute was as follows: <b>Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not dispute with regard to <i>teruma</i>, that one may not bring</b> it to a priest on a Festival. <b>They disputed only</b> the case <b>of the</b> other <b>gifts, as Beit Shammai say: One may not bring</b> the other gifts, <b>and Beit Hillel say: One may bring</b> them. The Gemara proposes: <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> only in accordance with the opinion of <b><i>Aḥerim</i>, and not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> The Gemara does not even suggest that the mishna might be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, as it is clear that it cannot be reconciled with his explanation.

### Part 11
<b>Rava said: Is it taught</b> in the mishna: <b>They were separated that day and were slaughtered that day?</b> No; <b>it teaches: They were separated, and actually</b> the mishna should be explained as follows: <b>They were slaughtered last evening</b> and separated today, which is exactly what Rabbi Yehuda said. The Gemara asks: If so, <b>let us say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b><i>Aḥerim</i>?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b><i>Aḥerim</i>,</b> it can still be claimed that, in their opinion, Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel disputed the case <b>of these</b> animals that <b>were slaughtered last evening,</b> not those slaughtered on the Festival.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, this is</b> the same opinion as that of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> What, then, is the difference between the opinions of Rabbi Yehuda and <i>Aḥerim</i>? The Gemara answers: The practical difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to <b>secondary</b> gifts. If one has gifts separated before a Festival, is he permitted to join them as secondary gifts along with others separated on the Festival and transport them together to a priest? Rabbi Yehuda maintains that secondary gifts may be brought to a priest, according to the opinion of Beit Hillel, whereas <i>Aḥerim</i> prohibit it.

### Part 13
With regard to the dispute cited in the <i>Tosefta</i>, <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Tovi, son of Rabbi Neḥemya, had a bottle of</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>wine. He came before Rav Yosef</b> and <b>said to him: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>bringing</b> this wine <b>to a priest now,</b> on a Festival? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: That is what Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who maintains that Beit Hillel permit one to bring <i>teruma</i> to a priest on a Festival, and the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with their opinion.

### Part 14
§ The Gemara relates: <b>The host of Rava, son of Rav Ḥanan, had bundles of</b> unprocessed <b>mustard,</b> whose seeds remained in their stems. <b>He said</b> to his guest, the Sage: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to crushing</b> these mustard stalks <b>and eating from them on a Festival?</b> Rava, son of Rav Ḥanan, <b>did not have</b> an answer readily available, so he <b>came before Rava</b> to ask his opinion. Rava <b>said to him</b> that it was taught: <b>One may husk kernels</b> by rubbing them between one’s fingers, <b>and one may</b> likewise <b>crush legumes on a Festival.</b> This statement indicates that it is permitted to crush mustard stalks.

### Part 15
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who husks kernels</b> of grain <b>on Shabbat eve, on the following day,</b> on Shabbat itself, <b>he may winnow</b> the chaff in an irregular manner by passing the kernels <b>from hand to hand and</b> then <b>eat</b> them. <b>However, one may not</b> do so, <b>neither by</b> means of <b>a basket [<i>kanon</i>]</b> that is occasionally used for sorting and separating the chaff <b>nor with a large vessel.</b>

### Part 16
With regard to <b>one who husks kernels</b> of grain <b>on a Festival eve, on the following day, he may winnow a little</b> grain <b>at a time and eat, even with a tray or a large vessel. However, he may not</b> do so <b>with a tablet, nor with a winnow, nor with a sieve.</b> Since these vessels are designed for winnowing, they are used only for large quantities, and therefore it will appear as though he were preparing for after the Festival, which is certainly prohibited. In any case, the wording of the <i>baraita</i> indicates: <b>On a Festival eve, yes,</b> one may husk or crush legumes; <b>on the Festival</b> itself, <b>no,</b> it is prohibited to do so.

### Part 17
The Gemara refutes this: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that it is permitted <b>on a Festival,</b> the <i>baraita</i> can be understood. The reason is as follows: <b>Since he taught</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>On Shabbat eve,</b> as husking grain may not be performed on Shabbat itself, for it might lead to a prohibited labor on Shabbat, <b>he also taught in the latter clause: On a Festival eve.</b> However, this does not mean that rubbing or crushing legumes is prohibited on the Festival itself.

### Part 18
Abaye raises a difficulty against the opinion of Rava from a different angle: <b>If</b> you say <b>so, we</b> have thereby <b>found</b> a case of <b><i>teruma</i> for which separation is allowed</b> on a Festival. Before being rubbed, the grains of wheat were certainly not fit to be eaten, and therefore there was no obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> from them. Now that one has prepared them as food by rubbing them, he is obligated to separate <i>teruma</i> from them, and if one is permitted to eat them, he must be permitted to separate <i>teruma</i> from them first. <b>And we learned</b> explicitly in the mishna: <b>No, if you said</b> that you derive the halakha from <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> where <b>its separation is not allowed</b> on the Festival. This statement indicates that even Beit Hillel agree that one may not separate <i>teruma</i> of any kind on a Festival.

### Part 19
The Gemara refutes this challenge: This is <b>not difficult.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC