
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara wonders at the wording of the mishna: <b>But didn’t you say in the first clause</b> of the mishna that <b>one may not chop</b> beams <b>at all</b> on a Festival, ostensibly due to the extra effort involved? Why, then, does the mishna later define how one may chop, and even permit the use of a cleaver? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The mishna <b>is incomplete and is teaching the following: One may not chop</b> wood <b>from the pile of beams</b> intended for construction, <b>nor from a beam that broke on the Festival</b> itself, as it is considered <i>muktze</i>. <b>However, one may chop</b> wood <b>from a beam that broke on the eve of the Festival,</b> since it has presumably been designated as firewood.

### Part 2
Yet even <b>when one chops</b> such a beam, it must not be done in the weekday manner; an adjustment must be made. Therefore, <b>one may not chop</b> it <b>neither with an ax, nor with a saw, nor with a sickle, but with a cleaver.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>This</b> opinion, which is in accordance with the opinion of Shmuel, <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not chop wood, neither from the pile of beams nor from the beam that broke on the Festival</b> itself, <b>as it is not considered prepared.</b>

### Part 3
It is taught in the mishna that even when it is permitted to chop wood on a Festival, one may <b>not</b> do so <b>with an ax. Rav Ḥinnana bar Shelemya said in the name of Rav: They taught</b> this prohibition <b>only</b> with regard to a case where one chops <b>with its female</b> side, i.e., the broad side of the ax, as was normally done. <b>But</b> if one chops <b>with its male</b> side, i.e., the narrow side, this <b>is permitted</b> because it is an unusual manner of chopping.

### Part 4
The Gemara challenges: <b>It</b> is <b>obvious</b> that one may do so in this unusual fashion, as <b>we learned</b> in the mishna that it is permitted to chop <b>with a cleaver,</b> and chopping with the narrow side of an ax is similar to chopping with a cleaver. The Gemara explains: It was necessary to teach this <i>halakha</i> <b>lest you say: This applies only</b> to <b>a cleaver,</b> as it is narrow on both sides, <b>but</b> with regard to a tool that is <b>an ax</b> on one side <b>and</b> like <b>a cleaver</b> on the other, one might <b>say: Since this side,</b> that which is like an ax, <b>is prohibited, the other, side,</b> which is like a cleaver, should <b>also</b> be <b>prohibited.</b> Rav therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the cleaver side is in fact permitted.

### Part 5
<b>And some teach this</b> <i>halakha</i> in relation <b>to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Rather, with a cleaver. Rav Ḥinnana bar Shelemya said in the name of Rav: They taught</b> that it is permitted to chop wood on a Festival from a beam that was broken the day before, as stated previously, when one does so <b>only with its male</b> side; <b>but</b> if he chops <b>with its female</b> side, <b>it is prohibited.</b> The Gemara challenges: This is <b>obvious.</b> Didn’t <b>we learn</b> in the mishna that one may <b>not</b> use <b>an ax?</b> The Gemara answers: It was necessary to teach this <i>halakha</i> <b>lest you say: This</b> prohibition <b>applies</b> only to <b>an ax, but</b> with regard to a utensil that is both <b>an ax and a cleaver,</b> i.e., that is broad on one side and narrow on the other, one might <b>say: Since this side,</b> the narrower one, <b>is permitted, the other,</b> broader <b>side</b> should <b>also</b> be <b>permitted.</b> Rav therefore <b>teaches us</b> that they did not permit one side due to the other.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If there is <b>a house that is filled with produce</b> and locked on all sides, <b>and a hole formed</b> in one of its walls or its roof, <b>one may remove</b> produce <b>through the place of the hole.</b> The produce is not considered <i>muktze</i>, even though one cannot reach it without the existence of the hole. <b>Rabbi Meir says: One may even make a hole <i>ab initio</i> and take</b> produce through that opening.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara wonders at Rabbi Meir’s statement: <b>Why</b> does he permit one to make a hole in order to remove the produce <i>ab initio</i>? <b>Isn’t</b> one who does so <b>dismantling a tent,</b> thereby performing a biblically prohibited labor? <b>Rav Naḥumi bar Adda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> Here, it is referring <b>to bricks</b> placed <b>one on top of the other [<i>aveira delivni</i>]</b> but not cemented together. This is not considered a building at all. The Gemara challenges: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rav Naḥman say:</b> With regard to <b>these bricks remaining from a building, it is permitted to handle them on Shabbat, since they are fit to sit on;</b> however, if <b>one arranged them</b> in rows, one on top of the other, <b>he has certainly set them aside</b> from his intentions? This indicates that even bricks placed on top of one another without being cemented together are nonetheless considered <i>muktze</i>.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> Rabbi Meir was referring to a Festival. <b>On a Festival they said</b> that one may do so, <b>but</b> they did <b>not</b> allow it <b>on Shabbat</b> even in such a manner, and Rav Naḥman was speaking of Shabbat. <b>This</b> opinion <b>was also taught</b> explicitly in the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Meir says: One may even make a hole</b> on a Festival <b><i>ab initio</i> and remove</b> the produce from inside; <b>they said</b> this with regard to <b>a Festival, but not</b> with regard to <b>Shabbat.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Shmuel said:</b> In the case of <b>fastenings</b> made of knotted ropes <b>that</b> are attached <b>to the ground</b> and that serve as closures for doors of cellars and caves, <b>one may untie</b> the knot, <b>but one may not unravel</b> the rope itself into its constituent fibers <b>nor cut</b> the rope. This constitutes the prohibited labor of dismantling the cellar or cave on Shabbat. With regard to fastenings <b>that are on</b> the doors of <b>vessels,</b> e.g., cupboards, it is permitted to <b>untie, or unravel, or cut</b> them if necessary, <b>both</b> on <b>Shabbat and</b> on <b>a Festival,</b> as the prohibition against dismantling does not apply to vessels.

### Part 10
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this from the following <i>baraita</i>: In a case of <b>fastenings that</b> are attached <b>to the ground,</b> which are on doors, <b>on Shabbat one may untie</b> the rope <b>but not unravel or cut</b> it. Although it is permitted to do so by Torah law, the Sages prohibited it. However, <b>on a Festival, one may untie or unravel or cut</b> it, as this is not prohibited even by rabbinic law. This appears to contradict the opinion of Shmuel, who does not differentiate between Shabbat and Festivals.

### Part 11
Shmuel could respond: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who said: One may even make a hole and remove</b> produce <b><i>ab initio</i>, whereas the Rabbis disagree with him</b> and prohibit it, <b>and I spoke in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And do the Rabbis disagree with him with regard to</b> doors <b>sealed to the ground? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Rabbis concede to Rabbi Meir with regard to</b> doors <b>sealed to the ground that one may untie</b> them <b>on Shabbat but not unravel or cut</b> them, <b>while on a Festival one may untie or unravel or cut</b> them?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC