
### Part 1
<b>and is not a species of grain,</b> but one of the fruits, <b>or which is a species of grain and has not been made into bread,</b> there is a dispute. <b>Rabban Gamliel says</b> that one recites the <b>three blessings</b> of the Grace after Meals <b>and the Rabbis say</b> that one recites <b>a single blessing. And</b> over <b>anything that is neither one of the seven species nor a species of grain, such as rice bread or millet bread, Rabban Gamliel says</b> that after eating, one recites <b>one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals, <b>and the Rabbis say</b> that one need <b>not</b> recite <b>any</b> blessing, i.e., Grace after Meals or one blessing abridged from three, but instead he recites: Who creates the many forms of life. If so, the <i>Tosefta</i>, which says that after rice one recites one blessing abridged from three, is in accordance with Rabbi Yehuda’s version of Rabban Gamliel’s opinion.

### Part 2
The Gemara challenges: <b>How did you establish</b> the <i>Tosefta</i>? <b>In accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel. Say the latter clause of the first</b> section of this <i>Tosefta</i>, which states that even over wheat bread, <b>when the slices are not intact,</b> then <b>at the start one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals. <b>Whose</b> opinion is reflected in that section of the <i>Tosefta</i>? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel, now</b> if over <b>dates and pounded wheat, Rabban Gamliel said</b> that one recites the <b>three blessings</b> of Grace after Meals, in a case <b>where the slices</b> of bread <b>are not intact, is it necessary</b> to say that one recites Grace after Meals?

### Part 3
<b>Rather, it is clear</b> that the <i>Tosefta</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. If so, there is a contradiction between</b> one opinion of <b>the Rabbis and</b> a second opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> The Gemara resolves the contradiction: <b>Rather, actually,</b> the <i>Tosefta</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis and</b> emend the text <b>and teach with regard to rice: At the end, one does not recite any blessing,</b> consistent with their opinion in the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 4
With regard to the blessings recited over various types of porridge, <b>Rava said:</b> Over <b>the farmer’s mixture of flour and honey to which they add</b> extra <b>flour, one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment. What is the reason?</b> Because <b>the flour is</b> the <b>primary</b> ingredient in the mixture. Over this same dish, however, when it is prepared in the manner that it is prepared in <b>Meḥoza</b> where <b>they do not add</b> extra <b>flour, one recites: By Whose word all things came to be. What is the reason?</b> Because in that dish, <b>the honey is</b> the <b>primary</b> ingredient. <b>And Rava reconsidered and said:</b> Over <b>both this,</b> the mixture of the farmers, and <b>that,</b> the mixture of Meḥoza, one recites: <b>Who creates the various kinds of nourishment. As Rav and Shmuel both said: Anything that is from the five species</b> of grain, <b>one recites over it: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> Over <b>this cooked dish, which contains pieces</b> of bread that are the size of <b>an olive-bulk, at the start one recites: Who brings forth bread from the earth, and afterward one recites</b> the <b>three blessings</b> of Grace after Meals as he would over bread. Over that same cooked dish, <b>which does not contain pieces</b> of bread that are the size of <b>an olive-bulk, at the start one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals, as he would over a cooked dish.

### Part 6
<b>And Rav Yosef said: From where do I say this</b> <i>halakha</i>? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The first time the priest <b>would stand and offer meal-offerings in Jerusalem, he would recite: Who has given us life, sustained us, and brought us to this time,</b> as it is the first time that he fulfilled the mitzva of offering that sacrifice (Rashi). <b>When he would take</b> the meal-offerings in order <b>to eat them, he would recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth. And it was taught on the</b> topic of meal-offerings: <b>And all of the</b> meal-offerings, <b>he crumbles</b> them into pieces, approximately the size of an <b>olive-bulk.</b> This proves that over bread crumbs the size of an olive-bulk, one recites: Who brings forth bread from the earth.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>But</b> if what you say is <b>so, then now, according to the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael</b> who <b>said</b> with regard to meal-offerings: <b>He crushes them until he restores them to</b> the form that they were when <b>they were flour,</b> would you say that <b>so too,</b> in that case, <b>he need not recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth? And if you say</b> that <b>that is so,</b> that one does not recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth, over these meal-offerings, <b>wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who gathered an olive-bulk</b> sized portion <b>from all of</b> the crumbs of the meal-offerings <b>and ate them, if it was</b> an offering of <b>leavened bread</b> like that of a thanks-offering, if he ate them on Passover he is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>. If</b> it was an offering <b>of unleavened bread, one fulfills his obligation</b> to eat <i>matza</i> <b>on Passover.</b> This illustrates that bread crumbs, regardless of their size, are always considered bread.

### Part 8
Rav Yosef answered that this is not the case, and one does not recite a blessing over bread crumbs as he would over actual bread. Rather, <b>with what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where</b> one mixed the bread crumbs with water <b>and compacted them</b> into a single mass. The Gemara challenges this: <b>If so, say the latter clause,</b> in which we learn that <b>this case</b> of one who eats the crumbs speaks specifically about <b>when he ate them,</b> all of the crumbs that constitute the size of an olive-bulk <b>in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread. And if</b> it is referring to a case where <b>one compacted them</b> into a single mass, <b>that</b> expression: <b>When he ate them,</b> is inappropriate. <b>When he ate it, is what it needed</b> to say, as it is a single loaf.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it can be explained in another way: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where</b> each of the crumbs <b>came from a large</b> loaf of <b>bread</b> over which one is obligated to recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth. Over crumbs that were never part of a loaf of bread large enough to require this blessing, however, one need only recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth, if they are at least the size of an olive-bulk.

### Part 10
Since all of the proofs for and against this opinion were rejected, the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> conclusion <b>was</b> reached <b>about</b> this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> Over <b>this cooked dish, which contains</b> bread <b>crumbs, even though it does not contain crumbs</b> the size <b>of an olive-bulk, one recites: Who brings forth bread from the earth. Rava said: This is</b> specifically in a case where the crumbs still <b>have the appearance of bread</b> and did not dissolve completely.

### Part 11
Another issue concerned <b><i>terokanin</i>,</b> with regard to which it was said that <b>they are obligated in</b> the mitzva to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i>,</b> meaning that <i>terokanin</i> have the halakhic status of bread. <b>And, when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: <i>Terokanin</i> are exempt from</b> the mitzva to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are <i>terokanin</i>? Abaye said:</b> <i>Terokanin</i> are made of a watery mixture of flour and water roasted in a <b>cavity</b> in a stove <b>in the ground</b> and is not actually bread.

### Part 12
<b>And Abaye said: <i>Terita</i> is exempt from</b> the mitzva to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b><i>terita</i>?</b> There are several opinions: <b>Some say,</b> it is flour and water <b>kneaded</b> that is poured onto a <b>boiling</b> hot stove. <b>And some say,</b> it is <b>bread from India,</b> made from dough wrapped around a skewer and covered with oil or eggs before baking. <b>And some say,</b> it is <b>bread made for <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> bread baked in an unusual manner so that it would become extremely leavened and could be used as an ingredient in the Babylonian spice, <i>kutaḥ</i>.

### Part 13
And similarly, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: Bread made for <i>kutaḥ</i>;</b> one <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that one <b>is obligated in</b> the mitzva to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i></b> from bread made for <i>kutaḥ</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>There, as the reason was taught</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> There is a distinction between different types of bread made for <i>kutaḥ</i>, as <b>the actions</b> taken in <b>its</b> preparation <b>prove</b> the purpose for which <b>it</b> was made. <b>If he made them</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC