
### Part 1
Therefore, <b>he teaches us: Anything that has</b> of the five species of grain <b>in it,</b> even if it is in the context of a mixture with other ingredients. <b>And had he taught us</b> only: <b>Anything that has</b> of the five species of grain <b>in it, I would have said</b> that specifically over <b>anything that has</b> of the five species of grain <b>in it, yes,</b> one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, even if it is in the context of a mixture with other ingredients. <b>However,</b> over anything that has <b>rice and millet</b> in it, <b>no,</b> one does not recite: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, <b>because</b> one is eating <b>it in</b> the context of <b>a mixture. However,</b> if the rice or millet <b>is in its pure,</b> unadulterated form, <b>say</b> that <b>even over rice and millet one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment,</b> because they, too, are types of grain. Therefore, <b>he teaches us</b> specifically: <b>Anything that is from the five species</b> of grain, <b>one recites over it: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, to the exclusion of rice and millet,</b> over <b>which, even in its pure,</b> unadulterated form, <b>one does not recite: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment.</b>

### Part 2
With regard to the previous conclusion, the Gemara asks: <b>And</b> over <b>rice and millet we do not recite: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment? But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If they brought before him rice bread or millet bread, he recites the blessing over it</b> both <b>before and after, as</b> he would recite the blessing over <b>a cooked dish</b> containing dough from the five species of the grain. <b>And with regard to a cooked dish, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>At the start, one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end, one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals [<i>al hamiḥya</i>]. Apparently, one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, over rice and millet.

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this proof: Indeed, rice or millet is <b>like a cooked dish, and is not like a cooked dish</b> in every sense. The Gemara elaborates: It is considered <b>like a cooked dish</b> in that <b>one recites a blessing over it</b> both at the <b>beginning and</b> the <b>end. And it is unlike a cooked dish</b> in that <b>over a cooked dish, at the start, one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end,</b> one recites <b>one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals; <b>whereas here, over</b> rice, <b>at the start, one recites: By Whose word all things came to be, and at the end,</b> one recites: <b>Who creates the many forms of life and their needs for all that You have created.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara challenges: <b>And rice is not a cooked dish? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>these are cooked dishes: Wheat kernels split into two parts, wheat kernels crushed into three parts [<i>teraggis</i>], flour, wheat kernels crushed into four parts [<i>zariz</i>], wheat kernels crushed into five parts [<i>arsan</i>] and rice?</b> Apparently, rice is considered a cooked dish like crushed wheat.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>Whose</b> opinion is reflected in <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri’s</b> opinion, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says: Rice is a type of grain</b> in every respect and, therefore, <b>one is liable to</b> death by <b><i>karet</i> if it leavens</b> on Passover and he eats it intentionally. <b>And a person</b> who ate <i>matza</i> baked from rice flour <b>fulfills his obligation on Passover; however,</b> according to <b>the Rabbis, no,</b> rice is not in the category of a cooked dish.

### Part 6
The Gemara challenges this: <b>And the Rabbis</b> hold that rice is <b>not</b> considered a cooked dish? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who chews wheat recites: Who creates fruit of the ground.</b> However, if <b>he ground</b> the wheat, <b>baked it, and cooked</b> the bread, there is a distinction between two situations: <b>When the slices are intact</b> and did not dissolve in the boiling process, <b>at the start one recites: Who brings forth bread from the earth, and at the end one recites</b> the <b>three blessings</b> of Grace after Meals, as he does after eating bread. <b>When the slices</b> dissolved in the course of the boiling process and <b>are not intact,</b> then <b>at the start one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals.

### Part 7
<b>One who chews rice recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. If one ground it, baked it, and then cooked it, even though the pieces are intact, at the start one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals.

### Part 8
The Gemara discusses this <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Whose</b> opinion is reflected in <b>this</b> <i>Tosefta</i>? <b>If you say that</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri who said</b> that <b>rice is a type of grain,</b> it should have said that one must recite: <b>Who brings forth bread from the earth,</b> beforehand <b>and</b> the <b>three blessings</b> of Grace after Meals thereafter, as he does after eating bread.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, isn’t it</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that rice is not a type of grain, but nevertheless hold that over rice one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment? If so, this is a <b>conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav and Shmuel.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: Indeed, this <b>is a conclusive refutation</b> of their opinion.

### Part 11
Above, it was taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>the Master said: One who chews wheat recites: Who creates fruit of the ground.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that one who chews wheat recites: <b>Who creates various kinds of seeds?</b> The Gemara resolves the problem: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as it is the subject of a tannaitic dispute. <b>This</b> opinion, that one must recite: Who creates various kinds of seeds, is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and this</b> opinion, that one must recite: Who creates fruit of the ground, is the opinion of the <b>Rabbis. As we learned</b> in our mishna: <b>Over</b> herbs and leafy <b>vegetables one recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. Rabbi Yehuda says: Who creates various kinds of herbs.</b> Rabbi Yehuda designates specific blessings for every type of plant, and he certainly distinguishes between vegetables in general and seeds.

### Part 12
It was taught in the same <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>the Master said: One who chews rice recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. If one ground it, baked it and then cooked it, even though the pieces are intact, at the start one recites: Who creates the various kinds of nourishment, and at the end one recites one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals.

### Part 13
The Gemara raises the challenge: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that in that case, <b>at the end</b> one need <b>not</b> recite <b>any</b> of the blessings recited over the fruits of Eretz Yisrael, but rather: Who creates the many forms of life. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as this is the subject of a tannaitic dispute. <b>This,</b> that one recites one blessing abridged from the three blessings of Grace after Meals, is the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel. This,</b> that one need only recite: Who creates the many forms of life, is the opinion of the <b>Rabbis. As it was taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>this is the principle: Anything that is from the seven species</b> of grain and fruits for which Eretz Yisrael is praised, <b>Rabban Gamliel says:</b> Afterwards, one recites the <b>three blessings</b> of the Grace after Meals. <b>And the Rabbis say: One blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals is sufficient.

### Part 14
The Gemara relates: <b>And</b> there was an <b>incident involving Rabban Gamliel and the Sages who were sitting in an upper floor in Jericho and they brought dates before them and they ate. And</b> afterwards, <b>Rabban Gamliel gave Rabbi Akiva permission to recite the blessing. Rabbi Akiva hurried and recited one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals. <b>Rabban Gamliel said: Akiva, until when will you</b> continue to <b>stick your head into the dispute</b> among the Sages with regard to what you did? Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: Our teacher, even though you say this while your colleagues</b> disagree and <b>say that, you taught us, our teacher,</b> the general principle that guides resolution of halakhic disputes: In a dispute between <b>an individual and the many, the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the many.</b> Although you are the <i>Nasi</i>, it is appropriate to act in accordance with the opinion of the many.

### Part 15
The Gemara records a variation on the dispute between Rabban Gamliel and the Rabbis: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says in his name,</b> the name of Rabbi Akiva. With regard to <b>anything that is from the seven species</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC