
### Part 1
I would have understood that <b>he</b> thereby <b>taught us the meaning</b> of the verse: “Who brought you forth from Egypt,” <b>and he</b> thereby <b>taught us that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. However, what did he teach us by reciting <i>motzi</i>?</b> Everyone agrees that one fulfills his obligation when reciting <i>motzi</i>. The Gemara explains: The son of Rav Zevid <b>did this</b> in order <b>to preclude himself from</b> taking sides in <b>the dispute.</b> He preferred to phrase his blessing in a manner appropriate according to all opinions, rather than teach a novel concept, which is not universally accepted.

### Part 2
The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that one recites: <b>Who brings forth [<i>hamotzi</i>] bread from the earth, as we hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis who say</b> that it also means: Who brought forth.

### Part 3
We learned in the mishna that <b>over vegetables one recites:</b> Who creates fruits of the ground. The Gemara comments: The mishna <b>taught vegetables</b> together with, and therefore <b>similar to, bread,</b> and from this analogy one may infer: <b>Just as bread</b> is food <b>that was transformed by fire, so too vegetables</b> retain the blessing: Who creates fruits of the ground, after they <b>have been transformed by fire. Rabbenai said in the name</b> of <b>Abaye: This means</b> that <b>over boiled vegetables one recites: Who creates fruits of the ground. From where</b> is this matter inferred? From the fact that the mishna <b>taught vegetables similar to bread.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ḥisda taught in the name of Rabbeinu; and</b> the Gemara remarks incidentally: <b>Who is</b> Rabbeinu? <b>Rav. Over boiled vegetables one recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. And our Rabbis who descended from Eretz Yisrael,</b> and again the Gemara explains: <b>And who is</b> the Sage with this title? <b>Ulla said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Over boiled vegetables one recites: By whose word all things came to be,</b> since after they are boiled, they are no longer the same as they were before. Expressing his own opinion, Rav Ḥisda said: <b>And I say</b> that there is an intermediate opinion: <b>Any</b> vegetable that, when eaten <b>in its original</b> uncooked state, one recites: <b>Who creates fruit of the ground,</b> when he <b>boiled it,</b> he recites: <b>By whose word all things came to be,</b> as boiling damages it qualitatively. <b>And any</b> vegetable that when eaten <b>in its original</b> uncooked state, one recites: <b>By whose word all things came to be,</b> because it is not typically eaten raw, when he <b>boiled it,</b> he recites: <b>Who creates fruit of the ground.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, any</b> vegetable that, when eaten <b>in its original</b> uncooked state, one recites: <b>By whose word all things came to be,</b> when he <b>boiled it,</b> he recites: <b>Who creates fruit of the ground,</b> as <b>you</b> can <b>find</b> several vegetables, e.g., <b>cabbage, chard, and pumpkin</b> which are virtually inedible raw, and boiling renders it edible. <b>However,</b> under <b>what</b> circumstances can <b>you find</b> a case where <b>any</b> vegetable that when eaten <b>in its original</b> uncooked state, one recites: <b>Who creates fruit of the ground,</b> when he <b>boiled it,</b> he recites: <b>By whose word all things came to be,</b> as boiling damages the vegetable qualitatively? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: You</b> can <b>find it</b> in the case of <b>garlic and leeks.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Naḥman taught in the name of Rabbeinu; and who is</b> Rabbeinu? <b>Shmuel: Over boiled vegetables one recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. And our colleagues who descended from Eretz Yisrael; and who is</b> the Sage with this title? <b>Ulla said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Over boiled vegetables, one recites: By whose word all things came to be.</b>

### Part 7
Rav Naḥman remarked: <b>I say this</b> is dependent upon and <b>taught as a</b> tannaitic <b>dispute, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>matza</i> on Passover: <b>One fulfills the</b> mitzva of <i>matza</i> <b>with a wafer soaked</b> in water or <b>with</b> one that is <b>boiled</b> as long that <b>it did not dissolve;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And Rabbi Yosei says: One fulfills the</b> mitzva of <i>matza</i> <b>with a soaked wafer but not with</b> one that is <b>boiled even if it did not dissolve.</b> Rav Naḥman concludes that this dispute with regard to boiled <i>matza</i> reflects a larger dispute with regard to boiling in general, whether or not it diminishes the flavor of that which is boiled.

### Part 8
This approach is rejected by the Gemara: <b>That is not so; as everyone agrees that over boiled vegetables one recites: Who creates fruit of the ground. Rabbi Yosei only said</b> the <i>halakha</i>, that one fulfills his obligation of <i>matza</i> if it is soaked but not if it is boiled, <b>there, because</b> in order to fulfill the mitzva, <b>we require</b> the <b>taste of <i>matza</i>, and it is lacking. However, here, even Rabbi Yosei agrees</b> that boiling vegetables does not damage it qualitatively.

### Part 9
Ulla’s statement in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan with regard to boiled vegetables was cited above. The Gemara cites two conflicting traditions with regard to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Over boiled vegetables, one recites: Who creates fruit of the ground, and Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Over boiled vegetables, one recites: By whose word all things came to be.</b> Commenting on this, <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Ulla established his error in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet,</b> which conflicted with the prevailing opinion among the Sages in Babylonia.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Zeira wondered</b> with regard to Ulla’s approach: <b>What is the matter of Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet</b> doing in the same discussion <b>with Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba was meticulous and learned the <i>halakha</i> from Rabbi Yoḥanan, his teacher; and Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet was not meticulous. Furthermore, every thirty days, Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba reviews his studies before Rabbi Yoḥanan, his teacher, while Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet does not review</b> his studies. <b>Furthermore, aside from these</b> reasons concerning the difference between a wise and meticulous student like Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba and a student like Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet, one can also bring proof from the custom of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as <b>the lupin is boiled seven times in a pot and eaten as dessert</b> at the end of a <b>meal. They came and asked Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> with regard to the blessing to be recited over this lupin, <b>and he said to them: One recites over it: Who creates fruit of the ground,</b> indicating that one recites that blessing over boiled vegetables.

### Part 11
<b>Furthermore, Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: I saw Rabbi Yoḥanan eat a salted olive,</b> which, halakhically, is considered cooked, <b>and he recited a blessing over it both before and after. Granted, if you say</b> that <b>boiled vegetables remain in their original state</b> and that cooking does not qualitatively damage them, then certainly <b>at the start one recites over it: Who creates fruit of the tree, and at the end one recites over it one blessing abridged from</b> the <b>three</b> blessings of Grace after Meals, just as he would over any of the seven species for which Eretz Yisrael was praised. <b>However, if you say</b> that <b>boiled vegetables do not remain in their original state, granted, at the start, one recites: By whose word all things came to be. However, at the end, what blessing does he recite?</b> There are several opinions that hold that no blessing is recited after eating something whose initial blessing was: By whose word all things came to be.

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this: That is no proof, as <b>perhaps</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan held that on items over which at the start one recites: By whose word all things came to be, at the end he recites: <b>Who creates the many forms of life and their needs, for all that You have created.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Shmuel raised an objection</b> to the ruling that over both boiled vegetables and raw vegetables one recites the same blessing, from a <i>baraita</i> concerning the <i>halakhot</i> of eating bitter herbs on Passover: <b>Vegetables with which one may fulfill his obligation</b> in the mitzva of bitter herbs <b>on Passover, one fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with</b> both the vegetables <b>themselves as well as with their stalks. However,</b> one may <b>neither</b> fulfill his obligation <b>with pickled</b> vegetables, <b>nor with boiled</b> vegetables <b>nor with cooked</b> vegetables. <b>And if it would enter your mind</b> that <b>they remain in their original state, why are boiled</b> vegetables not fit for use in fulfilling the mitzva of bitter herbs?

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there, as</b> even if we assert that boiled vegetables remain in their original state, <b>we require</b> the <b>taste of bitter herbs, and it is lacking.</b> There is no proof that boiling damages the vegetable qualitatively.

### Part 15
The Gemara related above that Rabbi Yoḥanan recited a blessing over a salted olive. With regard to this story, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zeira: How did Rabbi Yoḥanan recite a blessing over a salted olive</b> after he ate it? <b>Since the pit was removed,</b> i.e., he did not eat it,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC