
### Part 1
<b>dipped with them</b> a small bit of food <b>in brine and ate with them only a single dry fig, he joins them. And to satisfy the obligation of the many, he does not satisfy</b> their obligation <b>until he eats an olive-bulk of grain. Rabbi Ḥana bar Yehuda said in the name of Rava</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is:</b> If one <b>ate a vegetable leaf and drank a cup of wine, he joins</b> the diners. However, <b>to satisfy</b> the obligation of others, <b>he does not satisfy</b> their obligation <b>until he eats an olive-bulk of grain.</b>

### Part 2
With regard to the origins of the four blessings of Grace after Meals, <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> <br><b>Moses instituted for Israel the</b> first <b>blessing of: Who feeds</b> all, <b>when the manna descended for them</b> and they needed to thank God.<br><b>Joshua instituted the blessing of the land when they entered Eretz Yisrael.</b><br><b>David and Solomon instituted the</b> third blessing: <b>Who builds Jerusalem,</b> in the following manner: <br><b>David instituted “…on Israel Your people and on Jerusalem Your city…”</b> as he conquered the city, <br><b>and Solomon instituted “…on the great and Holy Temple…”</b> as he was the one who built the Temple. <br><b>They instituted</b> the blessing: <b>Who is good and does good, at Yavne in reference to the slain</b> Jews <b>of</b> the city of <b>Beitar</b> at the culmination of the bar Kokheva rebellion. They were ultimately brought to burial after a period during which Hadrian refused to permit their burial. <b>As Rav Mattana said: On the same day that the slain of Beitar were brought to burial, they instituted</b> the blessing: <b>Who is good and does good, at Yavne. Who is good,</b> thanking God that the corpses <b>did not decompose</b> while awaiting burial, <b>and does good,</b> thanking God <b>that they were</b> ultimately <b>brought to burial.</b>

### Part 3
On the topic of the blessings of Grace after Meals, the Gemara adds that <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>the order of Grace after Meals is as follows: The first blessing is the blessing of: Who feeds</b> all; <b>the second is the blessing of the land; the third is: Who builds Jerusalem; and the fourth is: Who is good and does good. On Shabbat one begins</b> the third blessing <b>with consolation and ends with consolation and mentions the sanctity of the day</b> with mention of Shabbat <b>in the middle. Rabbi Eliezer says: If one wishes to recite</b> the supplement for the sanctity of Shabbat in <b>the blessing of consolation:</b> Who builds Jerusalem, <b>he recites it</b> there; <b>in the blessing of the land, he recites it</b> there; <b>in the blessing instituted by the Sages at Yavne,</b> Who is good and does good, <b>he recites it</b> there. <b>And the Rabbis say: He may only recite</b> the mention of the sanctity of Shabbat <b>in</b> the context of <b>the blessing of consolation.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara remarks: <b>The</b> opinion of the <b>Rabbis is</b> identical with the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>.</b> Both opinions hold that the mention of Shabbat is in the third blessing. The Gemara responds: <b>The difference between</b> the opinion of the Rabbis and the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is with regard to <b>after the fact.</b> They both agree that <i>ab initio</i>, Shabbat should be mentioned in the third blessing. If, though, one inadvertently mentioned Shabbat in one of the other blessings mentioned by Rabbi Eliezer, the first <i>tanna</i> holds that he fulfilled his obligation and the Rabbis emphasize that it may only be recited in the blessing of consolation.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>Grace after Meals is from the Torah? As it is stated: “And you shall eat and be satisfied, and you shall bless</b> the Lord, your God, for the good land that He has given you” (Deuteronomy 8:10). The Gemara explains: <b>And you shall bless, that is the blessing of: Who feeds</b> all. <b>The Lord, your God, that is the <i>zimmun</i> blessing</b> in which God’s name is invoked. <b>For the land, that is the blessing of the land; good, that is</b> the blessing: <b>Who builds Jerusalem, and it also says: “This good mountain and Lebanon”</b> (Deuteronomy 3:25), which is interpreted homiletically as referring to Jerusalem and the Temple. <b>That He gave you, that is: Who is good and does good.</b> However, <b>I only have</b> a Torah source for blessings <b>after</b> eating, i.e., Grace after Meals. <b>From where</b> is it derived that one is obligated to recite blessings <b>before</b> eating? <b>You said</b> that it can be derived through <b>an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: When one is satisfied, he</b> is obligated to <b>recite a blessing</b> and thank God for food; <b>when he is hungry, all the more so</b> that he should recite a blessing to offer thanks for the food he will eat.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: It is not necessary</b> to interpret the verse this way; rather, it should be understood in a slightly different manner, as follows: <b>“And you shall eat and be satisfied, and you shall bless,” that is the blessing of: Who feeds</b> all; <b>however, the <i>zimmun</i> blessing is derived</b> from the verse: <b>“Praise God with me</b> and we will exalt His name together” (Psalms 34:3). He continues: <b>For the land, that is the blessing of the land. Good, that is</b> the blessing: <b>Who builds Jerusalem, and it also says: This good mountain and Lebanon. They instituted</b> the blessing: <b>Who is good and does good, at Yavne</b> and, as such, it has no biblical source. However, <b>I only have</b> a Torah source for blessings <b>after</b> eating, i.e., Grace after Meals. <b>From where</b> is it derived that one is obligated to recite blessings <b>before</b> eating? <b>The verse states: That he gave you.</b> A blessing must be recited over food <b>from</b> the moment that God <b>gave it to you,</b> not only afterward.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> That source for the obligation to recite a blessing beforehand <b>is not necessary, as it says: “And He will bless your bread and your water”</b> (Exodus 23:25); <b>do not read: And He will bless [<i>uveirakh</i>], rather: And you will bless [<i>uvareikh</i>]. And when is it called bread? Before it is eaten.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> That source for the obligation to recite a blessing beforehand <b>is not necessary, as it says</b> when the maidens told Saul: <b>“As soon you come into the city, find him right away, before he goes up to the high place to eat; for the people will not eat until he comes, because he will bless the sacrifice; and afterwards all those who are invited will eat;</b> now go, for you shall find him at this time of day” (I Samuel 9:13). A blessing recited prior to eating is explicitly mentioned in that verse.

### Part 9
Tangentially, the Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> did these maidens go on <b>so expansively</b> while speaking to Saul? <b>It is because women are chatterers. And Shmuel said</b> a different reason: They spoke expansively <b>in order to gaze upon Saul’s beauty</b> longer, <b>as it is written</b> about him: “An excellent young man; no one among the Israelites was better than he; <b>he was taller than the people from the shoulders up”</b> (I Samuel 9:2). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that their expansiveness was initiated by God, because <b>one sovereignty does not overlap with its counterpart, even</b> one <b>hairbreadth.</b> Saul’s coronation was delayed so that Samuel’s leadership would not be curtailed.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> with regard to Grace after Meals continues: <b>I only have</b> a Torah source for <b>Grace after Meals. From where</b> is the obligation to recite <b>the blessing of the Torah</b> derived? Several answers are offered: <b>Rabbi Yishmael said:</b> It is derived through <b>an <i>a fortiori</i> inference</b> from Grace after Meals: <b>Over</b> food, which is an aspect of <b>temporal life, one recites a blessing, all the more so</b> one recites a blessing over the Torah, which is <b>eternal life. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Naḥmani,</b> the <b>student of Rabbi Yishmael, says in the name of Rabbi Yishmael: This</b> <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>is not necessary,</b> as this <i>halakha</i> can be derived from the same verse from which Grace after Meals is derived, <b>as it states: “For the good land that He gave [<i>natan</i>] you,” and below,</b> with regard to the Torah, <b>it says: “And I will give [<i>ve’etna</i>] you the stone tablets, and the Torah and the mitzva,</b> which I have written, that you may teach them” (Exodus 24:12). Here, just as giving with regard to the good land requires a blessing, giving with regard to the Torah requires a blessing.

### Part 11
Concerning this verse, <b>Rabbi Meir says: From where</b> is it derived that <b>just as one recites a blessing over the good</b> that befalls him <b>he recites a blessing over the bad? The verse states: “That the Lord, your God gave you.”</b> “Your God” is a reference to the attribute of divine justice; <b>your Judge, in whatever judgment that He judges you, whether it is a positive measure of goodness or a measure of calamity.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> Proof for a blessing over the Torah from a different verse <b>is not necessary, as it says:</b> “For the good [<i>hatova</i>] land.” Two different matters are derived from different aspects of the word <i>hatova</i>: <b><i>Tova</i>, that is Torah, as it says: “For I have given you good [<i>tov</i>] teachings,</b> do not forsake My Torah” (Proverbs 4:2); <b><i>hatova</i>, that is the building of Jerusalem, as it says: “This good mountain [<i>hatov</i>] and Lebanon.”</b>

### Part 13
With regard to the formula of Grace after Meals, the Gemara continues: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Anyone who did not say: A desirable, good, and spacious land in the blessing of the land, and</b> who did not mention <b>the royal house of David in</b> the blessing: <b>Who builds Jerusalem, did not fulfill his obligation. Naḥum the Elder says: One must mention the covenant</b> of circumcision <b>in</b> the blessing of the land. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: One must mention the Torah in</b> the blessing of the land. <b>Pelimu,</b> one of the last <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>says: He must</b> make mention of the <b>covenant</b> of circumcision <b>preceding</b> mention of the <b>Torah, as this,</b> the Torah, <b>was given</b> to the Jewish people <b>with three covenants,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC