
### Part 1
With regard to Babylonia, the Gemara cites what <b>Rabbi Yirmeya ben Elazar said:</b> When <b>Babylonia was cursed, its neighbors were cursed</b> along with it. When <b>Samaria was cursed, its neighbors were blessed.</b> When <b>Babylonia was cursed its neighbors were cursed</b> along with it, <b>as it is written: “I will also make it a possession for the bittern,</b> a wading bird, <b>and pools of water”</b> (Isaiah 14:23); not only will it be destroyed, but the site will become a habitat for destructive, environmentally harmful creatures. When <b>Samaria was cursed,</b> however, <b>its neighbors were blessed, as it is written: “Therefore I will make Samaria a heap in the field, a place for the planting of vineyards”</b> (Micah 1:6); although destroyed, it will serve a beneficial purpose.

### Part 2
<b>And Rav Hamnuna said: One who sees multitudes of Israel,</b> six hundred thousand Jews, <b>recites: Blessed…Who knows all secrets.</b> One who sees <b>multitudes of gentiles recites: “Your mother shall be sore ashamed,</b> she that bore you shall be confounded; behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert” (Jeremiah 50:12).

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who sees multitudes of Israel recites: Blessed…Who knows all secrets.</b> Why is this? He sees a whole nation <b>whose minds are unlike each other and whose faces are unlike each other,</b> and He Who knows all secrets, God, knows what is in each of their hearts. The Gemara relates: <b>Ben Zoma once saw a multitude [<i>okhlosa</i>] of Israel</b> while standing <b>on a stair on the Temple Mount.</b> He immediately <b>recited: Blessed…Who knows all secrets and Blessed…Who created all these to serve me.</b>

### Part 4
Explaining his custom, <b>he would say: How much effort did Adam the first</b> man <b>exert before he found bread to eat:</b> He <b>plowed, sowed, reaped, sheaved, threshed, winnowed</b> in the wind, <b>separated</b> the grain from the chaff, <b>ground</b> the grain into flour, <b>sifted, kneaded, and baked and</b> only <b>thereafter he ate. And I,</b> on the other hand, <b>wake up and find all of these prepared for me.</b> Human society employs a division of labor, and each individual benefits from the service of the entire world. Similarly, <b>how much effort did Adam the first</b> man <b>exert before he found a garment to wear?</b> He <b>sheared, laundered, combed, spun and wove, and</b> only <b>thereafter he found a garment to wear. And I,</b> on the other hand, <b>wake up and find all of these prepared for me.</b> Members of <b>all nations,</b> merchants and craftsmen, <b>diligently come to the entrance of my home, and I wake up and find all of these before me.</b>

### Part 5
Ben Zoma <b>would say: A good guest, what does he say? How much effort did the host expend on my behalf, how much meat did</b> the host <b>bring before me. How much wine did he bring before me. How many loaves [<i>geluskaot</i>] did he bring before me. All the</b> effort <b>that he expended, he expended only for me. However, a bad guest, what does he say? What effort did the host expend? I ate</b> only <b>one</b> piece of <b>bread, I ate</b> only <b>one piece of meat</b> and <b>I drank</b> only <b>one cup</b> of wine. <b>All the effort that the home owner expended he only expended on behalf of his wife and children.</b>

### Part 6
<b>With regard to a good guest, what does he say? “Remember that you magnify his work, whereof men have sung”</b> (Job 36:24); he praises and acknowledges those who helped him. <b>With regard to a bad guest it is written: “Men do therefore fear him;</b> he regards not any who are wise of heart” (Job 37:24).

### Part 7
On the topic of multitudes, the Gemara cites another verse: <b>“And the man in the days of Saul was old, and came among men”</b> (I Samuel 17:12). <b>Rava, and some say Rav Zevid, and some say Rav Oshaya, said: This</b> refers to <b>Yishai, father of David, who</b> always <b>went out with multitudes, and entered with multitudes, and taught Torah with multitudes. Ulla said: We hold there is no multitude in Babylonia.</b> The Sage <b>taught: A multitude is no fewer than six hundred thousand</b> people.

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught: One who sees the Sages of Israel recites: Blessed…Who has shared of His wisdom with those who revere Him.</b> One who sees <b>Sages of the nations of the world recites: Blessed…Who has given of His wisdom to flesh and blood. One who sees kings of Israel recites: Blessed…Who has shared of His glory with those who revere Him.</b> One who sees <b>kings of the</b> other <b>nations of the world recites: Blessed…Who has given of His glory to flesh and blood.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One should always strive to run toward kings of Israel</b> to greet them. <b>And not only</b> should he run <b>toward kings of Israel, but also toward kings of the nations of the world, so that if he will be privileged</b> to witnesses the glory of the Messiah (Rashi) and the World-to-Come, <b>he will distinguish between the kings of Israel and the kings of the nations of the world.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Sheshet was blind. Everyone was going to greet the king and Rav Sheshet stood up and went along with them. This heretic found him</b> there and <b>said to him:</b> The intact <b>jugs</b> go <b>to the river, where do the broken</b> jugs <b>go?</b> Why is a blind person going to see the king? Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: Come see that I know more than you</b> do. <b>The first troop passed,</b> and <b>when the noise grew louder, this heretic said to him: The king is coming. Rav Sheshet said to him:</b> The king <b>is not coming. The second troop passed,</b> and <b>when the noise grew louder, this heretic said to him: Now the king is coming. Rav Sheshet said to him: The king is not coming. The third</b> troop <b>passed,</b> and <b>when there was silence, Rav Sheshet said to him: Certainly now the king is coming.</b>

### Part 11
<b>This heretic said to him: How do you know this?</b> Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: Royalty on earth is like royalty in the heavens, as it is written</b> with regard to God’s revelation to Elijah the Prophet on Mount Horeb: <br><b>“And He said: Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord.</b><br><b>And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before the Lord;</b><br><b>but the Lord was not in the wind;</b><br><b>and after the wind an earthquake;</b><br><b>but the Lord was not in the earthquake;</b><br><b>and after the earthquake a fire;</b><br><b>but the Lord was not in the fire;</b><br><b>and after the fire a still small voice.</b><br>And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle and went out, and stood in the entrance of the cave” (I Kings 19:11–13). God’s revelation was specifically at the moment of silence.

### Part 12
<b>When the king came, Rav Sheshet began to bless him. The heretic</b> mockingly <b>said to him: Do you bless someone you do not see?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what ultimately happened to this heretic? Some say</b> that <b>his friends gouged out his eyes, and some say</b> that <b>Rav Sheshet fixed his gaze upon him, and</b> the heretic <b>became a pile of bones.</b>

### Part 13
As for the connection between divine and earthly royalty, the Gemara cites another story: <b>Rabbi Sheila</b> ordered that <b>a man who had relations with a gentile woman be flogged.</b> That man <b>went to inform the king and said: There is one man among the Jews who renders judgment without the king’s authority [<i>harmana</i>].</b> The king <b>sent a messenger [<i>peristaka</i>] for</b> Rabbi Sheila to bring him to trial. <b>When</b> Rabbi Sheila <b>came, they said to him: Why did you</b> order <b>flogging for this man? He said to them:</b> Because <b>he had relations with a female donkey.</b> According to Persian law this was an extremely heinous crime, so <b>they said to him: Do you have witnesses</b> that he did so? <b>He replied: Yes,</b> and <b>Elijah the prophet came</b> and <b>appeared as a person and testified. They said to</b> Rabbi Sheila: <b>If so, he is liable for the death penalty;</b> why did you not sentence him to death? <b>He replied: Since the day we were exiled from our land we do not have the authority to execute,</b> but <b>you, do with him as you wish.</b>

### Part 14
<b>As</b> they <b>considered the sentence,</b> Rabbi Sheila praised God for saving him from danger: <b>“Yours, O Lord, is the greatness, power,</b> glory, triumph, and majesty; for all that is in heaven and on earth is Yours; Yours is the kingdom, O Lord, and You are exalted as head above all” (I Chronicles 29:11). <b>They asked him: What did you say? He told them: This is what I said: Blessed is Merciful One who grants kingdom on earth</b> that is a <b>microcosm of the kingdom in heaven, and granted you dominion and love of justice. They said to him:</b> Indeed, the <b>honor of royalty is so dear to you. They gave him a staff</b> to symbolize his license to sit in judgment and <b>said to him: Judge.</b>

### Part 15
<b>As he was leaving, that man said to</b> Rabbi Sheila: <b>Does God perform such miracles for liars? He replied: Scoundrel! Aren’t</b> gentiles <b>called donkeys? As it is written: “Whose flesh is as the flesh of donkeys”</b> (Ezekiel 23:20). Rabbi Sheila <b>saw that he was going to tell</b> the Persian authorities <b>that he called them donkeys. He said:</b> This man has the legal status of <b>a pursuer.</b> He seeks to have me killed. <b>And the Torah said: If one comes to kill you, kill him first. He struck him with the staff and killed him.</b>

### Part 16
Rabbi Sheila <b>said: Since a miracle was performed on my behalf with this verse</b> that I cited, <b>I will interpret it homiletically: Yours, O Lord, is the greatness; that is the act of creation, and so it says: “Who does great things past finding out”</b> (Job 9:10); <br><b>And the power; that is the exodus from Egypt, as it is stated: “And Israel saw the great work</b> which the Lord did to the <b>Egyptians”</b> (Exodus 14:31);<br><b>And the glory; that is the sun and the moon that stood still for Joshua, as it is stated: “And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed,</b> until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies” (Joshua 10:13);<br><b>And the triumph; that is the downfall of Rome, and so it says</b> describing the downfall of Edom, whom the Sages identified as the forefather of Rome: <b>“Their lifeblood is dashed against My garments</b> and I have stained all My raiment” (Isaiah 63:3);<br><b>And the majesty; this is the war of the valleys of Arnon, as it is stated: “Wherefore it is said in the book of the Wars of the Lord: Vahev in Sufa,</b> and the valleys of Arnon” (Numbers 21:14);<br><b>For all that is in the heaven and in the earth is Yours; this is the war of Sisera, as it is stated: “They fought from heaven, the stars in their courses</b> fought against Sisera” (Judges 5:20).<br><b>Yours is the kingdom, O Lord; this is the war of Amalek, and so it says:</b> “And he said: <b>The hand upon the throne of the Lord:</b> the Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation” (Exodus 17:16), as then God will sit on His throne.<br><b>And you are exalted; this is the war of Gog and Magog, and so it says: “I am against you, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshekh and Tubal”</b> (Ezekiel 38:3); and:<br><b>As head above all; Rav Ḥanan bar Rava said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> All leadership and authority, <b>even</b> the most insignificant, the <b>one responsible for distributing water, is appointed by heaven.</b>

### Part 17
<b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i> in the name of Rabbi Akiva:</b> <br><b>Yours, O Lord, is the greatness; this is the splitting of the Red Sea;</b><br><b>the power; this is the plague of the firstborn;</b><br><b>the glory; this is the giving of the Torah;</b><br><b>the triumph; this is Jerusalem;</b> <br>and <b>the majesty; this is the Temple.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC