
### Part 1
and the <b>lungs draw all kinds of liquids,</b> the <b>liver becomes angry,</b> the <b>gall</b> bladder <b>injects a drop</b> of gall <b>into</b> the liver and <b>allays</b> anger, the <b>spleen laughs,</b> the <b>maw grinds</b> the food, and the <b>stomach</b> brings <b>sleep,</b> the <b>nose awakens.</b> If they reversed roles such that <b>the</b> organ which brings on <b>sleep</b> were to <b>awaken,</b> or <b>the</b> organ which <b>awakens</b> were to bring on <b>sleep,</b> the individual <b>would gradually deteriorate. It was taught: If both</b> bring on <b>sleep or both awaken,</b> the person <b>immediately dies.</b>

### Part 2
With regard to one’s inclinations, <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: The good inclination rules the righteous, as it is stated: “And my heart is dead within me”</b> (Psalms 109:22); the evil inclination has been completely banished from his heart. The <b>evil inclination rules the wicked, as it is stated: “Transgression speaks to the wicked, there is no fear of God before his eyes”</b> (Psalms 36:2). <b>Middling people are ruled by both</b> the good and evil inclinations, <b>as it is stated: “Because He stands at the right hand of the needy, to save him from them that rule his soul”</b> (Psalms 109:31).

### Part 3
<b>Rabba said:</b> People <b>like us</b> are <b>middling. Abaye,</b> his student and nephew, <b>said to him:</b> If <b>the Master</b> claims that he is merely middling, he <b>does not leave</b> room for <b>any creature to live.</b> If a person like you is middling, what of the rest of us?

### Part 4
<b>And Rava said: The world was created only for</b> the sake of <b>the full-fledged wicked or the full-fledged righteous;</b> others do not live complete lives in either world. <b>Rava said: One should know of himself whether or not he is completely righteous,</b> as if he is not completely righteous, he knows that his life will be a life of suffering. <b>Rav said: The world was only created for</b> the wicked <b>Ahab ben Omri and for Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa.</b> The Gemara explains: For <b>Ahab ben Omri, this world</b> was created, as he has no place in the World-to-Come, <b>and</b> for <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, the World-to-Come</b> was created.

### Part 5
We learned in our mishna the explanation of the verse: <b>“And you shall love the Lord your God</b> with all your heart and all your soul and all your might” (Deuteronomy 6:5). This was elaborated upon when <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: If it is stated: “With all your soul,” why does it state: “With all your might”?</b> Conversely, <b>if it stated: “With all your might,” why does it state: “With all your soul”? Rather,</b> this means that <b>if one’s body is dearer to him than his property, therefore it is stated: “With all your soul”;</b> one must give his soul in sanctification of God. <b>And if one’s money is dearer to him than his body, therefore it is stated: “With all your might”;</b> with all your assets. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: “With all your soul”</b> means: <b>Even if</b> God <b>takes your soul.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara relates at length how Rabbi Akiva fulfilled these directives. <b>The Sages taught: One time,</b> after the bar Kokheva rebellion, <b>the evil empire</b> of Rome <b>decreed that Israel may not engage in</b> the study and practice of <b>Torah. Pappos ben Yehuda came and found Rabbi Akiva, who was convening assemblies in public and engaging in Torah</b> study. Pappos <b>said to him: Akiva, are you not afraid of the empire?</b>

### Part 7
Rabbi Akiva <b>answered him: I will relate a parable. To what can this be compared?</b> It is like <b>a fox walking along a riverbank when he sees fish gathering</b> and fleeing <b>from place to place.</b> <br>The fox <b>said to them: From what are you fleeing?</b> <br><b>They said to him:</b> We are fleeing <b>from the nets that people cast upon us.</b> <br><b>He said to them: Do you wish to come up onto dry land, and we will reside together just as my ancestors resided with your ancestors?</b> <br>The fish <b>said to him: You are the one of whom they say, he is the cleverest of animals? You are not clever; you are a fool. If we are afraid in</b> the water, <b>our</b> natural <b>habitat</b> which gives us <b>life,</b> then <b>in a habitat</b> that causes our <b>death, all the more so.</b> <br>The moral is: <b>So too, we</b> Jews, <b>now that we sit and engage in Torah</b> study, <b>about which it is written: “For that is your life, and the length of your days”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:20), we fear the empire <b>to this extent; if we proceed to</b> sit <b>idle from its</b> study, as its abandonment is the habitat that causes our death, <b>all the more so</b> will we fear the empire.

### Part 8
The Sages <b>said: Not a few days passed until they seized Rabbi Akiva and incarcerated him in prison, and seized Pappos ben Yehuda and incarcerated him alongside him.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: Pappos, who brought you here?</b> Pappos <b>replied: Happy are you, Rabbi Akiva, for you were arrested on</b> the charge of engaging in <b>Torah</b> study. <b>Woe unto Pappos who was seized on</b> the charge of engaging in <b>idle matters.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>When they took Rabbi Akiva out to be executed, it was time for the recitation of <i>Shema</i>. And they were raking his flesh with iron combs, and he was</b> reciting <i>Shema</i>, thereby <b>accepting upon himself the yoke of Heaven. His students said to him: Our teacher, even now,</b> as you suffer, you recite <i>Shema</i>? <b>He said to them: All my days I have been troubled by the verse: With all your soul,</b> meaning: <b>Even if God takes your soul. I said</b> to myself: <b>When will the</b> opportunity <b>be afforded me to fulfill this</b> verse? <b>Now that it has been afforded me, shall I not fulfill it? He prolonged</b> his uttering of the word: <b>One, until his soul left</b> his body as he uttered his final word: <b>One. A voice descended</b> from heaven <b>and said: Happy are you, Rabbi Akiva, that your soul left</b> your body <b>as</b> you uttered: <b>One.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The ministering angels said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: This is Torah and this its reward?</b> As it is stated: <b>“From death, by Your hand, O Lord, from death</b> of the world” (Psalms 17:14); Your hand, God, kills and does not save. God <b>said</b> the end of the verse <b>to</b> the ministering angels: <b>“Whose portion is in this life.”</b> And then <b>a Divine Voice emerged and said: Happy are you, Rabbi Akiva, as you are destined for life in the World-to-Come,</b> as your portion is already in eternal life.

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna that <b>one may not act irreverently opposite the Eastern Gate, which is aligned with the Holy of Holies.</b> Limiting this <i>halakha</i>, <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: They only said</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to irreverent behavior <b>from</b> Mount <b>Scopus [<i>Tzofim</i>] and within, and</b> specifically areas from where <b>one can see</b> the Temple. <b>It is also stated: Rabbi Abba, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, said: Rabbi Yoḥanan said the following: They only said</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to Mount <b>Scopus and within,</b> when <b>one can see, and when there is no fence</b> obstructing his view, <b>and when the Divine Presence is resting</b> there, i.e., when the Temple is standing.

### Part 12
In this context, <b>the Sages taught: One who defecates in Judea should not defecate</b> when facing <b>east and west,</b> for then he is facing Jerusalem; <b>rather</b> he should do so <b>facing north and south. But in the Galilee</b> which is north of Jerusalem, <b>one should only defecate</b> facing <b>east and west. Rabbi Yosei permits</b> doing so, <b>as Rabbi Yosei was wont to say: They only prohibited</b> doing so when <b>one can see</b> the Temple, <b>where there is no fence, and when the Divine Presence is resting</b> there. <b>And the Rabbis prohibit</b> doing so.

### Part 13
The Gemara argues: But the opinion of the <b>Rabbis,</b> who prohibit this, <b>is</b> identical to that of the <b>first</b> anonymous <b><i>tanna,</i></b> who also prohibits doing so. The Gemara replies: The practical difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to <b>the sides,</b> i.e., a place in Judea that is not directly east or west of Jerusalem, or a place in the Galilee that is not directly north of Jerusalem. According to the first <i>tanna</i>, it is prohibited; according to the Rabbis, it is permitted.

### Part 14
<b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who defecates in Judea should not defecate</b> when facing <b>east and west; rather,</b> he should only do so facing <b>north and south. And in the Galilee,</b> defecating while facing <b>north and south is prohibited,</b> while <b>east and west is permitted. And Rabbi Yosei permitted</b> doing so, <b>as Rabbi Yosei was wont to say: They only prohibited</b> doing so when <b>one can see</b> the Temple. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: When the Temple is standing, it is prohibited,</b> but <b>when the Temple is not standing, it is permitted.</b> The Gemara adds that <b>Rabbi Akiva prohibits</b> defecating <b>anywhere</b> while facing east and west.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges this: <b>Rabbi Akiva’s</b> position <b>is identical to</b> that of <b>the first,</b> anonymous <b><i>tanna</i>,</b> who also prohibits doing so. The Gemara responds: The practical difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to places <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael<b>,</b> as according to Rabbi Akiva, even outside of Eretz Yisrael, defecating while facing east and west is prohibited.

### Part 16
The Gemara relates that in <b>Rabba’s</b> bathroom, <b>the bricks were placed east and west</b> in order to ensure that he would defecate facing north and south. <b>Abaye went</b> and <b>placed them north and south,</b> to test if Rabba was particular about their direction or if they had simply been placed east and west incidentally. <b>Rabba entered</b> and <b>fixed them. He said: Who is the one that is upsetting me? I hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> who <b>said: It is prohibited everywhere.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC