
### Part 1
<b>One who enters a bathroom says</b> to the angels who accompany him at all times: <br><b>Be honored, honorable holy ones, servants of</b> the One <b>on High,</b> <br><b>give honor to the God of Israel,</b> <br><b>leave me until I enter and do my will and come</b> back <b>to you.</b> <br><b>Abaye said: A person should not say this, lest they abandon him and go. Rather he should say:</b> <br><b>Guard me, guard me,</b> <br><b>help me, help me,</b> <br><b>support me, support me,</b> <br><b>wait for me, wait for me until I enter and come out, as this is the way of man.</b> <br><b>Upon exiting, one says:</b> <br><b>Blessed…Who formed man in wisdom,</b> <br><b>and created in him many orifices and cavities.</b> <br><b>It is revealed and known before the throne of Your glory</b> <br><b>that were one of them to be ruptured or blocked, it would be impossible to survive and stand before You.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: With <b>what</b> should one <b>conclude</b> this blessing? <b>Rav said:</b> One should conclude: Blessed…<b>Healer of the sick. Shmuel said: Abba,</b> Rav, <b>has rendered everyone sick. Rather,</b> one should say: <b>Healer of all flesh. Rav Sheshet said:</b> One should conclude: <b>Who performs wondrous deeds. Rav Pappa said: Therefore, let us say them both: Healer of all flesh, Who performs wondrous deeds.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara proceeds to cite additional blessings recited as part of one’s daily routine. <b>One who enters to sleep on his bed recites</b> <i>Shema</i> in his bed <b>from <i>Shema Yisrael</i> to <i>VeHaya Im Shamoa</i>. Then he recites:</b> <br><b>Blessed…Who makes the bands of sleep fall upon my eyes and slumber upon my eyelids,</b> <br><b>and illuminates the pupil of the eye.</b> <br><b>May it be Your will, O Lord my God,</b> <br><b>that You make me lie down in peace and give me my portion in Your Torah,</b> <br><b>accustom me to mitzvot and do not accustom me to transgression,</b> <br><b>lead me not into error, nor into iniquity, nor into temptation nor into disgrace.</b> <br><b>May the good inclination have dominion over me</b> <br><b>and may the evil inclination not have dominion over me.</b> <br><b>Save me from an evil mishap and evil diseases.</b> <br><b>Let neither bad dreams nor troubling thoughts disturb me.</b> <br><b>May my bed be flawless before You,</b> that my progeny should not be flawed. <br><b>Enlighten my eyes</b> in the morning <b>lest I sleep</b> the sleep of <b>death,</b> never to awaken. <br><b>Blessed are You, O Lord, Who gives light to the whole world in His glory.</b>

### Part 4
<b>When one awakens, he recites:</b> <br><b>My God, the soul You have placed within me is pure.</b> <br><b>You formed it within me,</b> <br><b>You breathed it into me,</b> <br><b>and You guard it while it is within me.</b> <br><b>One day You will take it from me and restore it within me in the time to come.</b> <br><b>As long as the soul is within me, I thank You,</b> <br><b>O Lord my God and God of my ancestors, Master of all worlds, Lord of all souls.</b> <br><b>Blessed are You, O Lord, who restores souls to lifeless bodies.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Upon hearing the sound of the rooster, one should recite: Blessed…Who gave the heart [<i>sekhvi</i>] understanding to distinguish between day and night.</b> <br><b>Upon opening his eyes, one should recite: Blessed…Who gives sight to the blind.</b> <br><b>Upon sitting up straight, one should recite: Blessed…Who sets captives free.</b> <br><b>Upon dressing, one should recite: Blessed…Who clothes the naked,</b> as they would sleep unclothed. <br><b>Upon standing up straight, one should recite: Blessed…Who raises those bowed down.</b> <br><b>Upon descending</b> from one’s bed <b>to the ground, one should recite: Blessed…Who spreads the earth above the waters,</b> in thanksgiving for the creation of solid ground upon which to walk. <br><b>Upon walking, one should recite: Blessed…Who makes firm the steps of man.</b> <br><b>Upon putting on his shoes, one should recite: Blessed…Who has provided me with all I need,</b> as shoes are a basic necessity. <br><b>Upon putting on his belt, one should recite: Blessed…Who girds Israel with strength.</b> <br><b>Upon spreading a shawl upon his head, one should recite: Blessed…Who crowns Israel with glory.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Upon wrapping himself in ritual fringes, one should recite: Blessed…Who has made us holy through His commandments and has commanded us to wrap ourselves in</b> a garment with <b>ritual fringes.</b> <br><b>Upon donning his phylacteries on his arm, one should recite: Blessed…Who has made us holy through His commandments and has commanded us to don phylacteries.</b> <br>Upon donning phylacteries <b>on his head one should recite: Blessed…Who has made us holy through His commandments and has commanded us with regard to the mitzva of phylacteries.</b> <br><b>Upon</b> ritually <b>washing his hands: Blessed…Who has made us holy through His commandments and has commanded us with regard to the washing of the hands.</b> <br><b>Upon washing his face, one recites: Blessed…Who removes the bands of sleep from my eyes and slumber from my eyelids.</b> <br><b>And may it be Your will, O Lord my God, to accustom me in Your Torah,</b> <br><b>attach me to Your mitzvot, and lead me not into transgression,</b> <br><b>nor into error, nor into iniquity, nor into temptation nor into disgrace.</b> <br><b>Bend my</b> evil <b>inclination to be subservient to You,</b> <br><b>and distance me from an evil person and an evil acquaintance.</b> <br><b>Help me attach myself to the good inclination and to a good friend in Your world.</b> <br><b>Grant me, today and every day, grace, loving-kindness, and compassion in Your eyes and the eyes of all who see me,</b> <br><b>and bestow loving-kindness upon me.</b> <br><b>Blessed are You, O Lord, Who bestows loving-kindness on His people, Israel.</b>

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna: <b>One is obligated to recite a blessing</b> for the bad that befalls him just as he recites a blessing for the good that befalls him. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does it mean: <b>One is obligated to recite a blessing for the bad just as for the good? If we say</b> this means that <b>just as one recites a blessing for a positive event</b> with the formula: <b>Who is good and does good, so too one recites a blessing for a calamity</b> with the formula: <b>Who is good and does good, didn’t we learn</b> in our mishna that <b>over good tidings one recites: Who is good and does good,</b> while <b>over bad tidings one recites: Blessed…the true Judge?</b> Rather, <b>Rava said:</b> The mishna’s statement <b>was only necessary</b> to instruct us <b>to accept</b> bad tidings <b>with</b> the same <b>joy</b> with which we accept good tidings, not to instruct with regard to which blessing to recite.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Aḥa said in the name of Rabbi Levi: What</b> is the <b>verse</b> that alludes to this? <b>“I will sing of loving-kindness and justice; unto You, O Lord, will I sing praises”</b> (Psalms 101:1). Rav Aḥa explains: <b>If</b> it is <b>loving-kindness, I will sing, and if</b> it is <b>justice, I will sing.</b> I will thank God in song for the bad just as for the good.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said:</b> The proof is <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“In God, I will praise His word; in the Lord, I will praise His word”</b> (Psalms 56:11). The Gemara explains that <b>In God, I will praise His word; that is</b> the revelation of God’s <b>attribute of benevolence,</b> while: <b>In the Lord, I will praise His word; that is the attribute of suffering;</b> even if God brings suffering to bear upon me, I will still praise Him.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Tanḥum said:</b> The proof is <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“I will lift up the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord”</b> (Psalms 116:13), and: <b>“I found trouble and sorrow, but I called upon the name of the Lord”</b> (Psalms 116:3–4).

### Part 11
<b>And the Rabbis said:</b> The proof is <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord”</b> (Job 1:21).

### Part 12
<b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir said; and so it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in the name of Rabbi Akiva: One must always accustom oneself to say: Everything that God does, He does for the best.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara relates: <b>Like this</b> incident, <b>when Rabbi Akiva was walking along the road and came to a certain city, he inquired about lodging and they did not give him</b> any. <b>He said: Everything that God does, He does for the best. He went and slept in a field, and he had with him a rooster, a donkey and a candle. A</b> gust of <b>wind came and extinguished the candle; a cat came and ate the rooster; and a lion came and ate the donkey. He said: Everything that God does, He does for the best. That night, an army came and took the city into captivity.</b> It turned out that Rabbi Akiva alone, who was not in the city and had no lit candle, noisy rooster or donkey to give away his location, was saved. <b>He said to them: Didn’t I tell you? Everything that God does,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC