
### Part 1
<b>atop a chest is like a vessel within a vessel.</b> On a similar note, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> One who wishes to engage in marital relations in a room in which there is <b>a Torah scroll, must erect a partition ten</b> handbreadths high. The Gemara relates: <b>Mar Zutra happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rav Ashi</b> and <b>he saw</b> that <b>in the</b> bed <b>chamber of</b> his son <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi, there was a Torah scroll, and a partition of ten</b> handbreadths <b>had been erected for it. He said to him: In accordance with whose</b> opinion did you do this? Is it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi? Say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said</b> this only as a makeshift solution in exigent situations, when <b>he has no other room</b> in which to place it, but <b>don’t</b> you, <b>Master, have another room</b> where you could place the Torah scroll? <b>He said to him:</b> Indeed, <b>that</b> did <b>not</b> enter <b>my mind.</b>

### Part 2
We learned in the mishna: <b>And, how far must one distance himself from urine and from feces</b> in order to recite <i>Shema</i>? <b>Four cubits. Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Seḥora said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said: They only taught</b> that it is sufficient to distance oneself four cubits when the feces are <b>behind him, but</b> if they are <b>before him he must distance himself</b> to the point that it is <b>no longer within his range of vision;</b> and the <i>halakha</i> <b>is the same</b> for <b>prayer.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara challenges this: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rafram bar Pappa say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: One may stand opposite a bathroom and pray.</b> The Gemara resolves this contradiction: <b>With what are we dealing here? With a bathroom that has no feces,</b> and therefore there is no need to distance himself to that extent.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks again: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Yosef bar Ḥanina say: The bathroom to which</b> the Sages <b>referred</b> in all of the <i>halakhot</i> of distancing oneself was <b>even</b> one <b>in which there were no feces, and the bathhouse to which</b> the Sages <b>referred</b> in all of the <i>halakhot</i> of uttering sacred matters, was <b>even</b> one <b>in which there was no</b> naked <b>person. Rather, with what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing <b>with a new</b> structure, built as a bathroom but not yet used for that purpose.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t this</b> already <b>raised as a dilemma</b> by <b>Ravina: One who designated</b> the structure for use <b>as a bathroom, what is its</b> legal status? Is <b>designation</b> effective <b>or is designation not</b> effective? The Gemara replies: <b>When Ravina raised the dilemma,</b> it was whether or not one may <b>stand and pray inside it, but</b> he had <b>no</b> dilemma whether or <b>not one may pray opposite it.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rava said: These Persian bathrooms, even though they contain feces, they are considered as sealed,</b> as they are constructed on an incline so the feces will roll out of the bathroom underground.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Continuing the earlier discussion of the <i>halakhot</i> of immersion for Torah study and prayer for one who experienced a seminal emission, the mishna discusses a case where individuals who were already impure with a severe form of ritual impurity are exposed to the impurity of a seminal emission as well. They are required to immerse themselves and purify themselves of the impurity of the seminal emission even though they remain impure due to the more severe impurity. Consequently, even a <b><i>zav</i>,</b> whose impurity lasts at least seven days, <b>who experienced a seminal emission,</b> for which, were he not a <i>zav</i>, he would be impure for only one day; <b>a menstruating woman who discharged semen,</b> despite the fact that she is already impure with a severe impurity unaffected by her immersion; <b>and</b> a woman <b>who engaged in conjugal relations</b> with her husband <b>and</b> later <b>saw menstrual blood,</b> all <b>require immersion. And Rabbi Yehuda exempts</b> them from immersion.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the students of the yeshiva: <b>One who experienced a seminal emission</b> and was therefore required to immerse himself, who later <b>saw a discharge</b> that rendered him a <b><i>zav</i>; according to Rabbi Yehuda, what is his legal status?</b> The Gemara explains the sides of the dilemma: <b>When,</b> in our mishna, <b>Rabbi Yehuda exempted a <i>zav</i> who saw a seminal emission</b> from immersion, that <b>was because from the outset he was not fit for immersion,</b> as the immersion would not be effective in purifying him from the impurity of a <i>zav</i>; <b>however, one who experienced a seminal emission,</b> who later <b>saw a discharge</b> that rendered him a <b><i>zav</i>,</b> who <b>was fit for immersion</b> and only later became impure with the severe impurity of a <i>zav</i>, would Rabbi Yehuda <b>require</b> immersion? <b>Or perhaps there is no difference</b> and he is exempt from immersion in both cases?

### Part 9
In order to resolve this dilemma, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> the last case of the mishna: A woman <b>who engaged in conjugal relations</b> with her husband <b>and</b> later <b>saw menstrual blood requires immersion. And Rabbi Yehuda exempts</b> them from immersion. <b>Isn’t the</b> woman <b>who engaged in conjugal relations</b> with her husband <b>and</b> later <b>saw menstrual blood like one who experienced a seminal emission,</b> who later <b>saw a discharge</b> that rendered him a <b><i>zav</i>,</b> as in both cases there is a less severe ritual impurity followed by a more severe impurity; <b>and</b> nevertheless, <b>Rabbi Yehuda exempts. Conclude from this</b> that Rabbi Yehuda does not distinguish between the cases. And indeed, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya explicitly taught: One who experienced a seminal emission</b> who later <b>saw a discharge</b> that rendered him a <b><i>zav</i> requires immersion, and Rabbi Yehuda exempts.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC