
### Part 1
<b>as if it was appended</b> onto it. The Gemara explains: <b>And</b> the fact <b>that</b> Ursa Major <b>follows</b> Pleiades, it is as if Ursa Major <b>is saying</b> to Pleiades: <b>Give me</b> back <b>my children,</b> my two stars. As it is related: <b>When the Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to bring a flood into the world, He took two stars from Pleiades and brought the flood upon the world. And</b> afterward, <b>when He wished to fill</b> the void, <b>He took two stars from Ursa Major and filled</b> the void with them. Consequently, the constellation of Ursa Major attempts to persuade Pleiades, seeking to get its stars back.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And return it,</b> why did the Holy One, Blessed be He, not restore the original two stars to Pleiades? The Gemara answers: <b>A pit cannot be filled by its own earth;</b> when a pit is excavated, the earth that was excavated from it is insufficient to refill it. <b>Alternatively,</b> one could say that <b>a prosecutor cannot become an advocate;</b> since these stars caused the flood it is not appropriate that they facilitate the end of the flood.

### Part 3
The Gemara argues: <b>Then</b> God should have <b>created two other</b> new <b>stars</b> for Pleiades. The Gemara responds: <b>“There is nothing new under the sun”</b> (Ecclesiastes 1:9). <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> In the <b>future, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will restore</b> those same stars <b>to</b> Ursa Major, <b>as it is stated: “Or can you guide [<i>tanḥem</i>] Ursa</b> Major <b>with her sons?”</b> (Job 38:32), which is interpreted homiletically in the sense of consolation [<i>tanḥumim</i>] apparently due to the restoration of those stars.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> we learned in the mishna that <b>over <i>zeva’ot</i></b> one recites the blessing: Whose strength and power fill the world. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are <b><i>zeva’ot</i>? Rav Ketina said: An earthquake.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Ketina was once walking along the road when he came to the entrance of the house of a necromancer and an earthquake rumbled. He said: Does this necromancer know what is this earthquake?</b> The necromancer <b>raised his voice</b> and said: <b>Ketina, Ketina, why would I not know?</b> Certainly this earthquake occurred because <b>when the Holy One, Blessed be He, remembers His children who are suffering among the nations of the world, He sheds two tears into the great sea. The sound</b> of their reverberation <b>is heard from one end of the earth to the other. And that is an earthquake.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ketina said: The necromancer is a liar and his statements are lies. If so, it would necessitate an earthquake</b> followed by another <b>earthquake,</b> one for each tear. The Gemara remarks: <b>That is not so,</b> as it indeed <b>causes an earthquake</b> followed by another <b>earthquake; and the fact</b> that Rav Ketina <b>did not admit that</b> the necromancer was correct was <b>so that everyone would not mistakenly follow him.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ketina also stated his own</b> explanation for the earthquake: Because God <b>claps His hands</b> together in anger, <b>as it is stated: “I will also smite My hands together and I will satisfy My fury;</b> I, the Lord, have spoken it” (Ezekiel 21:22). <b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> The earthquake is caused because God <b>sighs</b> over the dire straits in which Israel finds itself, <b>as it is stated:</b> “Thus shall My anger spend itself, <b>and I will satisfy My fury upon them, and I will be eased”</b> (Ezekiel 5:13). <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> An earthquake is caused when God <b>kicks the firmament,</b> causing a rumbling, <b>as it is stated:</b> “The Lord roars from on high, from His holy dwelling He makes His voice heard. He roars mightily over His dwelling place, <b>He cries out like those who tread grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth”</b> (Jeremiah 25:30). <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> An earthquake is caused when God <b>forces His feet beneath the throne of glory</b> and the world quakes, <b>as it is stated: “The heaven is My throne, and the earth is My footstool”</b> (Isaiah 66:1).

### Part 7
We <b>also</b> learned in the mishna that <b>over thunder</b> one recites: Whose strength and power fill the world. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> causes <b>thunder? Shmuel said:</b> When the <b>clouds</b> located <b>in the curvature</b> of the firmament collide with the firmament itself, they produce this sound, <b>as it is stated: “The voice of Your thunder was in the whirlwind; the lightning lighted up the world; the earth trembled and shook”</b> (Psalms 77:19). <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> Thunder is the sound of <b>clouds pouring water into one another, as it is stated: “At the sound of His giving a multitude of waters in the heavens”</b> (Jeremiah 10:13). <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> Thunder is caused by <b>a powerful lightning bolt that flashes in the cloud and shatters the hailstones. Rav Ashi said:</b> Because the <b>clouds are hollow, and</b> when <b>the wind comes and blows across their mouths,</b> it sounds like <b>wind blowing in the mouth of a jug.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And it stands to reason in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov; as lightning flashes, the clouds rumble, and the rain comes.</b>

### Part 8
We <b>also</b> learned in the mishna <b>that over wind</b> one recites the blessing: Whose strength and power fill the world. The Gemara asks: <b>What are</b> these <b>winds? Abaye said:</b> These are <b>gale force winds. Abaye said: We learned</b> through tradition <b>that there are no gale force winds at night.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Don’t we see that there are</b> gale force winds at night? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> gale force wind that blows at night does not begin blowing at night; rather, it <b>begins</b> blowing <b>during the day. And Abaye said: We learned</b> through tradition <b>that a gale force wind does not last two hours, to fulfill that which is stated: “Trouble shall not rise up a second time”</b> (Nahum 1:9). The Gemara asks: <b>Don’t we see that it does last</b> longer than two hours? The Gemara answers: Actually, it does not last longer than two hours. The fact that we sense that it does last longer is due to cases where it does not blow uninterruptedly, but <b>it</b> briefly <b>stops in between.</b>

### Part 9
We <b>also</b> learned in the mishna that <b>over lightning one recites: Blessed…Whose strength and power fill the world.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> this <b>lightning? Rava said:</b> A <b>bright light. And Rava said: A single</b> bolt of <b>lightning, white lightning, green lightning, clouds that rise in the western corner and come from the southern corner, and two clouds that rise with one facing the other are all</b> signs of <b>trouble.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What practical difference</b> is there in the knowledge that they are signs of trouble? The Gemara answers: So that we may <b>pray for God’s mercy,</b> that they cause us no harm. The Gemara remarks that <b>this only applies</b> when these phenomena appear <b>at night. In the morning, however, they are insignificant.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said: Morning clouds</b> dissipate immediately so they <b>have no substance, as it is written: “For your goodness is as a morning cloud,</b> and as the dew that early passes away” (Hosea 6:4). With regard to this, <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: But</b> don’t <b>people say</b> the maxim: <b>If there is rain when people open their doors</b> in the morning, <b>donkey-driver, fold your sack and go to sleep,</b> as rain will continue to fall all day. Apparently morning clouds indicate that there will be rain all day. The Gemara responds: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this,</b> that suggests that there will be considerable rain, refers to a case where the sky is <b>covered with thick clouds,</b> while <b>this</b> opinion, where Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said that morning clouds have no substance and will not produce much rain, refers to a case where the sky is <b>covered with flimsy clouds</b> which will certainly pass.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Alexandri said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Thunder was created only</b> to impose fear and <b>straighten the crookedness of the heart, as it is stated: “And God has so made it, that men should fear before Him”</b> (Ecclesiastes 3:14). <b>And Rabbi Alexandri said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: One who sees a rainbow in a cloud must fall upon his face, as it is stated: “As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud</b> in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord. <b>And when I saw it, I fell upon my face”</b> (Ezekiel 1:28). The colors of the rainbow symbolize the glory of God and one may not stare at them. Yet, <b>in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they would curse</b> one who fell upon his face when seeing a rainbow <b>because it appears as one who is bowing to the rainbow.</b> As far as <b>blessing</b> is concerned, <b>however,</b> all agree that <b>one certainly recites a blessing. What</b> blessing <b>does one recite? Blessed…Who remembers the covenant</b> with Noah. <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i></b> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says</b> that the blessing is: Blessed…<b>Who is faithful to His covenant and fulfills His word. Rav Pappa said: Therefore we will say them both</b> combined: <b>Blessed…Who remembers the covenant and is faithful to His covenant and fulfills His word.</b>

### Part 13
We learned in the mishna that <b>over mountains and hills</b> one recites: Blessed…Author of creation. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that all those that we mentioned until now,</b> such as lightning, <b>are not acts of creation?</b> Among God’s praise for creation of the world and forming the mountains, <b>is it not</b> also <b>written: “He makes lightning for the rain”</b> (Psalms 135:7)? <b>Abaye said: Combine</b> the two statements and <b>teach that</b> in all the cases in our mishna, one recites these two blessings. <b>Rava said: There,</b> over lightning and thunder, <b>one recites two</b> blessings: <b>Blessed…Whose power fills the world, and: Author of creation. Here,</b> however, over mountains and hills, <b>one</b> recites the blessing: <b>Author of creation,</b> but <b>need not</b> recite: <b>Whose power fills the world.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: One who sees the firmament in its purity recites: Blessed…Author of creation.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>When</b> does the firmament appear in its purity? <b>Abaye said: When rain</b> falls <b>all night and in the morning a northern wind blows, exposing the heavens.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> in this they <b>disagree with Rafram bar Pappa</b> who said that <b>Rav Ḥisda said, as Rafram bar Pappa said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Since the day the Temple was destroyed the firmament has not been seen in its purity, as it is said: “I clothe the heavens with blackness and I make sackcloth their covering”</b> (Isaiah 50:3).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC