
### Part 1
<b>The Sages taught: One who sees the houses of Israel inhabited</b> and tranquil <b>recites: Blessed…Who establishes the border of the widow.</b> One who sees them <b>in ruins he recites: Blessed…the true Judge.</b> One who sees <b>the houses of the nations of the world inhabited recites: “The Lord will destroy the house of the proud,</b> but He will establish the border of the widow” (Proverbs 15:25). <b>And</b> if he sees them <b>in ruins he recites: “God of vengeance, Lord, God of vengeance, shine forth”</b> (Psalms 94:1).

### Part 2
The Gemara relates that <b>Ulla and Rav Ḥisda were once walking along the road when they came upon the doorway of the house of Rav Ḥana bar Ḥanilai. Rav Ḥisda groaned and sighed. Ulla asked him: Why are you sighing? Didn’t Rav say: Sighing breaks half of one’s body? As it is stated: “Sigh, therefore, you son of man; with the breaking of your loins”</b> (Ezekiel 21:11); sighing breaks a person down to his loins. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that sighing breaks <b>even</b> one’s <b>entire body, as it is stated: “And it shall be, when they say unto you: Why are you sighing? That you shall say: Because of the tidings, for it comes; and every heart shall melt,</b> and all hands shall be slack, and every spirit shall be faint, and all knees shall drip with water” (Ezekiel 21:12).

### Part 3
Rav Ḥisda <b>said to</b> Ulla: <b>How can I not sigh?</b> We see <b>this house where there were sixty cooks during the day and sixty cooks at night who would cook for anyone in need, and</b> Rav Ḥana <b>never removed his hand from his pocket</b> because he <b>thought: Perhaps a well-born poor person</b> might <b>come and</b> in the time that passed <b>until he put his hand in his pocket</b> to give him charity, the poor person <b>would be embarrassed. Moreover,</b> that house had <b>four doors open in</b> all <b>four directions, and anyone who entered hungry left satiated. And they would scatter wheat and barley outside during years of drought</b> so that <b>anyone who was embarrassed to take</b> the grain <b>during the day could come and take</b> it <b>at night. Now</b> that the house <b>has fallen in ruins,</b> how can <b>I not sigh?</b>

### Part 4
Ulla <b>said to</b> Rav Ḥisda: You have nothing about which to sigh, as <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said as follows: From the day that the Temple was destroyed a decree was issued upon the houses of the righteous that they would be destroyed, as it is stated: “In mine ears said the Lord of hosts: Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant”</b> (Isaiah 5:9). <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In the <b>future,</b> in the end of days, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, will restore them to their</b> original locations and their <b>inhabited state, as it is stated: “A Song of Ascents of David. They who trust in the Lord are as Mount Zion,</b> which cannot be moved but abides forever” (Psalms 125:1). From this verse one may infer that <b>just as in the future the Holy One, Blessed be He, will restore Mount Zion to its inhabited state, so too, in the future the Holy One, Blessed be He, will restore the houses of the righteous to their inhabited state,</b> so you have no reason to sigh. <b>Seeing that he was still not satisfied,</b> Ulla <b>said to him: It is enough for a servant to be like his master.</b> Since God leaves His home, the Holy Temple, in ruins, one should not be distraught over the destruction of the houses of the righteous.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who sees graves of Israel recites:</b> <br><b>Blessed…Who formed you in judgment,</b><br><b>and Who nourished you in judgment,</b><br><b>and Who sustained you in judgment,</b><br><b>and collected</b> your soul <b>in judgment,</b><br><b>and in the future will raise you</b> from the dead <b>in judgment.</b><br>And <b>Mar, son of Ravina, concludes</b> the formula of this blessing <b>in the name of Rav Naḥman:</b><br><b>And Who knows the number of you all,</b><br><b>and Who in the future will restore you to life and sustain you.</b><br><b>Blessed…Who revives the dead.</b><br>One who sees <b>graves of gentiles recites: “Your mother shall be sore ashamed,</b> she who bore you shall be confounded; behold, the hindermost of the nations shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert” (Jeremiah 50:12).

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: One who sees his friend after thirty days</b> have passed since last seeing him <b>recites: Blessed…Who has given us life, sustained us and brought us to this time.</b> One who sees his friend <b>after twelve months recites: Blessed…Who revives the dead.</b> As <b>Rav said: A dead person is only forgotten from the heart after twelve months</b> have elapsed, <b>as it is stated: “I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind; I am like a lost vessel”</b> (Psalms 31:13), and with regard to the laws of lost objects, it is human nature to despair of recovering a lost object after twelve months (see <i>Bava Metzia</i> 28a).

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, were once walking along the road when they met Rav Ḥanina the son of Rav Ika. They said to him: When we saw you we recited two blessings over</b> meeting <b>you: Blessed…Who has shared of His wisdom to those who revere Him,</b> and: <b>Who has given us life…</b>as they had not seen him in over a month. <b>He said to them: I too, once I saw you, considered you in my eyes as</b> equivalent to <b>six hundred thousand</b> of the <b>house of Israel, and I recited three blessings over you. I recited those two</b> that you recited, as well as: <b>Blessed…Who knows all secrets,</b> which is the blessing recited upon seeing six hundred thousand Israelites. <b>They said to him: Are you all that clever? They fixed their gaze upon him and he died.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara continues to discuss the obligation to recite a blessing over unusual phenomena. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: One who sees spotted people recites: Blessed…Who makes creatures different.</b> The Gemara <b>raises a challenge: One who saw a person with</b> unusually <b>black skin, a person with</b> unusually <b>red skin, a person with</b> unusually <b>white skin [<i>lavkan</i>], an</b> unusually <b>tall and thin person, a dwarf, or one with warts [<i>darnikos</i>]recites: Blessed…Who makes creatures different.</b> However, one who sees <b>an amputee, a blind person, a flat-headed person, a lame person, one afflicted with boils, or spotted people recites: Blessed…the true Judge,</b> not: Who makes creatures different.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This,</b> where Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says to recite: Who makes creatures different, refers to a case where the individual was spotted <b>from</b> when he was <b>in his mother’s womb,</b> since birth. While <b>this,</b> where one recites: The true Judge, refers to a case where the individual only became spotted <b>after he was born.</b> The Gemara remarks: The language of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise</b> as it draws a parallel to other cases, as <b>it taught</b> that a spotted person is <b>similar to an amputee,</b> which, in general, is a handicap incurred after birth. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from this.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught: One who sees an elephant, a monkey, or a vulture</b> (Rashi) <b>recites: Blessed…Who makes creatures different. One who saw beautiful</b> or otherwise outstanding <b>creatures</b> or <b>beautiful trees recites: Blessed…Who has such things in His world.</b>

### Part 11
We learned in the mishna that <b>over <i>zikin</i>,</b> one recites: Whose strength and power fill the world. The Gemara asks: <b>What are <i>zikin</i>? Shmuel said: A comet. Shmuel also said: The paths of the sky are as clear to me as the paths</b> of my city, <b>Neharde’a, except for comets, that I do not know what they are. And we learn</b> through tradition <b>that a comet does not pass</b> the <b>Orion</b> constellation, <b>and if it does pass Orion, the world will be destroyed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Don’t we see that</b> comets <b>pass</b> Orion? The Gemara rejects this: <b>The aura</b> of the comet <b>passes</b> Orion <b>and it appears as though</b> the comet itself <b>passes. Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said</b> a different answer: It is merely that <b><i>vilon</i>,</b> one of the firmaments, <b>rips and furls and the light of</b> the next <b>firmament is seen,</b> and this appears like a comet. <b>Rav Ashi said</b> another explanation: It is not a comet that passes Orion, but <b>a star that is uprooted from one side of Orion, and another</b> star, <b>from the other side</b> of Orion, <b>sees it and gets startled</b> and shudders, <b>and appears as if it is passing.</b>

### Part 12
On the subject of stars, the Gemara notes that <b>Shmuel raised a contradiction</b> between the implications of two verses with regard to constellations. On the one hand <b>it is written: “Who makes Ursa Major, Orion, and Pleiades,</b> and the chambers of the south” (Job 9:9); Orion precedes Pleiades. <b>And</b> on the other hand <b>it is written: “He Who makes Pleiades and Orion”</b> (Amos 5:8); Pleiades precedes Orion. <b>So how</b> is this reconciled? The Gemara replies: <b>Were it not for Orion’s heat, the universe could not exist because of the cold of Pleiades;</b> and conversely, <b>were it not for the cold of Pleiades, the universe could not exist because of the heat of Orion.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And we learned</b> a tradition that <b>if the tail of</b> the constellation <b>Scorpio</b> did <b>not</b> rest <b>in the River of Fire, anyone stung by a scorpion would not survive. And that is what the All-Merciful said to Job</b> of the relationship between heat and cold among the stars: <b>“Can you bind the chains of the Pleiades or loosen the bands of Orion?”</b> (Job 38:31); God alternates intensifying the power of different constellations in order to raise or lower the temperature.

### Part 14
With regard to Pleiades, the Gemara asks: <b>What is Pleiades [<i>Kima</i>]?</b> Why is it called by that name? <b>Shmuel said:</b> Because it is <b>approximately a hundred [<i>keme’a</i>] stars</b>, as that is the number of stars in that constellation; <b>some say that</b> they are <b>concentrated and some say that</b> they are <b>dispersed.</b>

### Part 15
With regard to the verse: “Who makes Ursa Major, Orion, and Pleiades” (Job 9:9), the Gemara asks: <b>What is Ursa Major [<i>Ash</i>]? Rav Yehuda said:</b> It is the star called <b><i>Yota</i>.</b> This name was unfamiliar as well, so the Gemara asks: <b>What is <i>Yota</i>?</b> There is disagreement; <b>some say</b> that <i>Yota</i> is the group of stars comprising the <b>tail of Aries, while others say</b> that <i>Yota</i> belongs to <b>the head of Taurus.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And it stands to reason in accordance with the</b> opinion of the <b>one who said</b> that <i>Yota</i> is the group of stars comprising the <b>tail of Aries, as it is written: “Or can you guide Ursa</b> Major <b>with her sons?”</b> (Job 38:32); <b>apparently it was incomplete and</b> the tail <b>appears</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC