
### Part 1
Continuing to discuss the <i>halakhot</i> of breaking bread, <b>Rav said:</b> One who broke bread, and before eating it, offered a piece to another, and said: <b>Take</b> it and <b>recite a blessing, take</b> it and <b>recite a blessing, need not recite the blessing</b> a second time, because that is considered to have been for the purpose of the blessing. If, however, he said: <b>Bring salt or bring relish, he must recite the blessing</b> a second time, as that is considered an interruption between the blessing and eating the bread. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even</b> if he said: <b>Bring salt</b> or <b>bring relish,</b> it is not considered an interruption <b>and he need not recite the blessing</b> a second time. Only if he said: <b>Mix</b> the food <b>for the oxen, mix</b> the food <b>for the oxen,</b> it is considered an interruption <b>and he is required to recite the blessing</b> a second time. <b>And Rav Sheshet said: Even</b> if he said: <b>Mix for the oxen, he need not recite a blessing</b> a second time, as that is also considered to be for the purpose of the blessing, <b>as Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: One is prohibited from eating before feeding his animals, as it is stated: “And I will give grass in your fields for your animals”</b> first <b>and</b> only <b>then: “And you shall eat and be satisfied”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:15). In the verse, preparation of food for one’s cattle precedes preparation of his own food. Consequently, it is considered part of the preparation for one’s own meal.

### Part 2
<b>Rava bar Shmuel said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: One who breaks</b> bread <b>is not permitted to break</b> it <b>until they bring salt or relish before each and every one</b> seated at the table. However, the Gemara relates that <b>Rava bar Shmuel</b> himself <b>happened</b> to come <b>to the House of the Exilarch. They brought him bread, which he immediately broke,</b> without waiting for them to bring salt or relish. <b>They said to him: Did the Master reconsider his halakhic</b> ruling? <b>He said to them:</b> Although poor quality bread requires salt in order to give the bread flavor, and therefore one must wait before breaking bread, <b>this</b> refined bread served in the House of the Exilarch needs no salt, and <b>does not require waiting.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Rava bar Shmuel said in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: Urine only completely</b> leaves the body if one urinates <b>seated,</b> as, otherwise, due to concern that drops of urine will drip onto his clothes, he attempts to conclude prematurely. <b>Rav Kahana said: Over loose soil</b> which absorbs the urine, one is not concerned that it will splash on him; therefore, <b>even when standing</b> the urine leaves his body. <b>And if there is no loose soil</b> there is another way to prevent the urine from splashing on his clothes while standing. <b>Stand on an elevated place and urinate down an inclined plane.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And Rava bar Shmuel said</b> the following advice <b>in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: After all eating, eat salt and after all drinking, drink water and you will not be harmed. That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>After all eating, eat salt and after all drinking, drink water and you will not be harmed. It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one ate any food and did not eat salt</b> afterward, or <b>if he drank any liquid and did not drink water</b> afterward, <b>during the day, he should be concerned about bad breath, and at night he should be concerned about diphtheria.</b>

### Part 5
On the topic of health, the Gemara cites that <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who inundates his food with water,</b> i.e., one who drinks a great deal of water, <b>will not come to suffer</b> from <b>intestinal illness.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> water? <b>Rav Ḥisda said: One jug [<i>kiton</i>] per loaf.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Mari said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who is accustomed</b> to eat <b>lentils once in thirty days prevents diphtheria from</b> afflicting <b>his house.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>However,</b> one should <b>not</b> eat lentils <b>every day. What is the reason? Because it is deleterious</b> in that it causes <b>bad breath.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And Rav Mari said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who is accustomed</b> to eat <b>mustard once in thirty days prevents illnesses from</b> afflicting <b>his house.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>However,</b> one should <b>not</b> eat mustard <b>every day. What is the reason? Because it is deleterious</b> in that it causes <b>weakness of the heart.</b>

### Part 8
Another health recommendation: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: One who is accustomed</b> to eat <b>small fish will not come to suffer</b> from <b>intestinal illness. Moreover,</b> eating <b>small fish causes one’s entire body to flourish, to grow, and to be healthy.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: One who is accustomed</b> to eat <b>black cumin,</b> a medicine for the heart, <b>will not come to suffer</b> from <b>heart pain. The Gemara raises an objection: Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Black cumin is one of sixty deadly drugs, and</b> therefore <b>one who sleeps to the east of its storage</b> area, where its odor wafts with the westerly wind, responsibility for <b>his blood is on his</b> own <b>head.</b> The Gemara responds: This is <b>not difficult, as this,</b> where Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said that black cumin is harmful, refers to <b>its odor,</b> whereas <b>this,</b> where Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said that it is beneficial for the heart, refers only to <b>its taste.</b> And the Gemara relates: <b>The mother</b> of <b>Rabbi Yirmeya would bake him bread and would stick</b> black cumin <b>to it</b> so its taste would be absorbed, <b>and she would peel it</b> off, so that its odor would not harm him.

### Part 10
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that one recites over herbs and leafy greens: <b>Who creates various kinds of herbs. Rabbi Zeira, and some say Rabbi Ḥinnana bar Pappa, said: The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. And Rabbi Zeira, and some say Rabbi Ḥinnana bar Pappa, said: What is the reason for Rabbi Yehuda’s</b> opinion? <b>The verse says: “Blessed is the Lord, day by day”</b> (Psalms 68:20). The question arises: <b>Is it so that one blesses Him by day and does not bless Him at night? Rather,</b> the verse comes <b>to tell you: Each and every day, give the Lord</b> the appropriate <b>blessings</b> for that day. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to the blessings recited over food, for <b>each and every type</b> of food, <b>give the</b> Lord the appropriate blessings for that food.

### Part 11
<b>And Rabbi Zeira, and some say Rabbi Ḥinnana bar Pappa, said: Come and see that the attribute of flesh and blood is unlike the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He. The attribute of flesh and blood is</b> that <b>an empty vessel holds</b> that which is placed within it, while <b>a full</b> vessel <b>does not hold</b> it. <b>The attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> however, <b>is not so,</b> as if God adds to a person who is <b>a full vessel</b> in terms of knowledge or good attributes, he will <b>hold</b> it; a person who is <b>an empty</b> vessel <b>will not hold</b> it. This is alluded to by the verse where <b>it is said: “And He said, if you will surely listen [<i>shamo’a tishma</i>]</b> to the voice of the Lord your God and do what is right in His eyes” (Exodus 15:26). This verse is interpreted homiletically: <b>If you listen [<i>shamo’a</i>]</b> in the present, <b>you will listen [<i>tishma</i>]</b> in the future as well; <b>and if not, you will not listen. Alternatively: If you listened [<i>shamo’a</i>] to the old,</b> you review what you already learned, then <b>you will listen [<i>tishma</i>] to the new</b> as well. But <b>if you turn your heart away, you will no longer be able to hear.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna discusses how, after the fact, a more general blessing exempts one from the obligation to recite a more specific one. <b>One who recited: Who creates fruit of the ground, over fruit of the tree, fulfilled</b> his obligation. One who recited: <b>Who creates fruit of the tree, over fruits of the earth, did not fulfill</b> his obligation. <b>And over all</b> food items, <b>one who recited: By whose word all things came to be, fulfilled</b> his obligation.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara begins by ascertaining: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> that holds that <b>the primary</b> factor in the growth <b>of a tree is the earth,</b> and therefore one may recite: Who creates fruit of the ground, over fruits of the tree fulfills his obligation? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: That</b> is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as we learned</b> in a mishna dealing with the <i>halakhot</i> of first fruits: If, after one picked the first fruits from his field, <b>the spring dried up and the tree</b> upon which the fruit grew <b>was chopped</b> down, <b>he brings</b> the first fruits to the Temple but <b>does not read</b> the accompanying praise. The tree or spring, which were the primary components of the growth of the fruit, no longer exist and he cannot recite the passage thanking God for “the good land.” <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: He brings</b> the first fruits <b>and reads</b> the accompanying praise, as the land is the primary factor in the growth of the tree, and the tree itself is merely an extension of the land. Even after the tree is felled, the land remains intact. Similarly, with regard to blessings, the <i>halakha</i> maintains that fruit of the tree is considered to be fruit of the ground, as well.

### Part 14
We learned in the mishna: One who recited: Who creates fruit of the tree, <b>over fruits of the earth,</b> did not fulfill his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>That is obvious,</b> as fruits of the earth do not fall under the rubric of trees. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> This ruling in the mishna <b>is only necessary according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who <b>said</b> in another context that <b>wheat is a type of tree, as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The tree from which Adam, the first</b> man, <b>ate, Rabbi Meir says: It was a vine, as nothing brings wailing</b> and trouble <b>upon man</b> even today <b>other than wine,</b> as <b>it is stated</b> with regard to Noah: <b>“And he drank from the wine and became drunk”</b> (Genesis 9:21). <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says: It was a fig</b> tree, <b>as with the object with which they were corrupted</b> and sinned <b>they were rehabilitated, as it is stated: “And they sewed together fig leaves</b> and made for themselves loincloths” (Genesis 3:7). They must have taken the leaves from the tree closest at hand, the Tree of Knowledge. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: It was wheat, as,</b> even today, <b>the child does not know how to call</b> his <b>father and mother until he tastes the taste of grain.</b>

### Part 15
Based on this, <b>it might have entered your mind to say, since Rabbi Yehuda said</b> that <b>wheat is a type of tree, one should recite over it: Who creates fruit of the tree.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>taught us</b> that with regard to blessings, the principle is different. <b>Where does one recite: Who creates fruit of the tree?</b> Only in a case <b>where, when you take the fruit, the branch remains and again produces</b> fruit.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC