
### Part 1
On a similar note, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who erred and did not recite the afternoon prayer on the eve of Shabbat, prays in</b> the evening prayer <b>two</b> <i>Amida</i> prayers <b>on Shabbat evening. One who erred and did not recite the afternoon prayer on Shabbat, recites two weekday</b> <i>Amida</i> prayers in the evening prayer <b>at the conclusion of Shabbat. He recites <i>havdala</i> [</b>the prayer of <b>distinction]</b> between the sanctity of Shabbat and the profanity of the week by reciting: You have graced us, etc., in the fourth blessing of the <i>Amida,</i> which is: Who graciously grants knowledge, <b>in the first</b> prayer, as it is the actual evening prayer, <b>but he does not recite <i>havdala</i> in the second</b> prayer, which is in place of the afternoon prayer. Moreover, <b>if he recited <i>havdala</i> in the second</b> prayer <b>and did not recite <i>havdala</i> in the first, the second prayer fulfilled his</b> obligation, the <b>first one did not fulfill his</b> obligation.

### Part 2
The Gemara comments: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>since he did not recite <i>havdala</i> in the first</b> prayer, he is <b>as one who did not pray and we require him to return</b> to the beginning of the prayer and repeat it? If so, the conclusion is that one who fails to recite <i>havdala</i> in the prayer must repeat that prayer.

### Part 3
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> to the above conclusion from the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who erred and did not mention the might of the rains:</b> He makes the wind blow and rain fall <b>in</b> the second blessing of the <i>Amida</i>, the blessing on <b>the revival of the dead, and</b> one who erred and failed to recite <b>the request</b> for rain <b>in</b> the ninth blessing of the <i>Amida</i>, <b>the blessing of the years, we require him to return</b> to the beginning of the prayer and repeat it. However, one who erred and failed to recite <b><i>havdala</i> in</b> the blessing: <b>Who graciously grants knowledge, we do not require him to return</b> to the beginning of the prayer and repeat it, <b>as he can recite</b> <i>havdala</i> <b>over the cup</b> of wine, independent of his prayer. This contradiction was not resolved and remains <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 4
The dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda with regard to the times beyond which the different prayers may not be recited is rooted in a profound disagreement, also manifest in a later amoraic dispute. <b>It was stated: Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said:</b> The practice of praying three times daily is ancient, albeit not in its present form; <b>prayers were instituted by the Patriarchs.</b> However, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said</b> that the <b>prayers were instituted based on the daily offerings</b> sacrificed in the Holy Temple, and the prayers parallel the offerings, in terms of both time and characteristics.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, and it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina: Abraham instituted the morning prayer, as it is stated</b> when Abraham came to look out over Sodom the day after he had prayed on its behalf: <b>“And Abraham rose early in the morning to the place where he had stood</b> before the Lord” (Genesis 19:27), <b>and</b> from the context as well as the language utilized in the verse, the verb <b>standing</b> means <b>nothing other than prayer,</b> as this language is used to describe Pinehas’ prayer after the plague, <b>as it is stated: “And Pinehas stood up and prayed</b> and the plague ended” (Psalms 106:30). Clearly, Abraham was accustomed to stand in prayer in the morning.

### Part 6
<b>Isaac instituted the afternoon prayer, as it is stated: “And Isaac went out to converse [<i>lasuaḥ</i>] in the field toward evening”</b> (Genesis 24:63), <b>and conversation</b> means <b>nothing other than prayer, as it is stated: “A prayer of the afflicted when he is faint and pours out his complaint [<i>siḥo</i>] before the Lord”</b> (Psalms 102:1). Obviously, Isaac was the first to pray as evening approached, at the time of the afternoon prayer.

### Part 7
<b>Jacob instituted the evening prayer, as it is stated: “And he encountered [<i>vayifga</i>] the place and he slept there</b> for the sun had set” (Genesis 28:11). The word <b>encounter</b> means <b>nothing other than prayer, as it is stated</b> when God spoke to Jeremiah: <b>“And you, do not pray on behalf of this nation and do not raise on their behalf song and prayer, and do not encounter [<i>tifga</i>] Me</b> for I do not hear you” (Jeremiah 7:16). Jacob prayed during the evening, after the sun had set.

### Part 8
<b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> that the laws of prayer are based on the laws of the daily offerings: <b>Why did</b> the Rabbis <b>say</b> that <b>the morning prayer</b> may be recited <b>until noon? Because,</b> although the <b>daily morning offering</b> is typically brought early in the morning, it may be <b>sacrificed until noon. And Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> My opinion, that the morning prayer may be recited <b>until four hours</b> into the day, is <b>because the daily morning offering is sacrificed until four hours.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And why did</b> the Rabbis <b>say</b> that <b>the afternoon prayer</b> may be recited <b>until the evening? Because the daily afternoon offering is sacrificed until the evening. Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>the afternoon prayer</b> may be recited only <b>until the midpoint of the afternoon because,</b> according to his opinion, <b>the daily afternoon offering is sacrificed until the midpoint of the afternoon.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And why did they say</b> that <b>the evening prayer is not fixed? Because</b> the burning of the <b>limbs and fats</b> of the offerings that were <b>not consumed</b> by the fire on the altar <b>until the evening.</b> They remained on the altar and were <b>offered continuously</b> throughout <b>the entire night.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And why did</b> the Rabbis <b>say</b> that <b>the additional prayer</b> may be recited <b>all day? Because the additional offering is brought</b> throughout <b>the entire day.</b> However, <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>the additional prayer</b> may be recited <b>until the seventh hour</b> of the day, <b>because the additional offering is sacrificed until the seventh hour.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> continues and states that there are two times for the afternoon prayer. Greater, earlier <i>minḥa</i> [<i>minḥa gedola</i>] and lesser, later <i>minḥa</i> [<i>minḥa ketana</i>]. The Gemara clarifies the difference between them: <b>Which is <i>minḥa gedola</i>? From six-and-a-half hours</b> after sunrise <b>and on,</b> which is a half an hour after noon and on. It is the earliest time that the daily afternoon offering may be sacrificed, as in the case on the eve of Passover that occurs on Shabbat. <b>Which is <i>minḥa ketana</i>? From nine-and-a-half hours and on,</b> which is the standard time that the daily afternoon offering is sacrificed.

### Part 13
On that note, <b>a dilemma was raised before them: Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that the afternoon prayer may be recited only until the midpoint of the afternoon, does <b>he say the midpoint of the first <i>minḥa</i>,</b> <i>minḥa gedola</i>? <b>Or,</b> does <b>he say the midpoint of the last <i>minḥa</i>? Come and hear</b> an explicit resolution to this dilemma: <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: They said the midpoint of the last <i>minḥa</i>, and that is eleven hours minus a quarter</b> of an hour after sunrise, i.e., an hour-and-a-quarter hours before sunset.

### Part 14
In any case, it is clear that according to this <i>baraita</i> the <i>halakhot</i> of prayer are based on the Temple offerings. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that this is a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> who held that the forefathers instituted the prayers. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> could have <b>said to you: Actually, I will say to you</b> that <b>the Patriarchs instituted the prayers and the Sages based</b> the times and characteristics of prayer <b>on the Temple offerings,</b> even though they do not stem from the same source. <b>As, if you do not say so,</b> that even Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, would agree that the laws of offerings and those of prayers are related, <b>then, according to Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, who instituted the additional prayer?</b> It is not one of the prayers instituted by the forefathers. <b>Rather,</b> even according to Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, <b>the prayers were instituted by the Patriarchs and the Sages based them</b> on the laws of the <b>offerings.</b>

### Part 15
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The morning prayer may be recited <b>until four hours</b> of the day. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the yeshiva students: When Rabbi Yehuda says <b>until,</b> does he mean <b>until and including</b> the fourth hour, <b>or, perhaps</b> when he says <b>“until”</b> he means <b>until and not including,</b> in which case one may not pray during the fourth hour? <b>Come and hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma based on the mishna. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The afternoon prayer may be recited only <b>until the midpoint of the afternoon.</b> Now, <b>granted, if you say</b> that <b>until</b> means <b>until and not including, then there is</b> a difference <b>between</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda and</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. However, if you say</b> that <b>until</b> means <b>until and including,</b> then the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC