
### Part 1
<b>or</b> a case where he prayed as part of <b>a congregation and</b> began to repeat it as part of <b>a congregation; however,</b> in a case where he initially prayed by himself and subsequently joined the congregation at the venue where it was praying, we might have said that <b>an individual vis-à-vis the congregation is</b> considered <b>as one who has not prayed.</b> Therefore, <b>he taught us</b> that in this case, too, one may not repeat the prayer. <b>And,</b> on the other hand, <b>if he had taught us here</b> only with regard to one who entered a synagogue, we would have thought that the reason he may not pray again is <b>because he did not</b> yet <b>begin</b> to recite the prayer, <b>but there, in the case where he</b> already <b>began</b> to recite the prayer, <b>say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case and he may continue to repeat the prayer. Therefore, both statements are <b>necessary.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Huna said: One who</b> did not yet pray and <b>enters a synagogue and found that the congregation is</b> in the midst of <b>reciting</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer, if he is able to begin and complete</b> his own prayer <b>before the prayer leader reaches</b> the blessing of <b>thanksgiving [<i>modim</i>], he should</b> begin to <b>pray, and, if not, he should not</b> begin to <b>pray. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: If he is able to begin and complete</b> his prayer <b>before the prayer leader reaches sanctification [<i>kedusha</i>], then he should</b> begin to <b>pray. If not, then he should not</b> begin to <b>pray.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: <b>With regard to what do they disagree?</b> The basis for their dispute is that one <b>Sage,</b> Rav Huna, <b>holds: An individual</b> is permitted to <b>recite <i>kedusha</i></b> on his own, so he need not insist on reciting it along with the prayer leader; <b>and</b> the other <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, <b>holds</b> that <b>an individual may not recite <i>kedusha</i></b> alone, and, therefore he is required to complete his prayer before the communal prayer leader reaches <i>kedusha</i>.

### Part 4
<b>Similarly, Rav Adda bar Ahava stated,</b> in accordance with the second opinion: <b>From where is it derived that an individual may not recite <i>kedusha</i></b> alone? <b>As it is stated: “And I shall be hallowed among the children of Israel”</b> (Leviticus 22:32), <b>any expression of sanctity may not be</b> recited in a quorum of <b>fewer than ten</b> men.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>How is this inferred</b> from that verse? The Gemara responds: This must be understood in light of a <i>baraita</i>, <b>which was taught by Rabbenai, the brother</b> of <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: It is inferred</b> by means of a verbal analogy [<i>gezera shava</i>] between the words <b>among, among. Here it is written: “And I shall be hallowed among the children of Israel,” and there,</b> regarding Korah’s congregation, <b>it is written “Separate yourselves from among this congregation”</b> (Numbers 16:21). <b>Just as there</b> among connotes <b>ten, so too here,</b> among connotes <b>ten.</b> The connotation of ten associated with the word among written in the portion of Korah is, in turn, derived by means of another verbal analogy between the word congregation written there and the word congregation written in reference to the ten spies who slandered Eretz Yisrael: “How long shall I bear with this evil congregation?” (Numbers 14:27). Consequently, among the congregation there must be at least ten.

### Part 6
<b>And, in any case, everyone</b> agrees that <b>one may not interrupt</b> his prayer in order to respond to <i>kedusha</i>.

### Part 7
However, <b>a dilemma was raised</b> before the Sages of the yeshiva: <b>What is</b> the ruling? Is one permitted <b>to interrupt</b> his prayer in order <b>to</b> recite: <b>“May His great name be blessed”</b> in <i>kaddish</i>? <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said: Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon, disciples of Rabbi Yoḥanan, said: One may not interrupt</b> his prayer <b>for anything, except for: “May His great name be blessed,” as even</b> if one was <b>engaged in</b> the exalted study of the <b>Act of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot</b> [<b><i>Ma’aseh Merkava</i>]</b> (see Ezekiel 1) <b>he stops</b> to recite it. However, the Gemara concludes: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with his</b> opinion.

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> with regard to one who experiences a seminal emission; <b>he recites a blessing beforehand and afterward</b> in both the case of <i>Shema</i> and in the case of food. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that Rabbi Yehuda holds that one who experienced a seminal emission is permitted</b> to engage <b>in matters of Torah? Didn’t Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi say: From where</b> in the Torah is it derived <b>that one who experiences a seminal emission is prohibited from</b> engaging <b>in matters of Torah? As it is stated:</b> “Just take heed and guard your soul diligently lest you forget the things your eyes have seen, and lest they depart from your heart, for all the days of your life, <b>and you shall impart them to your children and your children’s children”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:9), from which we derive, among other things, the obligation to study Torah. <b>And, juxtaposed to it,</b> is the verse: <b>“The day that you stood</b> before the Lord your God at Horeb” (Deuteronomy 4:10). This juxtaposition teaches us that <b>just as below,</b> at the revelation at Mount Sinai, <b>those who experienced a seminal emission were prohibited</b> and were commanded to refrain from relations with their wives and immerse themselves, <b>so too here,</b> throughout the generations, <b>those who experience a seminal emission are prohibited</b> from engaging in Torah study.

### Part 9
<b>And if you say that Rabbi Yehuda does not derive homiletic interpretations from juxtaposed</b> verses, <b>didn’t Rav Yosef</b> already say: <b>Even one who does not derive homiletic interpretations from juxtaposed</b> verses throughout <b>the entire Torah,</b> nevertheless, <b>derives</b> them <b>in Deuteronomy [<i>Mishne Torah</i>], as Rabbi Yehuda does not derive homiletic interpretations from juxtaposed</b> verses <b>throughout the entire Torah and he does derive them in <i>Mishne Torah</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And from where do we derive</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>does not derive homiletic interpretations</b> from juxtaposed verses <b>throughout the entire Torah? As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the punishment of a sorceress, <b>ben Azzai says: It is stated: “You shall not allow a sorceress to live”</b> (Exodus 22:17), although the manner of her execution is not specified, <b>and it is stated: “Whoever lies with a beast shall surely be put to death”</b> (Exodus 22:18). The fact that the Torah <b>juxtaposed this matter to that</b> was <b>to say: Just as one who lies with a beast</b> is executed <b>by stoning</b> (see Leviticus 20), <b>so too a sorceress</b> is executed <b>by stoning.</b>

### Part 11
With regard to this proof <b>Rabbi Yehuda said to him: And does</b> the fact <b>that</b> the Torah <b>juxtaposed this matter to that warrant taking</b> this person <b>out to be stoned?</b> Should he be sentenced to the most severe of the death penalties on that basis <b>Rather,</b> the source is: <b>Mediums and wizards were included among all sorcerers. And why were they singled out</b> from the rest, in the verse: “And a man or a woman who is a medium or a wizard shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stones, their blood is upon them” (Leviticus 20:27)? In order to <b>draw an analogy to them and say to you: Just as a medium and a wizard</b> are executed <b>by stoning, so too is a sorceress</b> executed <b>by stoning.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And from where do we derive</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>derives homiletic interpretations</b> from juxtaposed verses <b>in <i>Mishne Torah</i>? As it was taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer said that a man</b> may <b>wed</b> a woman <b>raped by his father and</b> one <b>seduced by his father;</b> a woman <b>raped by his son and</b> one <b>seduced by his son.</b> Though one is prohibited by Torah law from marrying the wife of his father or the wife of his son, this prohibition does not apply to a woman raped or seduced by them.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda prohibits</b> him from marrying <b>a woman raped by his father and a woman seduced by his father. And Rav Giddel said</b> that <b>Rav said: What is the reason for Rabbi Yehuda’s</b> opinion? <b>As it is written: “A man shall not take his father’s wife, and shall not uncover his father’s skirt”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:1). The last expression, “and shall not uncover his father’s skirt,” implies that: <b>A skirt that has been seen by his father,</b> i.e., any woman who has had sexual relations with his father, <b>may not be uncovered</b> by his son, i.e., his son may not marry her.

### Part 14
<b>And from where</b> do we know <b>that</b> the verse <b>is written with regard to a woman raped by his father? As</b> the previous section, <b>juxtaposed to it,</b> deals with the laws of rape: <b>“And the man who lay with her must give</b> her father fifty shekels…because he has violated her” (Deuteronomy 22:29).

### Part 15
At any rate, we see that in Deuteronomy, Rabbi Yehuda derives homiletic interpretations from juxtaposed verses. Why does he fail to derive that one who experiences a seminal emission is prohibited from engaging in matters of Torah from the juxtaposition of the verses? <b>They replied: Indeed, in <i>Mishne Torah</i></b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>does derive homiletic interpretations</b> from the juxtaposition of verses, <b>but</b> he requires <b>these juxtaposed verses</b> in order <b>to</b> derive <b>another</b> statement of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: One who teaches his son Torah, the verse ascribes to him</b> credit <b>as if he received</b> the Torah <b>from Mount Horeb. As it is stated: “And you shall impart them to your children and your children’s children”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:9) <b>after which it is written: “The day that you stood before the Lord your God at Horeb.”</b> Therefore, Rabbi Yehuda cannot derive from that same juxtaposition a prohibition banning one who experienced a seminal emission from engaging in matters of Torah.

### Part 16
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna that <b>a <i>zav</i> who experienced a seminal emission, and a menstruating woman who discharged semen, and a woman who engaged in intercourse</b> with her husband <b>and she saw</b> menstrual <b>blood,</b> all of whom are ritually impure for at least seven days due to the severity of their impurity, nevertheless <b>require ritual immersion</b> in order to purify themselves from the impurity of the seminal emission before they may engage in matters of Torah. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda exempts</b> them from immersion.

### Part 17
However, <b>Rabbi Yehuda only exempted</b> from immersion in the case <b>of a <i>zav</i> who experienced a seminal emission, who was unfit to immerse himself from the outset,</b> as even after immersion he would remain impure with the seven-day impurity of the <i>zav</i>. <b>But,</b> in the case of <b>one who experienced a seminal emission alone,</b> with no concurrent impurity, even Rabbi Yehuda <b>requires</b> immersion before he may engage in Torah matters.

### Part 18
<b>And if you say: The same is true even</b> in the case of <b>one who experienced a seminal emission alone,</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda also exempts</b> him from immersion, <b>and the fact that they disagree</b> in the case of <b>a <i>zav</i> who experienced a seminal emission</b> and not in the case of a person who experienced a seminal emission alone <b>is in order to convey the far-reaching</b> nature of the opinion <b>of the Rabbis,</b> who require immersion even in this case. If so, <b>say the last case</b> of that same mishna: <b>A woman who was engaged in intercourse and she saw</b> menstrual <b>blood requires immersion.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara seeks to clarify: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>was this</b> case in the mishna <b>taught? If you say</b> that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, that is obvious; if</b> in the case of <b>a <i>zav</i> who experienced a seminal emission who was unfit to immerse himself from the outset,</b> when he experienced the seminal emission, <b>the Rabbis</b> nevertheless <b>require immersion, all the more so</b> wouldn’t they require immersion for <b>a woman who engaged in intercourse and</b> only then <b>saw blood,</b> who <b>was fit to immerse herself from the outset,</b> when she came into contact with the seminal emission of her husband? <b>Rather, isn’t this Rabbi Yehuda’s</b> opinion, <b>and</b> this case <b>was taught specifically</b> in order to teach

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC