
### Part 1
He was referred to in the verse as <b>son of a living man.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>Is that to say,</b> the fact that the Bible referred to him with that appellation, <b>that all others are children of the dead? Rather,</b> the verse should be explained as follows: <b>The son of a living man</b> who lives forever, <b>who even in death is referred to as living. Man of Kabze’el who had done mighty deeds, as he accumulated and gathered many workers for</b> the sake of the <b>Torah. Who killed the two lion-hearted men [<i>Ariel</i>] of Moab, as</b> after his death <b>he left no one his equal, in either the First Temple or the Second Temple</b> periods, as the Temple is called <i>Ariel</i> (see Isaiah 29:1), and the two <i>Ariel</i> refers to the two Temples.

### Part 2
The Sages disagreed over the interpretation of the rest of the verse: <b>“And who descended and slew the lion in the pit on the snowy day.” Some say</b> that this means <b>that he broke blocks of hail and descended and immersed himself</b> in the water to purify himself. <b>Others say that he learned</b> all of <b>the <i>Sifra</i>,</b> the <i>halakhic</i> midrash on the book of Leviticus <b>of the school of Rav,</b> on a <b>winter’s day.</b>

### Part 3
In contrast to the righteous, who are referred to as living even after their death, the verse states explicitly: <b>“The dead know nothing.” These are the wicked, who</b> even <b>during their lives are called dead, as</b> the prophet Ezekiel <b>said</b> in reference to a king of Israel who was alive: <b>“And you are a slain, wicked prince of Israel”</b> (Ezekiel 21:30). <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the proof is <b>from here: “At the mouth of two witnesses or three witnesses the dead shall be put to death”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:6). This is puzzling. As long as the accused has not been sentenced to death, he <b>is alive. Rather,</b> this person who is wicked is considered <b>dead from the outset.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates a story on this topic: <b>The sons of Rabbi Ḥiyya went out to the villages</b> to oversee the laborers. <b>They forgot what they had learned and were struggling to recall it. One</b> of them <b>said to the other:</b> Does <b>our</b> deceased <b>father know of</b> our <b>anguish? The other said to him: From where would he know? Isn’t it written: “His sons are honored yet he shall not know it,</b> they come to sorrow and he shall not understand them” (Job 14:21)? The dead do not know.

### Part 5
<b>The other said</b> back <b>to him: And</b> do the dead truly <b>not know? Isn’t it written: “Only in his flesh does he feel pain, in his soul does he mourn”</b> (Job 14:22)? Based on this verse <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> Gnawing <b>maggots are as excruciating to the dead as</b> the stab of <b>a needle to the flesh of the living.</b> The dead must have the capacity to feel and know.

### Part 6
In order to reconcile this contradiction <b>they said:</b> They <b>know of their own pain but do not know of the pain of others.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges this: <b>And</b> is it so that the dead do <b>not</b> know of the pain of others? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>an incident involving a pious man who gave a poor man a dinar on the eve of Rosh HaShana during drought years, and his wife mocked him</b> for giving so large a sum at so difficult a time? <b>And</b> in order to escape her incessant mockery, <b>he went and slept in the cemetery.</b> That night in his dream (Ritva, <i>HaKotev</i>, Maharsha), <b>he heard two spirits conversing with each other. One said to the other: My friend, let us roam the world and hear from behind the heavenly curtain [<i>pargod</i>],</b> which separates the Divine Presence from the world, <b>what calamity will befall the world. The other spirit said to her:</b> I <b>cannot</b> go with you, <b>as I am buried in a mat of reeds, but you go, and tell me what you hear. She went, and roamed, and came</b> back. <b>The other spirit said: My friend, what did you hear from behind the heavenly curtain? She replied: I heard that anyone who sows during the first rainy season</b> of this year, <b>hail</b> will fall and <b>strike his</b> crops. Hearing this, the pious man <b>went and sowed</b> his seeds <b>during the second rainy season.</b> Ultimately, the crops of <b>the entire world were stricken</b> by hail <b>and his</b> crops <b>were not stricken.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The following year,</b> on the eve of Rosh HaShana, the same pious man <b>went and slept in the cemetery</b> at his own initiative, and again <b>he heard the two spirits conversing with each other. One said to the other: Let us roam the world and hear from behind the heavenly curtain what calamity will befall the world. She said to her: My friend, have I not</b> already <b>told you</b> that <b>I cannot, as I am buried in a mat of reeds? Rather, you go, and tell me what you hear. She went, and roamed, and returned. The other</b> spirit <b>said to her: My friend, what did you hear from behind the curtain? She said to her: I heard that those who sow during the second rainy season blight will strike his</b> crops. That pious man <b>went and sowed during the first rainy season.</b> Since everyone else sowed during the second rainy season, ultimately, the crops <b>of the entire world were blighted and his</b> crops <b>were not blighted.</b>

### Part 9
The pious man’s <b>wife said to him: Why is it that last year,</b> the crops <b>of the entire world were stricken and yours were not stricken, and now</b> this year, the crops <b>of the entire world were blighted and yours were not blighted? He related to her the entire story. They said: It was not</b> even <b>a few days</b> later that <b>a quarrel fell between the pious man’s wife and the mother of the young woman</b> who was buried there. The pious man’s wife <b>said to her</b> scornfully: <b>Go and I will show you your daughter,</b> and you will see that <b>she is buried in a mat of reeds.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The following year, he</b> again <b>went and slept in the cemetery, and heard the same spirits conversing with each other. One said</b> to the other: <b>My friend, let us roam the world and hear from behind the heavenly curtain what calamity will befall the world. She said to her: My friend, leave me</b> alone, as <b>words that</b> we have privately exchanged <b>between us have already been heard among the living. Apparently,</b> the dead <b>know</b> what transpires in this world.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds: This is no proof; <b>perhaps another person,</b> who heard about the conversation of the spirits secondhand, <b>died and</b> he <b>went and told them</b> that they had been overheard.

### Part 12
With regard to the deceased’s knowledge of what transpires, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, as it is told: <b>Ze’iri would deposit</b> his <b>dinars with his innkeeper. While he was going and coming to</b> and from <b>the school of Rav, she died,</b> and he did not know where she had put the money. <b>So he went after her to</b> her grave in <b>the cemetery and said to her: Where are the dinars? She replied: Go and get them from beneath the hinge of the door in such and such a place, and tell my mother</b> that <b>she should send me my comb and a tube of eyeshadow with such and such a woman who will</b> die <b>and come here tomorrow. Apparently,</b> the dead <b>know</b> what transpires in this world.

### Part 13
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the angel <b>Duma,</b> who oversees the dead, <b>comes beforehand and announces to them</b> that a particular individual will arrive the next day, but they themselves do not know.

### Part 14
The Gemara cites another proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear,</b> as it is told: <b>They would deposit the money of orphans with Shmuel’s father</b> for safekeeping. <b>When Shmuel’s father died, Shmuel was not with him,</b> and did not learn from him the location of the money. Since he did not return it, Shmuel was called: <b>Son of</b> him who <b>consumes the money of orphans.</b> Shmuel <b>went after</b> his father <b>to the cemetery and said to</b> the dead: <b>I want Abba.</b> The dead <b>said to him: There are many Abbas here. He told them: I want Abba bar Abba. They said</b> to him: <b>There are also many people named Abba bar Abba here. He told them: I want Abba bar Abba, the father of Shmuel. Where</b> is he? <b>They replied: Ascend to the yeshiva on high. Meanwhile, he saw</b> his friend <b>Levi sitting outside</b> the yeshiva, away from the rest of the deceased. <b>He asked him: Why do you sit outside? Why did you not ascend</b> to the yeshiva? <b>He replied: Because they tell me</b> that for <b>all those years</b> that <b>you didn’t enter the yeshiva of Rabbi Afes, and</b> thereby <b>upset him, we will not grant you entry to the yeshiva on high.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Meanwhile,</b> Shmuel’s <b>father came</b> and Shmuel <b>saw that he was crying and laughing.</b> Shmuel <b>said to</b> his father: <b>Why are you crying?</b> His father <b>replied:</b> Because <b>you will come here soon.</b> Shmuel continued and asked: <b>Why are you laughing?</b> His father replied: Because <b>you are extremely important in this world.</b> Shmuel <b>said to him: If I am important, then let them grant Levi entry</b> to the yeshiva. <b>And</b> so it was <b>that they granted Levi entry</b> to the yeshiva.

### Part 16
Shmuel <b>said to</b> his father: <b>Where is the orphans’ money? He said to him: Go</b> and <b>retrieve it from the millhouse,</b> where you will find <b>the uppermost and the lowermost</b> money <b>is ours, and</b> the money <b>in the middle</b> belongs to <b>the orphans.</b> Shmuel <b>said to him: Why did you do that? He replied: If thieves stole, they would steal from our</b> money on top, which the thief would see first. <b>If the earth swallowed up</b> any of it, it would swallow <b>from our</b> money, on the bottom. <b>Apparently,</b> the dead, in this case Shmuel’s father, <b>know</b> when others will die. Since Shmuel did not die the next day, clearly the angel Duma could not have informed them (<i>Tosafot</i>). The Gemara responds: <b>Perhaps Shmuel is different,</b> and <b>because he is so important they announce beforehand: Clear place</b> for his arrival.

### Part 17
In any case, with regard to the crux of the issue, <b>Rabbi Yonatan also reconsidered</b> his opinion, <b>as Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the dead converse with each other? As it is stated: “And the Lord said to him, this is the land that I swore to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, saying:</b> I will give it to your offspring” (Deuteronomy 34:4). <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“saying”?</b> It means that <b>God told Moses: Go and tell Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,</b> that <b>the oath that I swore to you I have already fulfilled for your descendants.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC