
### Part 1
<b>as it causes a blessing itself.</b> It is so significant, that one recites a blessing over it together with other blessings like <i>kiddush</i> and <i>havdala</i>, even though he does not particularly want to drink it. During a meal too, a blessing is recited over the wine and it is not exempted by the blessing over the bread.

### Part 2
As the Gemara mentioned bread that comes as dessert, it now relates that <b>Rav Huna ate thirteen</b> substantially sized, sweetened <b>loaves, three</b> loaves <b>per <i>kav</i></b> of flour, <b>and he did not recite</b> Grace after Meals because they were not genuine bread. <b>Rav Naḥman said to him: That is hunger.</b> One does not typically eat that much merely as dessert. <b>Rather, over anything which</b> is substantial enough to satiate and <b>others base a meal</b> upon it, <b>one must recite</b> Grace after Meals.

### Part 3
The Gemara also relates: <b>Rav Yehuda was engaged</b> in preparations for <b>his son’s</b> wedding <b>at the house of Rav Yehuda bar Ḥaviva when they brought bread that comes as dessert before them. When it arrived, he heard them reciting: Who brings forth</b> bread from the earth. <b>He said to them: What is this <i>tzitzi</i></b> sound <b>that I hear? Perhaps you are reciting: Who brings forth bread from the earth? They said to him: Yes,</b> indeed, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Mona said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda: Over bread that comes as dessert, one recites: Who brings forth</b> bread from the earth. <b>And Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Mona.</b>

### Part 4
Rav Yehuda <b>said to them:</b> You are mistaken. Actually, <b>it was stated</b> that Shmuel said: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Mona. They said to him: But aren’t</b> you, <b>Master, the one who said in the name</b> of <b>Shmuel</b> with regard to <b>wafers: One may establish an <i>eiruv</i>,</b> the joining of courtyards, to permit carrying in a shared courtyard and the joining of cooked foods, to permit cooking on a festival for Shabbat, <b>with them and recite over them: Who brings forth</b> bread from the earth. Why is that the blessing over those wafers? They too are sweetened bread that comes as dessert. He answered them: <b>It is different there as he based his meal upon them, but here, where one did not base his meal upon them, no,</b> he does not recite: Who brings forth bread from the earth.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Rav Huna, son of Rav Natan. After they finished their meal, they brought before them something to eat. Rav Pappa took</b> this food item <b>and ate</b> it without reciting a blessing. <b>They said to him:</b> Do you, <b>Master, not hold</b> that once <b>one finished</b> his meal <b>he is forbidden to eat</b> again without reciting a blessing? <b>He said to them</b> that in the correct version of that <i>halakha</i>, <b>it is stated: Removed.</b> One need recite a second blessing only when eating after the table was removed from before him.

### Part 6
Similarly, the Gemara relates: <b>Rava and Rabbi Zeira happened</b> to come <b>to the house of the Exilarch. After</b> the meal, when <b>they removed the table from before them, a portion [<i>ristena</i>]</b> of food <b>was sent to them from the house of the Exilarch. Rava ate</b> it <b>and Rabbi Zeira did not eat</b> it. Rabbi Zeira <b>said to</b> Rava: Do you, <b>Master, not hold</b> that once the table was <b>removed, he is forbidden to eat?</b> Rava <b>said to him: We are dependent upon the table of the Exilarch,</b> and so long as he has not completed his meal, his guests have not completed their meals either.

### Part 7
<b>Rav said: One who is accustomed to</b> applying fragrant <b>oil</b> to his hands after meals, failure to apply that <b>oil delays</b> the end of <b>his</b> meal and he is not considered to have finished his meal and is not required to recite a blessing before continuing to eat. Similarly, <b>Rav Ashi said: When we were in the house of Rav Kahana, he said to us: We, for example, who are accustomed to oil,</b> failure to apply that <b>oil delays</b> the end of the meal <b>for us.</b> Nevertheless, the Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with all of these statements</b> and the end of the meal is not determined by those factors. <b>Rather, it is</b> determined by <b>that which Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: There are three</b> pairs that <b>immediately</b> follow each other: <b>Immediately</b> following <b>placing hands</b> on the head of a sacrifice, is its <b>slaughter; immediately</b> following the blessing of <b>redemption</b> recited after <i>Shema</i>, is the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer;</b> and <b>immediately</b> following the ritual <b>washing of the hands</b> after a meal, is <b>the blessing of</b> Grace after Meals.

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said</b> that on a similar note, <b>we too will say: Immediately</b> following the entrance of <b>Torah scholars</b> into a house, a <b>blessing</b> rests upon that house, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to Laban and Jacob: <b>“The Lord has blessed me because of you”</b> (Genesis 30:27). <b>If you wish, say</b> instead, that the proof is <b>from here, as it is stated:</b> “And it was from when he placed him in charge of his house and over all that he owned, <b>the Lord blessed the house of the Egyptian on account of Joseph”</b> (Genesis 39:5).

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna explains those cases and those circumstances in which blessings recited over particular foods exempt other foods at the meal from the requirement to recite a blessing over them. <b>One who recited a blessing over the wine that</b> one drank <b>before the meal,</b> with that blessing <b>he exempted the wine that</b> he drinks <b>after the meal.</b> Similarly, <b>one who recited a blessing over the appetizers that</b> one ate <b>before the meal,</b> with that blessing <b>he exempted the appetizers that</b> he eats <b>after the meal. One who recited a blessing over the bread exempted the appetizers,</b> as they are considered secondary to the bread. However, one who recited a blessing <b>over the appetizers did not exempt the bread. Beit Shammai say:</b> The blessing recited over the appetizers <b>did not exempt even a cooked dish</b> that he eats during the meal.

### Part 10
An additional <i>halakha</i> is cited: If several people <b>were sitting</b> to eat not in the framework of a joint meal, <b>each recites a blessing for himself. If they were reclined</b> on divans to eat, which renders it a joint meal, <b>one recites a blessing on behalf of them all.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC