
### Part 1
<b>that</b> this problem was raised <b>in Rav Oshaya’s chamber,</b> and <b>they came and asked Rav Asi. He said to them: They only stated</b> the obligation to pour water over one who is impure because of a seminal emission <b>with regard to a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission, <b>but a sick person who experienced an involuntary</b> seminal emission is clearly <b>exempt from anything</b> and requires no immersion whatsoever. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> In that case, <b>Rav Naḥman’s jug is rejoined,</b> meaning that it is effective with regard to purification.

### Part 2
Up to now, discussion has focused on various problems pertaining to the laws of immersion as they concern one whose impurity is due to seminal emission. The Gemara asks: <b>Since all</b> of the <b><i>amora’im</i> and <i>tanna’im</i> disagree with regard to</b> the decree of <b>Ezra, let us examine how Ezra instituted</b> this ordinance, as this is not an uncommon circumstance and we can see how they conducted themselves.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said: Ezra</b> did not institute a sweeping ordinance concerning every case of one who experienced a seminal emission; rather, he <b>instituted</b> only that <b>a healthy person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is required to immerse himself in <b>forty <i>se’a</i>, while for a healthy person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> are sufficient. <b>And the <i>amora’im</i> came and disagreed with regard to a sick person. One Sage held</b> that <b>a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission, <b>while a sick person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission. <b>However, another Sage maintained</b> that <b>a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, and consequently requires only that nine <i>kav</i> be poured over him, <b>while a sick person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission <b>is exempt from any</b> form of immersion or purification.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: Although Ezra instituted immersion</b> for one who experienced a seminal emission, <b>did he institute the pouring</b> of nine <b><i>kav</i>? Didn’t the Master say</b> that we have a tradition that <b>Ezra</b> only <b>instituted immersion for those who experienced a seminal emission? Rather, Rava said:</b> We must explain that the diverse opinions developed after Ezra’s decree. <b>Ezra</b> himself <b>instituted immersion in forty <i>se’a</i></b> only <b>for a healthy person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission. <b>And the Sages came and instituted that a healthy person who experienced an involuntary</b> seminal emission should have <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> poured over him. <b>And</b> then <b>the <i>amora’im</i> came and disagreed</b> with regard to <b>a sick person; one Sage held</b> that <b>a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission, <b>while a sick person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, <b>another Sage maintained</b> that only <b>a healthy person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is required to immerse himself in <b>forty <i>se’a</i> while a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission is considered <b>like a healthy person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, requiring only <b>nine <i>kav</i>. But a sick person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission <b>is exempt from any</b> form of immersion or purification.

### Part 5
<b>Rava stated</b> that <b>the</b> halakhic ruling is in accordance with the first opinion: <b>A healthy person</b> who experienced <b>a normal</b> seminal emission <b>and a sick person</b> who experienced <b>a normal</b> seminal emission require <b>forty <i>se’a</i>, while a healthy person</b> who experienced <b>an involuntary</b> seminal emission suffices with <b>nine <i>kav</i>. But a sick person</b> who experienced <b>an involuntary</b> seminal emission <b>is exempt from</b> undergoing <b>any</b> rite of purification.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>One who experienced a seminal emission and had nine <i>kav</i> of</b> drawn <b>water poured over him is ritually pure. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case involving Torah study <b>for himself, but</b> in order to purify himself that he may teach Torah <b>to others,</b> he must immerse himself in <b>forty <i>se’a</i>. Rabbi Yehuda says: Forty <i>se’a</i></b> is required for purification <b>in any case.</b>

### Part 7
With regard to this issue, a dispute arose between <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, and Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina. One</b> member <b>of this pair and one</b> member <b>of that pair</b> disagreed <b>with regard to the first clause</b> of the <i>Tosefta</i>. <b>One said: That which you said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case involving Torah study <b>for himself, but</b> in order to purify himself that he may teach Torah <b>to others,</b> he must immerse himself in <b>forty <i>se’a</i>,</b> was <b>only taught regarding a sick person who experienced a normal</b> seminal emission, <b>but for a sick person</b> who experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> is sufficient even for teaching others. <b>And one said</b> that <b>anyone</b> who teaches <b>others, even</b> if he was <b>sick</b> and experienced an <b>involuntary</b> seminal emission, is not considered pure <b>until there are forty <i>se’a</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And one</b> member <b>of this pair and one</b> member <b>of that pair</b> disagreed <b>with regard to the latter clause</b> of the <i>Tosefta</i>. <b>One said: That which Rabbi Yehuda said: Forty <i>se’a</i> in any case, was only taught when</b> the water is in <b>the ground,</b> in accordance with the Torah law of ritual bath, <b>but not</b> if it was collected <b>in vessels. And one said: Even</b> forty <i>se’a</i> collected <b>in vessels</b> are sufficient for purification.

### Part 9
The Gemara clarifies this problem: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that forty <i>se’a</i> purifies <b>even in vessels. That is</b> why the <i>Tosefta</i> <b>taught: Rabbi Yehuda says: Forty <i>se’a</i> in any case. However,</b> according to <b>the one who said</b> that Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion is that forty <i>se’a</i> <b>in the ground, yes,</b> it purifies, but <b>in vessels, no,</b> it does not purify, <b>what</b> does the expression <b>in any case</b> come <b>to include?</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: In any case comes <b>to include drawn water,</b> as Rabbi Yehuda permits immersion in forty <i>se’a</i> of water collected in the ground even if the water was drawn by human hand.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, and Rava bar Shmuel ate bread together. Rav Pappa said to them: Allow me to recite</b> Grace after Meals for the group, as I am ritually pure because <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> of water <b>fell upon me;</b> in other words, he poured it over himself. <b>Rava bar Shmuel said to them: We learned, in what</b> case <b>is this statement</b> that nine <i>kav</i> purify, <b>said?</b> In a case involving Torah study <b>for himself. But,</b> in order to purify himself that he may teach Torah <b>to others,</b> and by extension to fulfill the obligation of others, he must immerse himself in <b>forty <i>se’a</i>. Rather, allow me to recite</b> Grace after Meals for the group, <b>as forty <i>se’a</i></b> of water <b>fell upon me;</b> in other words, I immersed myself in a ritual bath. <b>Rav Huna said to them: Allow me to recite</b> Grace after Meals for the group, <b>as I have</b> had <b>neither this nor that upon me</b> because I remained ritually pure.

### Part 12
It is also said that <b>Rav Ḥama would immerse himself on Passover eve in order to fulfill the obligations of the masses.</b> However the Gemara concludes: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with his</b> opinion that distinguishes between the purification for oneself and purification for the sake of others.

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna contains various statements with regard to individuals with different types of ritual impurity as well as the need to distance oneself from filth and impurity. <b>One who was standing in prayer and he recalled that he experienced a seminal emission,</b> and according to this opinion he is prohibited from praying, should <b>not interrupt</b> his prayer, <b>rather he should abridge</b> each individual blessing.

### Part 14
They stated a general principle: <b>One who descended to immerse himself, if he is able to ascend, cover himself</b> with a garment, <b>and recite</b> the morning <i>Shema</i> <b>before sunrise, he should ascend, cover himself, and recite</b> <i>Shema</i>, <b>and if not,</b> he should <b>cover himself in the water and recite</b> <i>Shema</i> there. <b>He may not, however, cover himself in either foul water, or water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked, until he pours</b> other <b>water into it. And</b> in general, <b>how far must one distance</b> himself <b>from</b> urine <b>and feces</b> in order to recite <i>Shema</i>? At least <b>four cubits.</b>

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> A <i>baraita</i> further elaborates on the first <i>halakha</i> in the mishna. <b>The Sages taught: One who was standing in prayer and he recalled that he</b> had <b>experienced a seminal emission,</b> should <b>not interrupt</b> his prayer. <b>Rather, he should abridge. One who was reading the Torah and recalled that he experienced a seminal emission, does not interrupt</b> his reading, <b>but rather reads quickly</b> with less than perfect diction. <b>Rabbi Meir</b> disagrees and <b>says: One who experienced a seminal emission is not permitted to read more than three verses in the Torah,</b> as one may read no fewer than three verses in the Torah. After he completes three verses, he must stop and let someone else continue.

### Part 16
<b>It was taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who was standing in prayer and he saw feces before him must walk forward until he has placed it four cubits behind him.</b> The Gemara challenges this: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> that it is sufficient if he distances himself four cubits <b>to the side?</b> The Gemara resolves this contradiction: <b>This is not difficult,</b> as <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> which taught that it must be four cubits behind him, is referring to a case <b>where it is possible</b> for him to advance that distance, <b>while that</b> <i>baraita</i> which taught that he may distance himself four cubits to the side, is referring to a case <b>where it is not possible</b> to advance four cubits, in which case he must at least step to the side.

### Part 17
The Gemara cites another <i>halakha</i>: <b>One who was praying and</b> later <b>found feces in the place</b> where he prayed, <b>Rabba said: Although he committed a transgression</b> in his failure to examine that venue to determine if it was worthy of prayer (<i>Tosafot</i>), <b>his prayer is a</b> valid <b>prayer</b> and he fulfilled his obligation. <b>Rava strongly objects to his</b> statement: <b>Isn’t</b> it stated: <b>“The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination,</b> the more so as he offers it in depravity” (Proverbs 21:27), from which we derive that a mitzva performed inappropriately is no mitzva at all? Consequently, the fact that he did not pay proper attention invalidates his prayer. <b>Rather, Rava said: Because</b> this person <b>committed a transgression, although he prayed, his prayer is an abomination</b> and he must pray again.

### Part 18
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who was standing in prayer when,</b> for some reason, <b>urine is flowing on his knees, he must interrupt</b> his prayer <b>until the urine ceases, and then resume praying.</b> The Gemara, asks: <b>To where</b> in the prayer <b>does he return</b> when he resumes his prayer? <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rav Hamnuna</b> disagreed; <b>one said: He must return to the beginning</b> of the prayer, <b>and the other said:</b> He must return <b>to</b> the point <b>where he stopped.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara notes: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>they disagree about this:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC