
### Part 1
<b>And</b> there is no need for others <b>to recite a blessing</b> beforehand <b>on his behalf, nor do others invite him</b> to join in Grace after Meals, as he cannot be a member of the quorum of three required to recite the formula. <b>He is exempt from the recitation of <i>Shema</i>, from</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer and from phylacteries, and from all mitzvot mentioned in the Torah. On Shabbat,</b> however, <b>he reclines</b> at the meal as per his custom, <b>and eats meat and drinks wine, and recites blessings and</b> recites the formula to <b>invite</b> the participants in the meal to join together in the Grace after Meals, <b>and others may recite blessings on his behalf and invite him</b> to join in Grace after Meals, <b>and he is obligated in all mitzvot mentioned in the Torah. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Just as he is obligated</b> on Shabbat <b>to</b> fulfill <b>these</b> mitzvot associated with Shabbat meals, <b>he is obligated to</b> fulfill <b>all</b> mitzvot.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> the apparently identical statements of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and the first <i>tanna</i>? <b>The</b> practical difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to <b>conjugal relations.</b> The first <i>tanna</i> holds that although there is no mourning on Shabbat, since refraining from addressing his wife’s conjugal rights would not be a public display of mourning, conjugal relations are prohibited. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel holds that since there is no mourning on Shabbat, he must fulfill the mitzva of addressing his wife’s conjugal rights.

### Part 3
<b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>one is exempt from the recitation of <i>Shema</i>, from</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer and from phylacteries, and from all mitzvot mentioned in the Torah.</b> This is an apparent contradiction of our mishna which states that one is exempt only when the deceased is laid before him. To resolve this contradiction, <b>Rav Pappa said: Explain</b> the <i>baraita</i> as applicable only to the particular case when <b>one turns his face</b> away <b>and eats,</b> with the deceased laid out before him. In the other cases, when he is in a different room, he is obligated in all mitzvot. <b>Rav Ashi says:</b> The phrase: The deceased is laid out before him, is not to be taken literally, but rather, <b>since it is incumbent upon him to bury the deceased,</b> and he is not yet buried, it is <b>as if he is laid out before him, as it is stated: “And Abraham rose up from before his dead”</b> (Genesis 23:3), <b>and</b> when Abraham speaks with the Hittites, <b>it is stated: “So that I may bury my dead from before me”</b> (Genesis 23:4). <b>As long as it is incumbent upon him to bury him,</b> it is <b>as he is laid out before him.</b>

### Part 4
From the mishna one can infer that when <b>his deceased</b> relative is laid out before him, <b>yes,</b> he is exempt from mitzvot. <b>But,</b> if it is not his relative and he is only <b>watching over</b> the deceased, <b>no,</b> he is not exempt.

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who watches over the deceased, even if it is not his deceased</b> relative, <b>is exempt from the recitation of <i>Shema</i>, from prayer and from phylacteries, and from all mitzvot mentioned in the Torah?</b> The Gemara responds that these two sources should not be understood as contradictory, but as complementary. In both the cases, he is exempt; where <b>one watches over</b> the deceased, <b>but it is not his deceased</b> relative, as well as the case where <b>it is his deceased</b> relative, <b>but he is not watching over</b> the deceased.

### Part 6
The Gemara further challenges: We concluded that, in both cases, if it is <b>his deceased</b> relative or if he was <b>watching over</b> the unrelated deceased, <b>he is</b> exempt from mitzvot. <b>However, one walking in a cemetery is not</b> exempt. <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may not walk in a cemetery with phylacteries on his head and a Torah scroll in his arm and read</b> from it? <b>If one does so he commits</b> a transgression <b>due to</b> the verse: <b>“He who mocks the poor blasphemes his Creator”</b> (Proverbs 17:5). As the deceased is incapable of fulfilling mitzvot, fulfilling a mitzva in his presence is seen as mocking him.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> when one walks in a cemetery, <b>within four cubits</b> of a grave, <b>that is prohibited.</b> However, <b>beyond four cubits</b> from a grave, <b>one is obligated</b> in prayer and phylacteries. <b>As the Master said: The deceased occupies four cubits</b> with regard to the exemption from the <b>recitation of <i>Shema</i>.</b> One who walks within four cubits of the deceased is exempt. <b>Here,</b> however, in the case where it is either his deceased relative or he is watching over an unrelated deceased, <b>beyond four cubits he is also exempt.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara discusses the <b>matter</b> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>itself.</b> It was taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who watches over the deceased, even though it is not his dead</b> relative, <b>is exempt from the recitation of <i>Shema</i>, from</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer and from phylacteries, and from all mitzvot mentioned in the Torah.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: If <b>two</b> individuals <b>were</b> watching over the deceased, <b>this</b> one <b>watches and that</b> one <b>recites</b> <i>Shema</i>, and then <b>that</b> one <b>watches and this</b> one <b>recites</b> <i>Shema</i>. <b>Ben Azzai says:</b> If <b>they were traveling</b> with the deceased <b>on a boat, they</b> are permitted <b>to set</b> the deceased <b>down in this corner</b> of the boat <b>and both pray in another corner</b> of the boat.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between these</b> two opinions? <b>Ravina said:</b> The practical difference <b>between them is</b> whether or not one need be <b>concerned about mice</b> even inside the boat. <b>The</b> first <b>Sage holds that we are concerned</b> about mice everywhere, and it is therefore inappropriate to leave the deceased unguarded, even on a boat, lest he be eaten by mice. <b>The</b> other <b>Sage,</b> ben Azzai, <b>maintains that we are not concerned about mice</b> on a boat.

### Part 10
The Gemara discusses other issues concerning the dignity of the deceased. <b>The Sages taught: One who transports bones from place to place may not place them in a saddlebag [<i>disakaya</i>] and place them on the donkey’s back and ride on them, as</b> in doing so <b>he treats</b> the remains <b>disgracefully. However, if he is afraid of gentiles</b> or <b>highwaymen</b> and therefore must move quickly, <b>he is permitted</b> to do so. <b>And just as they said with regard to bones, so they said with regard to a Torah scroll.</b>

### Part 11
With regard to this last statement, the Gemara asks: <b>To what</b> section of the <i>baraita</i> does the parallel to a Torah scroll refer? <b>If you say</b> that this refers to <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, this is <b>obvious. Is a Torah scroll less</b> important <b>than bones</b> of the dead? Certainly one may not treat a Torah disgracefully. Rather, this statement must refer <b>to the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, that in a dangerous situation, one is permitted to ride on a Torah scroll as well.

### Part 12
<b>Raḥava said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said: One who sees the deceased</b> taken to burial <b>and does not escort him has committed a transgression due to</b> the verse: <b>“He who mocks the poor blasphemes his Creator.” And if he does escort him, what is his reward? Rav Asi said: The verse says about him: “He who gives to the poor gives a loan to the Lord,</b> and the Lord will repay him” (Proverbs 19:17), and: “He who oppresses the poor blasphemes his Creator, <b>but he who is gracious to the poor honors Him”</b> (Proverbs 14:31).

### Part 13
The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yonatan were walking in a cemetery and the sky-blue string</b> of <b>Rabbi Yonatan’s</b> ritual fringes <b>was cast</b> to the ground and dragging across the graves. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya said</b> to him: <b>Lift it, so</b> the dead <b>will not say: Tomorrow,</b> when their day comes, they will <b>come to</b> be buried with <b>us, and now</b> they are <b>insulting us.</b>

### Part 14
Rabbi Yonatan <b>said to him: Do</b> the dead <b>know so much? Isn’t it stated: “And the dead know nothing”</b> (Ecclesiastes 9:5)? Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to him: If you read</b> the verse, <b>you did not</b> read it <b>a second time, and if you</b> read it <b>a second time, you did not</b> read it <b>a third time, and if you</b> read it <b>a third time, they did not explain it to you</b> properly. The meaning of the verse: “For the living know that they will die, and the dead know nothing and have no more reward, for their memory has been forgotten” (Ecclesiastes 9:5): <b>For the living know that they will die, these are the righteous, who even in their death are called living.</b> An allusion to this is <b>as it is stated: “And Benayahu, son of Yehoyada, son of a valiant man of Kabze’el, who had done mighty deeds, he smote the two altar-hearths of Moab; he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow”</b> (II Samuel 23:20).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC