
### Part 1
<b>Granted, according to the one who said that</b> <i>novelot temara</i> are <b>dates</b> felled <b>by the wind, that is why here,</b> when our mishna speaks of ruined dates, <b>it calls them <i>novelot</i>, unmodified and there,</b> when it speaks of those that fell because of the wind, <b>it calls them</b> <i>novelot <b>temara</b></i><b>. However, according to the one who said that</b> <i>novelot temara</i> are dates <b>burned by the heat</b> of the sun, <b>it should have taught</b> in <b>this</b> mishna here <b>and that,</b> the mishna in tractate <i>Demai</i>, <b><i>novelot temara</i>; or</b> taught in <b>this and that <i>novelot</i>, unmodified.</b> The use of different terms indicates that the <i>mishnayot</i> are discussing different items. No answer was found to this question, and the Gemara notes that indeed, according to the one who said that <i>novelot temara</i> are dates burned by the heat of the sun, <b>it is difficult.</b>

### Part 2
The mishna cited a dispute with regard to the order in which one is supposed to recite the blessings when <b>there were many types</b> of food <b>before him.</b> Rabbi Yehuda says: If there is one of the seven species for which Eretz Yisrael was praised among them, he recites the first blessing over it. And the Rabbis say: He recites a blessing over whichever of them he wants. <b>Ulla said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is specifically in a case <b>where the blessings</b> to be recited over each type of food <b>are the same,</b> as in that case <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds: The type of the seven</b> species <b>takes precedence, and the Rabbis hold: The preferred type takes precedence,</b> and a blessing is recited over it first. <b>However,</b> when <b>their blessings are not the same, everyone agrees that one must recite a blessing over this</b> type of food <b>and then recite another blessing over that,</b> ensuring that the appropriate blessing is recited over each type of food.

### Part 3
<b>The Gemara raises an objection</b> to this based on what was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>a radish and an olive were before him, he recites a blessing over the radish and exempts the olive</b> from the requirement of a blessing, although their blessings are different. The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where the radish is</b> the <b>primary</b> component for the one partaking of them, and the olive serves only to temper the taste of the radish. Therefore, he need recite a blessing only over the radish.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues and asks: <b>If so, say the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> where <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One recites a blessing over the olive, as the olive is a type of the seven</b> species. Does <b>Rabbi Yehuda not accept that</b> principle <b>which we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Any</b> food <b>that is primary, and</b> is eaten <b>with</b> food that is <b>secondary, one recites a blessing over the primary</b> food, and that blessing <b>exempts the secondary</b> from the requirement to recite a blessing before eating it? <b>And if you say: Indeed, he does not hold</b> that the primary food exempts the secondary, <b>wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> it is <b>due to the radish</b> that <b>the olive comes, one recites a blessing over the radish and exempts the olive.</b> If so, the dispute whether to recite a blessing over the radish or the olive must be in a case where the radish is not primary. This is an apparent contradiction of Ulla’s statement.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>Actually, we are dealing with</b> a case where the <b>radish is</b> the <b>primary</b> component of the meal, <b>and when Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis disagree, it is with regard to a different case that they disagree, and</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and it teaches the following:</b> If <b>a radish and an olive were before him, he recites a blessing over the radish and exempts the olive. In what</b> circumstances <b>does this apply?</b> Specifically <b>when the radish is primary, but when the radish is not primary, everyone agrees that one recites</b> the appropriate <b>blessing over this</b> one <b>and then he again recites</b> the appropriate <b>blessing over that</b> one. However, <b>in general,</b> if <b>two types of food whose blessings are identical</b> were before him, <b>he recites a blessing over whichever of them that he wants. Rabbi Yehuda says: He recites a blessing over the olive, as the olive is a type of the seven</b> species.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa disagreed with regard to</b> this subject. <b>One said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> is <b>in</b> a case <b>where their blessings are identical, as Rabbi Yehuda held:</b> A <b>type of the seven species takes precedence</b> and the blessing is recited over it first. <b>And the Rabbis held: The preferred type takes precedence,</b> and a blessing is recited over it first; <b>however, when their blessings are not identical, everyone agrees that one recites</b> the appropriate <b>blessing over this</b> one <b>and then he again recites</b> the appropriate <b>blessing over that</b> one. <b>And one said: Even when their blessings are not identical,</b> there is <b>also a dispute.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara discusses this: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that the <b>dispute</b> is <b>in</b> a case <b>where their blessings are identical, it</b> works out <b>well. However, according to the one who says</b> that <b>they disagree in</b> a case <b>where their blessings are not identical,</b> then <b>about what do they disagree?</b> One must recite two blessings in any case. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> They disagree with regard to which blessing <b>precedes</b> the other.

### Part 8
<b>As Rav Yosef, and some say Rabbi Yitzḥak, said: Each</b> food whose significance is manifest in that it <b>precedes</b> the others <b>in this verse,</b> which sings the praises of Eretz Yisrael, <b>takes precedence</b> over the others <b>in terms of blessing as well, as it is stated: “A land of wheat and barley, vines, figs and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey”</b> (Deuteronomy 8:8).

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: And this opinion <b>disagrees</b> with the opinion <b>of Rabbi Ḥanan. As Rabbi Ḥanan said: The entire verse was stated for</b> the purpose of teaching <b>measures</b> with regard to different <i>halakhot</i> in the Torah.

### Part 10
<b>Wheat</b> was mentioned as the basis for calculating the time required for one to become ritually impure by entering a house afflicted with leprosy, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One who enters a house afflicted</b> with leprosy of the house (see Leviticus 14:33–53) <b>with his clothes</b> resting <b>on his shoulders, and his sandals and his rings are in his hands,</b> both <b>he and they,</b> the clothes, sandals, and rings, <b>immediately</b> become <b>ritually impure.</b> However, if <b>he was dressed in his clothes, and his sandals were on his feet and his rings on his fingers, he immediately becomes ritually impure</b> upon entering the house, <b>but they,</b> the clothes, sandals, and rings, <b>remain pure until he stays</b> in the house <b>long enough to eat half a loaf</b> of bread. This calculation is made with <b>wheat bread,</b> which takes less time to eat, <b>and not</b> with <b>barley bread,</b> and with one who is <b>reclining and eating</b> the bread <b>with a relish,</b> which hastens the eating. There is, then, a Torah measurement that is connected specifically to wheat.

### Part 11
<b>Barley</b> is also used as the basis for a measure, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A bone</b> from a corpse that is the size <b>of</b> a grain of <b>barley imparts ritual impurity through contact and by being carried,</b> but <b>it does not impart impurity</b> by means <b>of a tent,</b> i.e., if the bone was inside a house, it does not defile all of the articles in the house.

### Part 12
The halakhic measure determined by <b>vines</b> is <b>the quantity of a quarter <i>log</i> of wine for a Nazirite</b> and not the wine equivalent of a quarter <i>log</i> of water, which is a slightly different measure. <b>Figs</b> serve as the basis for the measure of <b>a dried fig-bulk,</b> typically the smallest unit of food for which someone will be held liable <b>for carrying out on Shabbat</b> from one domain to another. <b>Pomegranates</b> teach us a particular measurement as well, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>All</b> ritually impure wooden <b>utensils belonging to</b> ordinary <b>homeowners</b> become pure through breaking the utensil,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC