
### Part 1
<b>that they are trampled.</b> Even if there had been a distinguishing mark on the bundles it would have been destroyed when it was trampled. If he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> the sheaves <b>and proclaims</b> his find, <b>as</b> due to the absence of pedestrian traffic <b>they are not trampled</b> and the distinguishing mark remains intact. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the sheaves, whether</b> he finds them <b>in a public area</b> or <b>whether</b> he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>Since they</b> protrude <b>high</b> above the ground, they are <b>not trampled.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Rava explains, according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to bundles <b>whose location</b> is their distinguishing mark: If one finds <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, these</b> belong <b>to him</b> due to the fact <b>that they are</b> kicked <b>and</b> they consequently <b>roll</b> to a different location than where they were placed. If he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. Due to the absence of pedestrian traffic <b>they are</b> not kicked <b>and do not roll,</b> and they therefore remain in the location where they were placed. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the sheaves, whether</b> he finds them <b>in a public area</b> or <b>whether</b> he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>Since they are heavy, they do not roll</b> when kicked.

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna: If one found <b>baker’s loaves, these</b> belong <b>to him.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>But</b> if one finds <b>loaves of a homeowner,</b> he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. <b>What is the reason?</b> When one finds loaves <b>of a homeowner</b> he is obligated to proclaim his find <b>because there is a distinguishing mark on</b> the loaves. <b>As</b> each person shapes his loaves in a unique manner, <b>it is known that the loaves of a person</b> belong to that <b>person. And</b> there <b>is no difference</b> if the loaves were found <b>in a public area, and</b> there <b>is no difference</b> if the loaves were found <b>in a secluded area;</b> the finder <b>takes</b> the item <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>Apparently,</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b> This is <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabba</b> could have <b>said to you: There, this is the reason</b> that one must return the loaves of a homeowner found in a public area. It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that one does not pass by food</b> with-out picking it up. Therefore, it can be assumed that it will not be trampled. The Gemara asks: <b>But aren’t there gentiles</b> who do not treat food with deference and who will trample the loaves? The Gemara answers: <b>Gentiles are concerned</b> that the loaves were placed in a public area for reasons <b>of sorcery.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But aren’t there beasts and dogs</b> that will trample the loaves? The Gemara answers: The mishna is referring to <b>a place where beasts and dogs are not commonly</b> found.

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this dispute between Rabba and Rava is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> in the mishna. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If one finds <b>any</b> lost item <b>in which there is an alteration,</b> he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. <b>How so?</b> If he <b>found a round</b> cake of pressed figs with an <b>earthenware</b> shard <b>inside it,</b> or <b>a loaf</b> of bread <b>with coins inside it,</b> he must proclaim his find. One may conclude <b>by inference that the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>holds</b> that even in that case <b>those</b> items belong <b>to him.</b>

### Part 6
In explaining the tannaitic dispute, the Sages <b>assumed that everyone agrees that</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> without having been placed there intentionally <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and</b> everyone agrees that <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up. Accordingly, <b>what</b> is the basis of their dispute? <b>Is it not with regard to</b> the matter of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled</b> that <b>they disagree?</b> As one <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that its legal status <b>is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that its legal status <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava: If it enters your mind that the first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up, then in the case of <b>loaves of a homeowner</b> that were found <b>in a public area,</b> where the loaves would be trampled and their distinguishing mark destroyed, <b>why does he proclaim</b> his find?

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava that everyone holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up. <b>And here,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> that <b>they disagree. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own <b>is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And Rabba</b> could have <b>said to you that everyone agrees</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one does not pass by food</b> without picking it up. <b>And here,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> that <b>they disagree. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own is not that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 10
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say,</b> in explaining the tannaitic dispute, that the Sages <b>assumed that everyone agrees that</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> without having been placed there intentionally <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and</b> everyone agrees that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark. What,</b> then, is the basis of their dispute? <b>Is it not with regard to</b> the matter of whether <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up that <b>they disagree. As</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b>one passes</b> by food without picking it up, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that <b>one does not pass</b> by food without picking it up.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava: If it enters your mind that the first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up, then in the case of <b>loaves of a homeowner</b> that were found <b>in a public area,</b> where the loaves would be trampled and their distinguishing mark destroyed, <b>why does he proclaim</b> his find?

### Part 12
<b>Rather, Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava that everyone holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one passes by food</b> without picking it up. <b>And here,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> that <b>they disagree. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And Rabba</b> could have <b>said to you that everyone agrees</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark and</b> that <b>one does not pass by food</b> without picking it up. <b>And here,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own</b> that <b>they disagree. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that</b> could <b>come</b> to mark an item <b>on its own is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that the legal status of a distinguishing mark that could come to mark an item on its own <b>is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 14
§ <b>Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava</b> that this is <b>the principle of a lost item: Once</b> the owner of a lost item <b>says: Woe</b> is me <b>for the monetary loss,</b> this indicates that <b>he has despaired of its</b> recovery.

### Part 15
<b>And Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that if one finds <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, those</b> bundles belong <b>to him. If</b> he finds the bundles <b>in a secluded area</b> in <b>a manner</b> indicating that they had <b>fallen, those</b> bundles belong <b>to him. If</b> he finds the bundles in <b>a manner</b> indicating that they had been <b>placed</b> there, the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>And</b> both <b>this</b> ruling <b>and that</b> ruling are <b>in</b> the case of <b>an item in which there is no distinguishing mark. But in</b> the case of <b>an item on which there is a distinguishing mark,</b> it <b>is no different</b> if the bundles were found <b>in a public area and</b> it <b>is no different</b> if the bundles were found <b>in a secluded area; whether</b> the bundles were found in <b>a manner</b> indicating that they had <b>fallen or whether</b> they were found in <b>a manner</b> indicating that they had been <b>placed</b> there, he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC