
### Part 1
§ The mishna teaches that <b>strings of fish</b> are among the list of found items that one may keep. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> not <b>let the knot</b> with which the fish are tied serve as <b>a distinguishing mark?</b> The Gemara answers: The mishna is referring <b>to the fisherman’s knot with which everyone ties</b> his fish, which is not distinctive. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>let the number</b> of fish tied on the string serve as <b>a distinguishing mark?</b> The Gemara answers: The mishna is referring <b>to a number</b> of fish <b>that is equal</b> to that on all strings of fish in that area.

### Part 2
The Sages <b>raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> In items that have no other distinguishing mark, <b>is</b> their <b>number a distinguishing mark or is it not a distinguishing mark? Rav Sheshet said to them: You learned it</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one found <b>silver vessels, copper vessels, fragments of lead, and any metal vessels, that</b> person who found them <b>shall not return</b> the item to its owner <b>until</b> the owner <b>provides</b> a distinguishing <b>sign or until</b> the owner <b>accurately provides its weight. And from</b> the fact <b>that weight</b> serves as <b>a distinguishing mark, measure and number also</b> serve as <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 3
The mishna teaches that <b>cuts of meat</b> are among the list of found items that one may keep. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> not <b>let the weight</b> of the cut serve as <b>a distinguishing mark?</b> The Gemara answers: The mishna is referring <b>to a weight that is equal,</b> i.e., all cuts of meat in that area are of that weight. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>let the cut</b> of meat <b>itself</b> serve as <b>a distinguishing mark,</b> as it came, for example, <b>either</b> from <b>the neck or</b> from <b>the thigh</b> of the animal? <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one found cuts of fish, or a fish</b> that <b>was bitten,</b> he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find, and if he found <b>barrels of wine, or of oil, or of grain, or of dried figs, or of olives, these</b> belong <b>to him?</b> Apparently, the distinguishing mark in the cuts of fish is the part of the fish from which they were cut.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here</b> in the <i>baraita</i>? It is <b>in</b> a case <b>where there is a distinguishing mark in the</b> shape of <b>the cut, as</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>of Rabba bar Rav Huna</b> who would <b>cut</b> the meat <b>with three corners,</b> forming a triangle. The distinguishing mark is not the part of the fish from where it had been cut. The language of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise, as</b> the case of cuts of fish <b>is taught</b> juxtaposed to and <b>similar to a fish</b> that <b>was bitten,</b> in which case the bite is a distinguishing mark. The Gemara concludes: <b>Learn from it</b> that it is the shape of the cut that is a distinguishing mark, not the place from where it was cut.

### Part 5
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: If one found <b>barrels of wine, or of oil, or of grain, or of dried figs, or of olives, these</b> belong <b>to him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (25a): With regard to <b>jugs of wine or jugs of oil,</b> if one finds any of these he is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his finding. <b>Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav said: The mishna</b> is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>sealed</b> jugs. Each person seals his jugs and barrels in a unique manner. Therefore, the seal constitutes a distinguishing mark. The Gemara asks: One may conclude <b>by inference that the <i>baraita</i></b> is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>open</b> barrels, and <b>if</b> it is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>open</b> barrels, <b>it is a deliberate loss.</b> Since the wine in open barrels will spoil, it is obvious that one need not return it to the owner. <b>Rav Hoshaya says:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to</b> a case where one <b>covers</b> the barrel with the lid but does not seal it.

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said: You</b> can <b>even say that</b> both <b>this</b> mishna <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are referring <b>to</b> jugs and barrels that are <b>sealed, and</b> it is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in the mishna, where one is required to return the jugs, it is referring to a case where one found the jugs <b>before the storehouses</b> of wine <b>were opened.</b> At that point, the distinguishing mark of the seal proves that the jug belongs to its owner. <b>There,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, where one is not required to return the barrels, it is referring to a case where one found the barrels <b>after the storehouses</b> of wine <b>were opened.</b> Since the storekeepers sold their barrels to the public, the seal would no longer serve as an indicator of the identity of the owner. This is just <b>as</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>where Rav Ya’akov bar Abba found a barrel of wine after the storehouses were opened. He came before Abaye</b> to ascertain what he should do with the barrel. Abaye <b>said to him: Go take</b> the barrel <b>for yourself.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Beivai raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman: Is</b> the <b>location</b> where the lost item was found <b>a distinguishing mark, or is it not a distinguishing mark?</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him</b> that <b>you learned it</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>found barrels of wine, or of oil, or of grain, or of dried figs, or of olives, these</b> belong <b>to him. And if it enters your mind that location is a distinguishing mark, let</b> the finder <b>proclaim</b> what he found, and have the <b>location</b> serve as a distinguishing mark. <b>Rav Zevid said: With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with the case of a barrel that was found <b>on the bank of the river.</b> Since it is the place where ships dock and merchandise belonging to many people is loaded and unloaded, the bank of a river cannot serve as a distinguishing mark.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Mari said: What is the reason that the Sages said</b> that in the case of a lost item, the location of <b>the bank of a river is not a distinguishing mark?</b> It is <b>because we say to</b> one seeking to reclaim his item by providing its location on the bank of a river: <b>Just as it happened</b> that <b>you</b> lost an item there, <b>it also happened</b> that <b>another</b> person lost an item there. <b>Some say</b> a slightly different version of that which <b>Rav Mari said: What is the reason that the Sages said</b> that <b>location is not a distinguishing mark?</b> It is <b>because we say to</b> one seeking to reclaim his item by providing its location: <b>Just as it happened</b> that <b>you</b> placed an item in <b>that place, it also happened</b> that <b>another</b> placed an item in <b>that place.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who found pitch</b> near <b>the winepress. He came before Rav</b> to ascertain what he should do with the pitch. Rav <b>said to him: Go take</b> the pitch <b>for yourself.</b> Rav <b>saw that</b> the man <b>was hesitating,</b> uncertain that he was entitled to the pitch. Rav, in an attempt to allay his qualms, <b>said to him: Go divide it with Ḥiyya my son,</b> as Rav would certainly not want his son to take a share of a stolen item. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that Rav holds that location is not a distinguishing mark. Rabbi Abba said:</b> That is not Rav’s reasoning. Rather, it is <b>due to</b> the <b>despair of its owner</b> that the Sages <b>touched upon</b> this matter and permitted the finder to keep such a found item. <b>As,</b> Rav <b>saw that grass was growing through</b> the pitch, indicating that it had been there for an extended period.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> If one finds any <i>anpurya</i> vessels he is not obligated to proclaim his find. The Gemara asks: <b>What are <i>anpurya</i></b> vessels? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> They are <b>new vessels, as the eye</b> of its purchaser has <b>not</b> yet <b>sufficiently seen them</b> to be able to recognize them. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If there is a distinguishing mark on</b> the vessels, <b>when the eye</b> of its purchaser has <b>not</b> yet <b>sufficiently seen them, what of it?</b> He can describe the mark after even a short glance and claim his item. <b>If there is no distinguishing mark on</b> the vessels, then <b>when the eye</b> of the one who purchases them has <b>sufficiently seen them, what of it?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> it is a vessel <b>in which there is no distinguishing mark, and the</b> practical <b>difference</b> is with regard <b>to returning</b> the vessel <b>to a Torah scholar</b> on the basis <b>of visual recognition.</b> When <b>the eye</b> of a Torah scholar has <b>sufficiently seen them he is certain about them, and we return</b> a lost item <b>to him</b> on the basis of his description of the vessel. <b>When the eye</b> of a Torah scholar has <b>not sufficiently seen them, he is not certain about them, and we do not return</b> a lost item <b>to him, as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: With regard to these three matters</b> alone, it <b>is normal</b> for <b>Sages to amend their statements</b> and deviate from the truth: <b>With regard to a tractate,</b> if he is asked whether he studied a particular tractate, he may humbly say that he did not, even if he did. <b>And with regard to a bed,</b> if he is asked whether he slept in a particular bed, he may say that he did not, to avoid shame in case some unseemly residue is found on the bed.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC