
### Part 1
<b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that Beit Hillel hold that the bailee pays <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of</b> its <b>removal from the owner’s house,</b> i.e., at the time of the misappropriation. The Gemara asks: If so, <b>shall we say that Rabba stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai</b> and not the opinion of Beit Hillel? The Gemara rejects this: <b>Rabba</b> could have <b>said to you: With regard to</b> a subsequent <b>increase</b> in the value of the misappropriated deposit, <b>everyone,</b> Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel, <b>agrees</b> that the bailee pays in accordance with its value when the deposit was destroyed. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>in</b> the case of a subsequent <b>decrease</b> in the value of the misappropriated deposit.

### Part 2
<b>Rabba clarifies: Beit Shammai hold</b> that <b>misappropriation does not require loss,</b> and even if the deposit remains intact, his legal status is that of a robber from the moment of misappropriation. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>when</b> the value of the misappropriated deposit <b>decreases, it decreases in his possession.</b> Therefore, he pays in accordance with its value at the time of misappropriation. <b>And Beit Hillel hold</b> that <b>misappropriation requires loss,</b> and only when the deposit decreases in value after the misappropriation is the bailee liable to pay. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>when</b> the value of the misappropriated deposit <b>decreases, it decreases in the possession of its owner.</b> Therefore, he pays in accordance with its value at the time that it was damaged.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to that explanation, concerning <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that Rava says: Misappropriation does not require loss, shall we say</b> that the opinion <b>that Rava stated is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai? Rather, with what are we dealing here?</b> It is with a case <b>where</b> the bailee <b>moved</b> the barrel <b>to</b> stand <b>upon it</b> and <b>bring fledglings</b> from a nest in a tree. <b>And they disagree with regard to one who borrows</b> an item <b>without the knowledge</b> of the owner.

### Part 4
<b>Beit Shammai hold:</b> The legal status of <b>one who borrows</b> an item <b>without the knowledge</b> of the owner <b>is</b> that of <b>a robber</b> in terms of responsibility. He is accorded that legal status the moment he moves the barrel. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>when</b> the value of the misappropriated deposit <b>decreases, it decreases in his possession.</b> Consequently, he pays in accordance with its value at the time that he borrowed the barrel. <b>And Beit Hillel hold:</b> The legal status of <b>one who borrows without the knowledge</b> of the owners <b>is</b> that of <b>a borrower,</b> and only when the barrel is broken is the bailee rendered liable to pay. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>when</b> the value of the barrel <b>decreases, it decreases in the possession of its owner.</b> Consequently, he pays in accordance with the barrel’s value at the time that it was damaged.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to that explanation, concerning <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that Rava says:</b> The legal status of <b>one who borrows</b> an item <b>without the knowledge</b> of the owner, <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, is</b> that of <b>a robber</b> in terms of responsibility, <b>shall we say</b> that the opinion <b>that Rava stated is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai? Rather,</b> contrary to the previous explanations, the terms decrease and increase are not referring to changes in market value. They are referring to the decrease in the value of the animal when its wool is sheared and the increase in its value due to the birth of offspring. And <b>here,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the <b>enhancement of stolen</b> property that <b>they disagree. Beit Shammai hold:</b> The enhancement <b>of stolen</b> property belongs to the one <b>who was robbed. And Beit Hillel hold:</b> The <b>enhancement of stolen</b> property belongs to <b>the robber.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between these <i>tanna’im</i></b> that they disagree, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who robs</b> another of <b>a ewe,</b> if <b>he sheared it or</b> if it <b>gave birth,</b> the robber <b>pays</b> the owner for <b>it and</b> for <b>its fleece or</b> for <b>its offspring;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: The stolen</b> property <b>returns</b> to the owner <b>in its</b> current <b>state.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: The language of the mishna <b>is also precise, as it is taught</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say: He is penalized for</b> its <b>decrease and</b> its <b>increase. And Beit Hillel say:</b> He pays <b>in accordance with the time of removal.</b> When recording the opinion of Beit Shammai, the mishna does not state: He is penalized for its rise and fall in value. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from</b> the wording of the mishna that they disagree with regard to fleece and offspring.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> He pays <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of the claim. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. And Rabbi Akiva concedes</b> in a case <b>where there are witnesses</b> to the misappropriation, as in that case the payment is calculated in accordance with the value of the deposit at the time of the misappropriation. <b>What is the reason</b> for that <i>halakha</i>? It is <b>as the verse states</b> concerning, among others, one who misappropriated a deposit: <b>“To whom it appertains shall he give it on the day of his being guilty”</b> (Leviticus 5:24). <b>And</b> in this case, <b>since there are witnesses</b> to the robbery, <b>from that moment he is liable to</b> pay <b>him</b> for his <b>guilt.</b> He is rendered guilty at the moment the witnesses saw him misappropriate the deposit.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Oshaya said to Rav Yehuda: My teacher,</b> is <b>that</b> what <b>you say? This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Akiva was in disagreement even</b> in a case <b>where there are witnesses</b> to the misappropriation. <b>What is the reason</b> for that <i>halakha</i>? It is <b>as the verse states: “To whom it appertains shall he give it on the day of his being guilty,” and</b> it is <b>the court,</b> not the witnesses, <b>that renders him liable to</b> pay <b>him</b> for his <b>guilt.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Zeira said to Rabbi Abba bar Pappa: When you go there,</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>take a circuitous</b> route <b>to the Ladder of Tyre, and enter before Rabbi Ya’akov bar Idi, and ask of him if he heard</b> whether according <b>to Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva or</b> whether the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b> He went and asked. Rabbi Ya’akov bar Idi <b>said to him: This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>always in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>always? Rav Ashi said:</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan used this term so <b>that you will not say</b> the following: <b>This statement,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, <b>applies</b> specifically in a case <b>where there are no witnesses, but</b> in a case <b>where there are witnesses, no,</b> payment is calculated in accordance with the value of the deposit when they witnessed the misappropriation.

### Part 12
<b>Or alternatively,</b> the <i>halakha</i> will not be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva in a case <b>where he returns</b> the barrel <b>to its place and it broke.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan stated that the <i>halakha</i> is always in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, <b>to exclude</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, who says</b> that if one stole from another and returned it <b>we do not require the knowledge of the owners</b> for the item to be considered returned. Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>teaches us</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that we require the knowledge of the owners,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva (see 40b). <b>And Rava says:</b> Contrary to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who intends to misappropriate a deposit</b> and voices that intent in the presence of witnesses, <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He is <b>liable</b> to pay for any damage to the deposit from that point forward, <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> He is <b>liable</b> to pay <b>only</b> if <b>he</b> actually <b>misappropriates</b> the deposit, <b>as it is stated</b> concerning a bailee: <b>“Whether he has misappropriated his neighbor’s goods”</b> (Exodus 22:7). If <b>he tilted the</b> deposited <b>barrel and took from it a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of wine for his own use, <b>and</b> the barrel <b>broke,</b> then <b>he pays only</b> for that <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i><b>.</b> If <b>he lifted</b> the barrel <b>and took from it a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of wine, <b>and</b> the barrel <b>broke,</b> since he acquired the barrel by lifting it, <b>he pays the value of</b> the <b>entire</b> barrel.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC