
### Part 1
<b>And what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: Do <b>you say</b> so? <b>This is what they were saying to him:</b> If we apply the opinion <b>from your statement</b> that one may volunteer as an unpaid bailee, <b>to our statement</b> that the Sages instituted a directive to give him four dinars, the result is that communal offerings <b>do not come from communal</b> funds as required. <b>And likewise, when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The question of whether or not <b>we are concerned about violent people is</b> the difference <b>between</b> the opinions of the Rabbis and Rabbi Yosei, i.e., that is the crux of their dispute.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who takes manure out to the public domain,</b> in order for it to be transported to fertilize a field, he <b>who takes it out</b> from his property <b>takes it out, and</b> immediately, he <b>who</b> takes it to <b>fertilize</b> the field takes it to <b>fertilize</b> the field. They must relocate the manure immediately without allowing it to sit around in the public domain. Similarly, <b>one may not soak clay in the public domain</b> before it is kneaded, <b>and one may not mold bricks</b> in the public domain since this takes a long time and inhibits use of the public domain by others. <b>But one may knead clay in the public domain,</b> as this process does not take long, <b>but not bricks.</b>

### Part 3
With regard to <b>one who builds</b> a structure, keeping the building materials <b>in the public domain,</b> he <b>who brings</b> the <b>stones brings</b> them, <b>and</b> immediately, he <b>who builds</b> the structure <b>builds</b> with them, and may not leave them there. <b>And</b> if the stones <b>cause damage</b> before he had a chance to build them into the structure, <b>he</b> must <b>pay</b> for <b>what he damaged. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One may <b>even prepare his work thirty days beforehand;</b> he may keep the building materials in the public domain for that duration.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 11:8): <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: When it is</b> the <b>time</b> for the <b>manure</b> to be <b>taken out, a person</b> may <b>take his manure out into the public domain and</b> may <b>pile it</b> up for <b>all thirty days, so that it will be trodden on by the feet of people and by the feet of animals,</b> to prepare it for use as fertilizer, <b>since</b> it was <b>on this condition</b> that <b>Joshua bequeathed Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>to the Jewish people.</b> In other words, it is universally accepted that some will relinquish certain rights for the sake of others, and although it may be a nuisance for certain people, this practice is allowed.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> since <b>Rabbi Yehuda concedes that</b> although he acted within his rights, <b>if</b> the manure <b>caused damage,</b> the one who placed it there is <b>liable to pay.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 62b): <b>Rabbi Yehuda concedes with regard to a Hanukkah lamp</b> placed in the public domain that ignited a fire and caused damage <b>that he is exempt, because he acts with permission? What, is</b> the reason he is exempt <b>not</b> that he acted with the <b>permission of the court</b> to use the public domain in this manner, which indicates that one who acts with court permission is exempt from liability for damage? The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>No,</b> it means that he has the <b>permission of a mitzva.</b> Since it is a mitzva to place the Hanukkah lamp outside, he is exempt from paying for the damage it caused. The mere right to place the item in the public domain does not exempt the owner from liability.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>all these</b> cases in <b>which</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>it is permitted</b> for people <b>to place obstacles in the public domain, if they caused damage,</b> these people <b>are liable to pay, and Rabbi Yehuda exempts</b> them? Evidently, according to Rabbi Yehuda, if one has the permission of the court to put an item in the public domain, he is exempt from paying damages. <b>Rather, it is clear</b> that <b>the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said: Rabbi Yehuda and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and Rabbi Shimon all hold</b> that <b>wherever the Sages gave</b> someone <b>permission</b> to perform an action, <b>and</b> in performing this action <b>he causes damage,</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from payment. The Gemara cites the sources for this assertion: It is clear that <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> is of that opinion based on <b>that which we</b> just <b>said.</b> It is clear that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> is of that opinion, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One may <b>even prepare his work thirty days beforehand.</b>

### Part 8
It is clear that <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> is of that opinion, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Batra</i> 20b): If <b>one was setting up</b> an oven <b>in the upper story, there must be a plaster floor beneath it,</b> which serves as the ceiling of the lower story, at least <b>three handbreadths</b> thick, so that the ceiling below does not burn. <b>And</b> in the case <b>of a stove</b> the plaster floor must be at least one <b>handbreadth</b> thick. <b>And if</b> he <b>causes damage</b> after having taken the necessary precautions, <b>he pays</b> compensation for that <b>which he damaged. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The Sages <b>said all of these measurements</b> to teach <b>only that if he causes damage he is exempt from paying,</b> as he took all reasonable precautions.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> Once <b>the stonecutter</b> has <b>delivered</b> the stones <b>to the chiseler,</b> from that point on, <b>the chiseler</b> is <b>liable</b> for any damage caused by them. Once <b>the chiseler</b> has <b>delivered</b> the stones <b>to the donkey driver</b> to transport them, <b>the donkey driver</b> is <b>liable.</b> Once <b>the donkey driver</b> has <b>delivered</b> the stones <b>to a porter</b> to carry them to the building site, <b>the porter</b> is <b>liable.</b> Once <b>the porter</b> has <b>delivered</b> the stones <b>to the builder, the builder</b> is <b>liable.</b> Once <b>the builder</b> has <b>delivered</b> them <b>to the master builder [<i>adrikhal</i>],</b> who places and straightens the stones on the structure, <b>the master builder</b> is <b>liable. And if he placed a stone upon the row [<i>dimos</i>]</b> of stones <b>and</b> the stone fell off and <b>caused damage,</b> then <b>they are all liable to pay.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, that only the <b>last one,</b> the master builder, is <b>liable, and all of them are exempt?</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as the ruling <b>here,</b> in this <i>baraita</i>, is stated <b>with regard to</b> a case of <b>hiring,</b> and therefore only the last one is liable, whereas the ruling <b>there,</b> in that <i>baraita</i>, is stated <b>with regard to</b> a case of <b>contracting,</b> in which they all agreed to perform the work together, and therefore they are all liable to pay.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>two gardens</b> that were located <b>one above the other,</b> i.e., a garden on a plateau that borders another garden below, <b>and vegetables</b> grew <b>in-between,</b> out of the wall of soil resulting from the difference in height between the two gardens, <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> These vegetables belong <b>to</b> the owner of the <b>upper</b> garden. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> They belong <b>to</b> the owner of the <b>lower</b> one. <b>Rabbi Meir said</b> in explanation of his ruling: <b>If the</b> owner of the <b>upper</b> garden would <b>want to</b> dig and <b>take his dirt</b> and does so, <b>no vegetables</b> would grow <b>here,</b> as that wall made of soil would not exist. The vegetables therefore belong to him. In response, <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: If the</b> owner of the <b>lower</b> garden would <b>want to fill his garden</b> with dirt and does so, thereby raising its level, <b>no vegetables</b> would grow <b>here,</b> as that wall made of soil would not exist. The vegetables therefore belong to him.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Meir said: Since the two of them can object to each other,</b> as they each have the ability to prevent the vegetable growth, nothing can be decided based on such considerations. Instead, the court <b>considers from where this vegetable lives</b> and derives nourishment, whether from above or from below. <b>Rabbi Shimon said: Any</b> vegetables <b>that the</b> owner of the <b>upper</b> garden <b>can stretch out his hand and take, those</b> vegetables <b>are his, and the rest</b> belong <b>to</b> the owner of the <b>lower</b> garden.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rava says: With regard to the root</b> of the vegetable growing out of the wall of soil, <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>it is</b> the property of the owner <b>of</b> the <b>upper</b> garden, since the ground belongs to him. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>with regard to its leaves,</b> which grow above the airspace of the lower garden. <b>Rabbi Meir holds: Cast its leaves after its root,</b> and consider that they too belong to the owner of the upper garden. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds: We do not say: Cast its leaves after its root.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara comments: <b>And they follow their</b> line of <b>reasoning, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to a tree belonging to one individual that grew on land owned by another: <b>That which sprouts from the trunk and from the roots, these</b> belong <b>to the owner of the land.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> That which sprouts <b>from the trunk</b> belongs <b>to the owner of the tree, and</b> anything that grows <b>from the roots</b> belongs <b>to the owner of the land.</b> This statement demonstrates that according to Rabbi Yehuda, ownership of the sprouts is not determined exclusively based on the ownership of the roots.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC