
### Part 1
<b>they disagree with regard to a lender who needs the collateral,</b> i.e., the lender wants to use the collateral and deduct the value of its use it from the amount of the loan. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>holds that he is performing a mitzva</b> in <b>that he lent to him, and</b> therefore <b>he is</b> considered <b>a paid bailee. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds</b> that <b>he is not performing a mitzva, as his intention is</b> to lend <b>for his own benefit. And</b> consequently <b>he is</b> considered <b>an unpaid bailee</b> for the collateral.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Abba Shaul says:</b> It is <b>permitted</b> for <b>a person to rent out a poor person’s collateral</b> that was given to him for a loan, <b>so that he shall</b> set a rental price for it and thereby <b>progressively reduce</b> the debt, because this is considered like returning a lost item. <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Ami says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abba Shaul, but even Abba Shaul said</b> his ruling <b>only with regard to a hoe, a chisel, and an ax, since the remuneration</b> from <b>these</b> utensils <b>is great and their depreciation is small.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who was transporting a barrel from one place to another and he broke it, whether</b> he was <b>an unpaid bailee or a paid bailee,</b> if <b>he takes an oath</b> that he was not negligent he is exempt from payment. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> Both <b>this</b> one, an unpaid bailee, <b>and that</b> one, a paid bailee, must <b>take an oath</b> to exempt themselves from payment, <b>but I wonder whether</b> both <b>this</b> one <b>and that</b> one <b>can take an oath.</b> In other words, this is the <i>halakha</i> that I heard from my teachers, but I do not understand their ruling.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>one who was transporting a barrel for another</b> person <b>from one place to another and he broke it, whether</b> he was <b>an unpaid bailee or a paid bailee,</b> if <b>he takes an oath</b> that he was not negligent, he is exempt from payment. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: An unpaid bailee takes an oath</b> and does not pay, but <b>a paid bailee pays. Rabbi Eliezer says: This</b> one <b>and that</b> one <b>take an oath, and I wonder whether</b> both <b>this one and that one can take an oath.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara analyzes these opinions. Is that <b>to say</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>one who stumbles is not</b> considered <b>negligent,</b> but the victim of an accident? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one’s pitcher broke</b> in a public place <b>and he did not remove it</b> from there, or if <b>his camel fell and he did not stand it up, Rabbi Meir renders him liable for the damage they</b> caused? <b>And the Rabbis say</b> that he is <b>exempt according to human laws but</b> is <b>liable according to the laws of Heaven.</b> Although the court cannot impose liability, nevertheless he is morally culpable. <b>And we maintain that they disagree with regard to</b> the question of whether <b>one who stumbles is negligent.</b>This indicates that Rabbi Meir holds that one who stumbles is considered negligent.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: Break</b> the mishna, as he <b>who taught this did not teach that,</b> i.e., there are two traditions with regard to Rabbi Meir’s opinion. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda came to say</b> a different ruling: <b>An unpaid bailee takes an oath</b> and does not pay while <b>a paid bailee pays, this one in accordance with his law and that one in accordance with his law,</b> as an unpaid bailee is exempt from liability for theft and loss, while a paid bailee is liable in those cases and exempt only in cases of circumstances beyond his control. <b>And Rabbi Eliezer came to say: Yes,</b> there is <b>a tradition</b> that <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> as I learned from my teachers, <b>but I wonder whether</b> both <b>this</b> one <b>and that</b> one <b>can take an oath.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, an unpaid bailee takes an oath that he was not negligent with regard to</b> the barrel, as required by Torah law, <b>but why does a paid bailee take an oath?</b> Even <b>if he was not negligent he is still required to pay,</b> as he is obligated to pay for theft and loss. <b>And even</b> with regard to <b>an unpaid bailee,</b> this <b>works out well</b> if the barrel broke <b>on an inclined plane [<i>midron</i>],</b> as the accident occurred due to the difficulty of transporting it, but if it broke <b>not on an inclined plane</b> but under different circumstances, <b>how can he take an oath</b> that <b>he was not negligent</b> with it? Evidently his negligence caused the accident.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC