### Part 1
we have <b>such and such men with us; such and such dogs with us,</b> and <b>such and such slings [<i>zukata</i>] with us.</b> In other words, we are fully protected and you should not dare to take anything from us. If the thief subsequently <b>went and took</b> an animal <b>from him, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rava <b>said to</b> Abaye: It is as though <b>he has taken them to a place of groups of beasts and bandits,</b> as his taunting of the thief motivated the theft.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The <i>halakhot</i> of bailees stated in the previous mishna apply to standard cases. The <i>halakha</i> is that in any case involving monetary matters the parties may agree to special terms. Therefore, <b>an unpaid bailee may stipulate</b> with the owner <b>that</b> he will <b>be exempt from</b> taking <b>an oath</b> if the item is lost, <b>and</b> similarly, <b>a borrower</b> may stipulate <b>that</b> he will <b>be exempt from</b> having <b>to pay,</b> and <b>a paid bailee or a renter</b> can stipulate <b>that</b> he will <b>be exempt from</b> taking <b>an oath and from</b> having <b>to pay,</b> as one can relinquish his monetary rights. With regard to matters that do not involve monetary claims, <b>anyone who stipulates counter to that which is written in the Torah, his stipulation is void.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And any condition that is preceded by an action,</b> i.e., the agreement is formulated with the promise of an action followed by a statement that this action will be carried out only under certain terms, <b>the condition is void</b> and the promise remains intact. The condition must be stated before the action. <b>And</b> with regard to any condition <b>that one can ultimately fulfill, but he stipulated with him initially,</b> i.e., in practice the action is performed first, followed by the fulfillment of the condition, nevertheless, because it was formulated in the proper manner, with the condition first, <b>his condition is valid.</b> If the condition cannot be fulfilled at all, once the action has been carried out the condition is void.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks a question with regard to the mishna’s statement that bailees can issue conditions and change the liabilities imposed on them by Torah law: <b>Why</b> are they able to do so? This <b>is</b> a case of one who <b>stipulates counter to that which is written in the Torah,</b> as the Torah determines who takes an oath and who must pay, <b>and</b> with regard to <b>anyone who stipulates counter to that which is written in the Torah, his condition is void.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> that of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that if the condition that runs counter to that which is written in the Torah is referring <b>to monetary matters, his condition is valid. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who says to a woman: You are hereby betrothed to me on the condition that you have no</b> claim <b>against me</b> to give you <b>food, clothing, and conjugal rights, she is betrothed but his condition is void;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And Rabbi Yehuda said: With regard to monetary matters,</b> i.e., her food and clothing, <b>his condition is valid.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But can you establish</b> the mishna <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? Say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Anyone who stipulates counter to that which is written in the Torah, his condition is void.</b> In this clause <b>we arrive at</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>actually</b> you can explain that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and the latter clause</b> is referring <b>to non-monetary matters.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara continues to question this explanation: But <b>say the latter clause</b> from near the end of the mishna: <b>And any condition that is preceded by an action, the condition is void. Who have you heard who accepts this reasoning?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Meir, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Abba Ḥalafta, from</b> the <b>village of Ḥananya, said in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> If <b>a condition</b> was stated <b>before the action, this is</b> a valid <b>condition,</b> but if <b>the action</b> came <b>before the condition, it is not</b> a valid <b>condition.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara retracts the previous explanation and states that the <b>entire</b> mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> Why, then, is the bailee exempt from payment or an oath? Because <b>here it is different, as at the outset he did not obligate himself</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> of a bailee as stated in the Torah. Before he entered into the agreement, he clearly stated that he is unwilling to accept upon himself the liabilities of a paid or an unpaid bailee by Torah law.

### Part 9
A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Just as a bailee can issue a condition that he should be exempt, the converse is also possible: <b>A paid bailee can stipulate to be like a borrower,</b> i.e., he can accept upon himself all the responsibilities of a borrower. The Gemara asks: <b>By what</b> means is this commitment binding? Is it merely <b>by speech</b> alone? Mere speech is not sufficient to demonstrate a commitment of this kind. <b>Shmuel said:</b> No; it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the owner <b>performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the bailee affirming this arrangement. The obligation goes into effect only if there was an act of acquisition.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that it is referring to a situation <b>where</b> the owner <b>did not perform</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the bailee, and even so he is liable as a borrower. The reason is that <b>by</b> means of <b>that benefit</b> he receives from the fact <b>that a rumor goes out about him that he is</b> a <b>trustworthy person, he</b> commits wholeheartedly to <b>obligate himself,</b> even by means of a verbal promise alone. Therefore, there is no need for a formal act of acquisition.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>any</b> condition <b>that ultimately can be fulfilled,</b> if he stipulated it initially, his condition is valid. <b>Rav Tavla says</b> that <b>Rav says: This is the statement of Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima, but the Rabbis say: Even though one cannot ultimately fulfill</b> the condition, <b>and he stipulated with regard to it initially, his condition is valid.</b>

### Part 12
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a man said to his wife: <b>This is your bill of divorce on the condition that you ascend to the skies,</b> or <b>on the condition that you descend to the depths;</b> or <b>on the condition that you swallow a reed of one hundred cubits</b> in size; or <b>on the condition that you cross the Great Sea by foot,</b> only if <b>the condition was fulfilled</b> and she did as he demanded <b>is this</b> a valid <b>bill of divorce,</b> but if <b>the condition was not fulfilled</b> it is <b>not</b> a valid <b>bill of divorce.</b> According to this <i>tanna</i>, the condition is binding despite the fact that it cannot be fulfilled in practice.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima says:</b> A document <b>such as this is</b> a valid <b>bill of divorce.</b> The condition is negated, and therefore the bill of divorce is valid even though the condition was not fulfilled. As <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima stated a principle:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> condition <b>that one cannot ultimately fulfill,</b> i.e., a condition that cannot be fulfilled at all, <b>and</b> yet <b>he stipulated</b> to this effect, even if he did so <b>initially, he is</b> considered <b>as only exaggerating, and</b> the document is <b>valid.</b> The supposed condition is not taken seriously and is not binding.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: The mishna is also precisely</b> formulated in accordance with this opinion, <b>as it teaches:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> condition <b>that ultimately he can fulfill, and he stipulated with regard to it initially, his condition is valid.</b> This indicates that if <b>he cannot fulfill it, his condition is void.</b> The Gemara affirms: One can <b>learn from this</b> formulation that the unattributed mishna does in fact represent the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima.

### Part 15
end of chapter

### Part 16
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who borrowed a cow and borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner with it, or</b> he borrowed a cow and <b>hired its owner with it,</b> or he <b>borrowed</b> the services of <b>the owner or hired him and afterward borrowed the cow;</b> in all such cases, if the cow <b>died,</b> the borrower is <b>exempt</b> from liability. Although a borrower is generally liable to pay if a cow he borrowed dies, here he is exempt, <b>as it is stated: “If its owner is with him, he does not pay”</b> (Exodus 22:14).