
### Part 1
<b>two of</b> the <b>three</b> of them to testify that you dissolved the partnership before them. <b>Or alternatively,</b> bring <b>two witnesses</b> to testify <b>that you dissolved</b> the partnership <b>before</b> a court <b>of three.</b>

### Part 2
Rav Safra <b>said to</b> Rabba bar Rav Huna: <b>From where do you</b> know <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that dissolution of the partnership may be accomplished only before a court? Rabba bar Rav Huna <b>said to him:</b> It is <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>If there are</b> three men <b>there</b> who can convene as <b>a court,</b> he <b>may stipulate before</b> the court that he will undertake to return the item provided that he receives full compensation for lost income. But <b>if there is no court there, before whom can he stipulate</b> his condition? Rather, in that case, <b>his</b> financial interests <b>take precedence,</b> and he need not return the lost item. Apparently, one stipulates binding conditions with regard to another’s property only before a court.

### Part 3
Rav Safra <b>said to</b> Rabba bar Rav Huna: <b>Is</b> that case in the mishna <b>comparable</b> to this case? <b>There, where he is removing property from</b> the possession of <b>this</b> person <b>and giving</b> it <b>to that</b> person, <b>we require a court. But here,</b> referring to himself in the third person, <b>he is</b> merely <b>taking his own</b> property, and not the property of any other person. There is no transaction effected here. It is <b>mere disclosure</b> of <b>the matter</b> that he divided the joint property equitably, and <b>two</b> witnesses <b>are sufficient for him</b> to disclose that fact. Rav Safra cites proof. <b>Know</b> that this is so, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 97a) that <b>a widow</b> owed sustenance from her husband’s estate <b>sells</b> the property of the estate when <b>not before a court.</b> Apparently, one need not involve the court when reclaiming property that belongs to him.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to him: But wasn’t it stated with regard to</b> that mishna that <b>Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> The court before which <b>a widow</b> sells the property of the estate <b>need not</b> be <b>a court of experts, but is required</b> to be at least <b>a court of laymen.</b> Therefore, as in the parallel case of the widow, even when disclosing that one took property belonging to him, two witnesses are not sufficient and a court is required.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one found</b> an animal <b>in a stable</b> belonging to its owner, he is <b>not obligated</b> to return <b>it</b> to its owner. If he found it <b>in a public area,</b> he is <b>obligated</b> to return <b>it. And if</b> the animal <b>was</b> lost <b>in a graveyard</b> and a priest found it, <b>he may not become impure to</b> return <b>it. If his father said to him: Become impure; or</b> in a case <b>where</b> one was obligated to return the animal and his father <b>said to him: Do not return</b> it, <b>he may not listen to</b> his father, as one may not violate Torah law to honor his father.

### Part 6
If <b>one unloaded</b> a burden from an animal collapsing under its weight <b>and</b> then later <b>loaded</b> it onto the animal, and later <b>unloaded and loaded</b> it again, <b>even</b> if this scenario repeats itself <b>four or five times,</b> he is <b>obligated</b> to continue unloading and loading, <b>as it is stated:</b> “If you see the donkey of him that hates you collapsed under its burden, you shall forgo passing him by; <b>you shall release it [<i>azov ta’azov</i>]</b> with him” (Exodus 23:5). It is derived from the verse that one is obligated to perform the action as needed, even several times.

### Part 7
If the owner <b>went, and sat, and said</b> to a passerby: <b>Since</b> there is <b>a mitzva</b> incumbent <b>upon you</b> to unload the burden, <b>if it is your wish to unload</b> the burden, <b>unload</b> it, in such a case the passerby is <b>exempt, as it is stated:</b> “You shall release it <b>with him,”</b> with the owner of the animal. <b>If</b> the failure of the owner to participate in unloading the burden was due to the fact <b>he was old or infirm,</b> the passerby is <b>obligated</b> to unload the burden alone.

### Part 8
There is <b>a mitzva by Torah law to unload</b> a burden, <b>but</b> there is <b>no</b> mitzva <b>to load</b> it. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> There is <b>even</b> a mitzva <b>to load</b> the burden.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: If there was</b> a burden <b>upon</b> the animal <b>greater than</b> its typical <b>burden, one need not attend to it, as it is stated: “Under its burden,”</b> i.e., the obligation is with regard to <b>a burden that</b> the animal <b>can bear.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that if one found an animal in a stable, he need not return it to its owner. <b>Rava said:</b> The <b>stable that</b> the Sages <b>mentioned</b> in the mishna is one that <b>neither encourages</b> the animal <b>to stray nor secures</b> the animal so it will not flee. The Gemara explains Rava’s statement. That it <b>does not encourage</b> the animal <b>to stray</b> is learned <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches: He is not obligated in its</b> return. The fact that <b>it does not secure</b> the animal is learned <b>from</b> the fact that it <b>was necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> <b>to teach: He is not obligated in its</b> return.

### Part 11
The Gemara continues its explanation of Rava’s statement: <b>As, if it enters your mind</b> to say that it is a stable that <b>secures</b> the animal, that ruling would be extraneous. <b>Now</b> that in a case where one <b>found</b> the animal <b>outside</b> a stable <b>he brings it inside</b> a stable of that type and thereby returns the animal to its owner, in a case where he <b>found</b> the animal <b>inside</b> the stable is it <b>necessary</b> to teach that he is not obligated to return it to its owner? <b>Rather, learn from it</b> that the stable mentioned in the mishna does <b>not secure</b> the animal and therefore there is a possibility that one must return it. The Gemara affirms: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that it is a stable that neither encourages the animal to stray nor secures the animal.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>one found</b> an animal <b>in a stable</b> belonging to its owner, <b>he is not obligated</b> to return it. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: And that</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only in a case <b>where</b> the animal <b>is standing within the</b> city <b>limits.</b> The Gemara concludes <b>by inference that</b> if the animal was <b>found in a public area</b> he is obligated to return it, <b>and even</b> if it was <b>within the</b> city <b>limits,</b> he is <b>also obligated</b> to return it.

### Part 13
<b>There are those who teach</b> this statement <b>with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If he found it <b>in a public area,</b> he is <b>obligated</b> to return <b>it. Rabbi Yitzḥak says: And that</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only in a case <b>where</b> the animal <b>is standing beyond the</b> city <b>limits.</b> The Gemara concludes <b>by inference that</b> in a case where the animal was <b>found in the stable, even</b> if the animal <b>is standing beyond the</b> city <b>limits, he is also not obligated in its</b> return.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And if</b> the animal <b>was</b> lost <b>in a graveyard</b> and was found by a priest, <b>he may not become impure to</b> return <b>it.</b> In a case where a priest’s father said to him: Become impure, or in a case where one was obligated to return the animal and his father said to him: Do not return it, he may not listen to his father. The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> in which <b>the Sages taught: From where</b> is it derived <b>that if</b> a priest’s <b>father said to him: Become impure, or that</b> if one’s father <b>said to him: Do not return</b> a lost item that you found; <b>he should not listen to him?</b> It is derived from the verse, <b>as it is stated: “Every man shall fear his mother and his father, and you shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i>; I am the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 19:3). From the fact that the verse concludes: “I am the Lord,” it is derived that: <b>You are all,</b> parent and child alike, <b>obligated in My honor.</b> Therefore, if a parent commands his child to refrain from observing a mitzva, he must not obey the command.

### Part 15
The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that a priest must not obey his father’s command to become impure is <b>because the Merciful One writes: “You shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i>;</b> I am the Lord”; <b>but</b> if <b>it were not so, I would say</b> that the child <b>must obey him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But why? This</b> obligation to obey a parent is <b>a positive mitzva,</b> as it is written: “Honor your father and your mother” (Exodus 20:12), <b>and that</b> obligation of a priest to refrain from becoming impure is both <b>a prohibition:</b> “To the dead among his people he shall not defile himself” (Leviticus 21:1), <b>and a positive mitzva:</b> “You shall be holy” (Leviticus 19:2); <b>and</b> the principle is that <b>a positive mitzva does not come and override a prohibition and a positive mitzva.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara answers that the derivation from “You shall observe My <i>Shabbatot</i>; I am the Lord” <b>was necessary,</b> as it might <b>enter your mind to say: Since honoring one’s father and mother is equated to the honor of the Omnipresent, as it is stated here: “Honor your father and your mother”</b> (Exodus 20:12), <b>and it is stated elsewhere: “Honor the Lord with your wealth”</b> (Proverbs 3:9), <b>therefore,</b> one might have thought that the priest must <b>obey his</b> father’s command to become impure. Therefore the Torah <b>teaches us that</b> the priest is commanded <b>not to listen to him.</b>

### Part 17
§ The mishna teaches: There is <b>a mitzva by Torah law to unload</b> a burden, <b>but</b> there is <b>no</b> mitzva <b>to load</b> it. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>But</b> there is <b>no</b> mitzva <b>to load</b> it? <b>If we say</b> that it means: <b>But</b> there is <b>no</b> mitzva <b>to load</b> it <b>at all; what is different</b> about <b>unloading, with regard to which it is written: “You shall release it with him”</b> (Exodus 23:5)? With regard to <b>loading as well, isn’t it written: “You shall lift them with him”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:4)?

### Part 18
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> there is <b>a mitzva by Torah law to unload</b> the burden <b>for free, but</b> there is <b>no</b> mitzva <b>to load</b> it <b>for free; rather,</b> the mitzva is performed <b>with remuneration. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> There is <b>also</b> a mitzva <b>to load</b> it <b>for free.</b> The Gemara states: <b>We learn</b> by inference from the mishna <b>that which the Sages taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Unloading</b> is performed <b>for free,</b> and <b>loading</b> is performed <b>with remuneration. Rabbi Shimon said:</b> Both <b>this and that</b> are performed <b>for free.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the Rabbis</b> that there is a distinction between unloading and loading with regard to remuneration? The reason is <b>that if it enters your mind</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, let the Merciful One write</b> only the mitzva of <b>loading, and</b> then He would <b>need not</b> write the mitzva of <b>unloading, and I would say: Just as</b> with regard to <b>loading, where there is no</b> potential <b>suffering of animals and there is no</b> potential <b>monetary loss</b> for the owner, one is <b>obligated</b> to load the burden, with regard to <b>unloading, where there is</b> potential <b>suffering of animals and there is</b> potential <b>monetary loss</b> for the owner, is it <b>not all the more so</b> clear that one is required to unload the burden? <b>Rather, with regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> did <b>the Merciful One write</b> the mitzva of unloading? It is <b>to tell you:</b> The mitzva of <b>unloading</b> the burden is performed <b>for free, but</b> the mitzva of <b>loading</b> is performed <b>with remuneration.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that even loading is performed for free, <b>what is the reason</b> that the Torah writes the mitzva of unloading? The Gemara answers: It is <b>because the verses are not</b> clearly <b>defined,</b> and it is unclear which of the verses refers to loading and which refers to unloading. Had the Torah written one verse, it would have been interpreted with regard to unloading, and there would be no source that one needs to load an animal.

### Part 21
<b>And the Rabbis</b> could ask: <b>Why</b> does Rabbi Shimon say that <b>the verses are not</b> clearly <b>defined? Here it is written: “Collapsed under its burden”</b> (Exodus 23:5), clearly referring to the case of a burden that needs unloading, and <b>there it is written: “Fallen down by the way”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:4), <b>indicating</b> that both the animals <b>and their burdens are</b> lying <b>on the way</b> and are in need of loading. <b>And Rabbi Shimon</b> explains that the verses are not defined because the phrase <b>“fallen down by the way”</b> could be understood as <b>indicating</b> that the animals are fallen <b>with their burdens upon them,</b> and referring to unloading.

### Part 22
<b>Rava says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC