
### Part 1
<b>And he pays him the value of</b> the hops mixed with <b>thorns</b> according to his profit.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who deposits money with a money changer, if</b> the money <b>is bound,</b> the money changer <b>may not use it. Therefore, if it is lost he does not bear responsibility for it.</b> If the money <b>was unbound,</b> the money changer <b>may use it. Therefore, if it is lost he bears responsibility for it.</b> If he deposited money <b>with a homeowner, whether</b> it <b>is bound or whether</b> it <b>is unbound,</b> the homeowner <b>may not use it,</b> as it never entered the mind of the depositor that the homeowner might use the money. <b>Therefore, if</b> the homeowner <b>lost</b> the money, <b>he does not bear responsibility for it.</b> If the bailee is <b>a storekeeper,</b> his status <b>is like</b> that of <b>a homeowner;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If the bailee is <b>a storekeeper,</b> his status <b>is like</b> that of <b>a money changer.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: Why is it that <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the money <b>is bound</b> the money changer <b>may not use it?</b> Don’t people typically bind their money? Binding is no indication that the intent of the one who deposited the money is that it not be used. <b>Rav Asi said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> It is in a case <b>where</b> the money is <b>bound and sealed,</b> a clear indication that he does not want the bundle to be opened, that the mishna <b>is taught. Rav Mari says:</b> It is in a case where the money is bound <b>with an atypical knot,</b> also indicating that he does not want the bundle to be opened. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that there is a variant reading: <b>Rav Mari raises a dilemma: What</b> is the legal status of money bound <b>with an atypical knot?</b> Is it like that of money that is sealed or not? The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that if the money is <b>unbound</b> the money changer <b>may use it,</b> and therefore he bears responsibility if it is lost. <b>Rav Huna says: And even if it was</b> taken from him under <b>circumstances beyond his control</b> he is liable to pay. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the mishna: <b>It is lost,</b> from which it may be inferred that only if the money was lost does he bear responsibility, but not if it was taken by force? The Gemara answers: This must be understood <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rabba</b> stated in a different context, <b>as Rabba says: They were stolen;</b> this is referring to a case where the items were stolen by force <b>by armed bandits. They were lost;</b> this is referring to a case where <b>his ship sunk at sea.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And Rav Naḥman says:</b> If <b>it was</b> taken from him under <b>circumstances beyond his control,</b> he is <b>not</b> liable to pay. <b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: According to your</b> opinion, <b>that you said</b> if <b>it was</b> taken from him due to <b>circumstances beyond his control,</b> he is <b>not</b> liable to pay; <b>apparently,</b> the money changer <b>is not</b> considered <b>a borrower with regard to</b> the money. <b>If he is not a borrower, he is not a paid bailee either.</b> Why, then, does he bear responsibility for the money if it is lost? His status should be that of an unpaid bailee, and he should be exempt. Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: In this</b> case, <b>I concede</b> that he is a paid bailee, <b>since he benefits</b> from the money. It is <b>with the benefit</b> the money changer derives, based on the fact <b>that if a profitable purchase</b> would <b>happen</b> to present itself <b>to him</b> he can <b>purchase</b> it <b>with</b> the deposited money, that <b>he is</b> considered <b>a paid bailee with regard to</b> the money.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Naḥman raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna</b> from a mishna (<i>Me’ila</i> 21b): With regard to the Temple treasurer <b>who deposits money with a money changer, if</b> the money <b>is bound,</b> the money changer <b>may not use it. Therefore, if he spent</b> the money, the Temple <b>treasurer</b> is <b>not</b> liable for <b>misuse</b> of Temple property because the money changer is liable. If the money <b>was unbound,</b> the money changer <b>may use it. Therefore, if</b> the money changer <b>spent</b> the money, the Temple <b>treasurer</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of Temple property, as the money changer serves as an agent for the treasurer.

### Part 7
Rav Naḥman explains his objection: <b>And if you say</b> that <b>even if</b> the money <b>was</b> taken from the money changer under <b>circumstances beyond his control,</b> he bears responsibility for the money, <b>why</b> did the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically</b> teach that the Temple treasurer bears responsibility if the money changer <b>spent</b> the money? <b>Even if he did not spend</b> the money the treasurer should bear responsibility. Since the Temple treasurer gave him unbound money, it is tantamount to a loan. The treasurer should be liable for misappropriation at the moment that he gave unbound money to the money changer.

### Part 8
Rav Huna <b>said to him: The same is true even if he did not spend</b> the money, and the treasurer is liable the moment he gives the money to the money changer. <b>And since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught in the first clause</b> of the mishna that the money changer is liable if <b>he spent</b> the money, the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught in the latter clause</b> of the mishna <b>as well</b> that the treasurer is liable if <b>he spent</b> the money, although he is liable even if he did not spend the money.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who misappropriates a deposit, Beit Shammai say: He is penalized for</b> its <b>decrease and</b> its <b>increase.</b> If the value of the deposit decreases, the bailee is liable to pay in accordance with its value at the time of the misappropriation. If it increases in value, he is liable to pay in accordance with its value at the time of repayment. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> He pays <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of removal. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> He pays <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of the claim.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabba says:</b> In a case of <b>this one who robbed another of a barrel of wine,</b> where <b>initially it was worth</b> one <b>dinar</b> and <b>now it is worth four</b> dinars; if the robber <b>broke</b> the barrel <b>or drank</b> the wine, <b>he pays four</b> dinars. If <b>it broke by itself, he pays</b> one <b>dinar.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the reason</b> for the difference? <b>Since if</b> the barrel <b>were</b> intact, <b>it would return to its owner in its</b> original <b>state</b> and there would be no need to calculate its price, <b>that moment that he drank it or that he broke it</b> is the moment that <b>he stole from</b> the owner of the wine. <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 93b): <b>All robbers pay in accordance with</b> the value of the stolen item <b>at the moment of the robbery.</b> Here, that is four dinars. If the barrel <b>broke by itself,</b> the robber <b>pays</b> one <b>dinar. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>He did not do anything to</b> the barrel <b>now. Why do you deem him liable</b> to pay? Because <b>of that moment</b> that <b>he robbed</b> the other of <b>it.</b> At <b>that moment, it was worth only</b> one <b>dinar.</b>

### Part 12
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna that <b>Beit Hillel say:</b> One who misappropriates a deposit pays <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of removal.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>In accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of removal? If we say</b> it means <b>in accordance with</b> its value at <b>the time of</b> its <b>removal from the world,</b> when he drank the wine or broke the barrel, that is difficult.

### Part 13
The Gemara clarifies the difficulty: <b>And with regard to what</b> case is this referring? <b>If</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> a case where there was <b>a decrease</b> in value before its removal, <b>is there anyone who says</b> that the bailee pays the lower price? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>All robbers pay in accordance with</b> the value of the stolen item at <b>the moment of the robbery,</b> and no less than that? <b>And if</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> a case where there was <b>an increase</b> in value before its removal, <b>that is</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> as the one who misappropriates a deposit always pays the higher value, not the opinion of Beit Hillel.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC