
### Part 1
This is Rava’s dilemma: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is it permitted for one <b>to take</b> some of the kernels <b>and eat from them?</b> Is their legal status <b>like</b> that of kernels <b>cast into a jug, and</b> the sacrifice of the <b><i>omer</i> offering rendered their</b> consumption <b>permitted? Or perhaps he subordinated them to the ground,</b> and their legal status is that of seeds that did not take root, and they are therefore forbidden. The Gemara concludes: The dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥasa said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami raises a dilemma</b> with regard to those matters that are not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation: Is the <i>halakha</i> that <b>they are not</b> subject to <b>exploitation</b> where the disparity in the price is one-sixth, but <b>they are</b> subject to <b>nullification of the transaction</b> when it is greater than that? <b>Or,</b> perhaps <b>they are not</b> subject to nullification of the transaction either. <b>Rav Naḥman said: Rav Ḥasa then said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami resolved</b> this dilemma and said: <b>They are not</b> subject to <b>exploitation; they are</b> subject to <b>nullification of the transaction. Rabbi Yona said:</b> This ruling applies <b>to consecrated</b> property. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> It applies <b>to land. And both of them said</b> it <b>in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: They are not</b> subject to <b>exploitation; they are</b> subject to <b>nullification of the transaction.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: The <b>one who states</b> that this ruling applies <b>to consecrated</b> property, <b>all the more so</b> does it apply <b>to land. The one who states</b> that this ruling applies <b>to land</b> states it only with regard to land, <b>but</b> it does not apply <b>to consecrated</b> property, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel, as Shmuel says: Consecrated</b> property <b>worth one hundred dinars that one desacralized upon</b> a coin <b>worth one <i>peruta</i>, is desacralized.</b> Since consecrated property is not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation at all, it is desacralized upon coins worth any sum.

### Part 4
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Temura</i> 26b): <b>If</b> the <b>consecrated</b> animal <b>was blemished</b> and another was substituted for it, the blemished animal <b>leaves</b> its consecrated state and assumes <b>non-sacred</b> status, <b>and one is required to calculate</b> the difference in <b>monetary</b> value between the two animals and pay it to the Temple treasury. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It <b>leaves</b> its consecrated state and assumes <b>non-sacred</b> status <b>by Torah law, and one is required to calculate</b> the difference in <b>monetary</b> value and pay it to the Temple treasury <b>by rabbinic law. And Reish Lakish says: Even</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>one is required to calculate</b> the difference in <b>monetary</b> value and pay it to the Temple treasury is <b>by Torah law.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>With what are we dealing? If we say</b> that the difference between the value of the substitute animal and the value of the consecrated animal was <b>the measure of exploitation, does Reish Lakish say in that</b> case: <b>He is required to calculate</b> the difference in <b>monetary</b> value and pay it to the Temple treasury <b>by Torah law? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>These are matters that are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation: Land, slaves, documents, and consecrated</b> property?

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> the difference was the measure of <b>nullification of the transaction. In that case, would Rabbi Yoḥanan say: He is required to calculate</b> the difference <b>in monetary</b> value and pay it to the Temple treasury <b>by rabbinic law? But didn’t Rabbi Yona say</b> that this ruling applies <b>to consecrated</b> property, <b>and</b> didn’t <b>Rabbi Yirmeya say</b> it applies <b>to land, and both of them say in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: They are not</b> subject to <b>exploitation; they are</b> subject to <b>nullification of the transaction?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the difference was the measure of <b>nullification of the transaction. And reverse</b> attribution of the opinions, so that the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> will be attributed <b>to Reish Lakish, and</b> the opinion <b>of Reish Lakish</b> will be attributed <b>to Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do</b> Reish Lakish and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagree?</b> They disagree <b>with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Shmuel, as Shmuel says: Consecrated</b> property <b>worth one hundred dinars that one desacralized</b> upon a coin <b>worth one <i>peruta</i> is desacralized.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>accepts</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> and therefore the consecrated article is desacralized by Torah law and the requirement to calculate and pay the difference is by rabbinic law. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>does not accept</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> and he therefore holds that the requirement to calculate and pay the difference is by Torah law.

### Part 8
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone accepts</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel, and here they disagree about this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, holds that <b>yes,</b> consecrated property worth one hundred dinars <b>that one desacralized</b> upon a coin worth one <i>peruta</i> is desacralized after the fact, but <b><i>ab initio</i>, no,</b> one may not do so. Therefore, one must nevertheless pay the difference to the Temple treasury by Torah law. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, holds that the opinion of Shmuel applies <b>even <i>ab initio</i>.</b> Therefore, the requirement to pay the difference to the Temple treasury is by rabbinic law.

### Part 9
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Actually,</b> the difference between the actual value of the animal and the amount used to desacralize it was within <b>the measure of exploitation, and do not reverse</b> attribution of the opinions of Reish Lakish and Rabbi Yoḥanan. <b>And they disagree with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ḥisda, who said: What</b> is the meaning of: <b>They are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation?</b> It means that <b>they are not</b> subject to <b>the principle of exploitation</b> at all. Rather, a more stringent standard applies,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC