
### Part 1
that a buyer need not tithe the produce he purchases, as derived from the verses: “You shall tithe all the produce of your planting, which is brought forth in the field year by year, and you shall eat before the Lord, your God” (Deuteronomy 14:22–23). They claimed that the phrases <b>“you shall tithe…and you shall eat”</b> indicate that only the one who eats the produce must tithe it, <b>but not the one who sells</b> it. Likewise, the phrase <b>“the produce of your planting”</b> teaches that the one who performs the planting must separate tithes, <b>but not the one who buys</b> it. <b>Rather,</b> the obligation of a buyer to separate tithes applies <b>by rabbinic law, and the verse is</b> cited as <b>a mere support</b> for this <i>halakha</i>. The residents of Beit Hino did not adhere to this rabbinic law and did not observe the <i>halakha</i> requiring the buyer to separate tithes.

### Part 2
It was stated previously that a buyer is not required to tithe produce by Torah law. If so, the same certainly applies to a laborer. Consequently, the term <i>kenafshekha</i> cannot serve to teach that a laborer may eat without tithing, as claimed earlier. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what does <i>kenafshekha</i> come</b> to teach? The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to</b> teach <b>that which is taught in</b> another <i>baraita</i>: <b><i>Kenafshekha</i></b> can mean: Like your own person. <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>your own person,</b> i.e., the owner, <b>if you muzzled</b> yourself and did not eat from your field’s produce, you are <b>exempt</b> from liability for the transgression of: “You shall not muzzle an ox when it is treading out the grain” (Deuteronomy 25:4), <b>so too</b> with regard to <b>a laborer, if you muzzled</b> him, i.e., you did not allow him to eat, you are <b>exempt</b> from liability for the transgression of muzzling an ox while it is working.

### Part 3
<b>Mar Zutra raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Ma’asrot</i> 1:5): With regard to different types of produce, <b>what is</b> the equivalent of <b>their granary,</b> i.e., the point at which the processing of various types of produce is completed so that they become <b>subject to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>tithes? With regard to cucumbers and gourds,</b> they become obligated <b>from when they lose their blossom; and Rabbi Asi said:</b> This means <b>from when their blossom [<i>pikas</i>] is removed.</b> The Gemara clarifies the objection from the mishna: <b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that the mishna means <b>from when they lose their blossom, even</b> while the produce is still <b>in the field?</b> This would mean that the produce is subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of tithes before it enters the house or the courtyard, which is not in accordance with the opinions of either Rabbi Yannai or Rabbi Yoḥanan.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the mishna means: <b>From when they lose their blossom</b> specifically <b>in the house</b> or courtyard, i.e., the house or courtyard renders the produce subject to tithes only when the produce loses its blossom. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> the phrase: <b>From when they lose their blossom,</b> is inaccurate, as the mishna <b>should have</b> said: <b>Until they lose their blossom.</b> The expression: From when they lose their blossom, indicates that the obligation applies as soon as that happens, i.e., before the produce enters the courtyard or house. By contrast, the expression: Until they lose their blossom, indicates that the obligation does not come into effect until they lose their blossom, regardless of whatever else is done to them, i.e., only when they are in the house and they lose their blossom.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Had</b> the mishna <b>taught: Until they lose their blossom, I would say</b> erroneously that the produce is not subject to tithes <b>until their loss of blossom is complete,</b> i.e., until all of the produce loses its blossoms. The expression: <b>From when they lose their blossom, teaches us</b> that the obligation to separate tithes takes effect <b>from when they begin to lose their blossom.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Naḥman, raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to produce, <b>its granary for tithes, rendering one</b> who eats it <b>liable for</b> violating the prohibition against <b>untithed produce,</b> is <b>from when its work is completed. And what is</b> meant by <b>the completion of its work?</b> This means <b>the work of its being brought in.</b> The Gemara discusses the meaning of being brought in. <b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that this is referring to <b>its being brought into</b> a pile, <b>even</b> while the produce is still <b>in the field?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>No,</b> it means that <b>its being brought into the house is</b> considered the <b>completion of its work. And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>When Rabbi Yannai</b> and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>say</b> that types of produce are subject to tithes when they are brought into the house or courtyard, they were referring only <b>to olives or grapes, which are not of a granary,</b> i.e., since these types of produce are not processed in a granary, which is the typical criterion for rendering produce subject to tithes, they become subject to tithes when they are brought into a house or courtyard. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>wheat or barley, a granary is explicitly written with regard to them</b> (see Numbers 18:27, 30). Therefore, they are subject to tithes in the granary, even before they are brought into a house or courtyard.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara returns to its discussion with regard to the right of a laborer to eat while working: <b>We found</b> a source for the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a person</b> may eat <b>from attached</b> produce while working in the field; <b>and</b> likewise we found a source that <b>an ox</b> that is threshing must be allowed to eat <b>from detached</b> produce, as the verse states: “You shall not muzzle an ox in its threshing” (Deuteronomy 25:4). <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>a person,</b> while working, may eat <b>from detached</b> produce?

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: This is derived by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the case of <b>an ox. And if an ox,</b> which one need <b>not</b> allow to <b>eat from attached</b> produce, must be allowed to <b>eat from detached</b> produce, then with regard to <b>a person, who may eat from attached</b> produce, <b>is it not right that he may</b> also <b>eat from detached</b> produce? The Gemara rejects this inference: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about an ox?</b> It is notable <b>in that you are commanded concerning its muzzling.</b> Can <b>you say</b> that a similar <i>halakha</i> should apply <b>to a person, as you are not commanded with regard to his muzzling?</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But let</b> an employer <b>be commanded concerning a person’s,</b> i.e., his laborer’s, <b>muzzling, from an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from an ox: And if</b> with regard to <b>an ox, which you are not commanded to sustain,</b> as there is no mitzva to support ownerless oxen if they do not have food to eat, and yet <b>you are commanded concerning its muzzling,</b> with regard to a Jewish <b>person, whom you are commanded to sustain</b> if he is impoverished (see Leviticus 25:35–36), <b>is it not right that you are commanded concerning his muzzling?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: The <i>halakha</i> that one is not commanded concerning the muzzling of his laborer is derived from the fact that <b>the verse states: “<i>Kenafshekha</i>,”</b> which indicates that as you treat your own person, <b>so is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the person of the laborer.</b> In other words, <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>himself,</b> the owner, <b>if you muzzled</b> yourself, you are <b>exempt</b> from punishment for violating the transgression of: “You shall not muzzle an ox in its threshing,” <b>so too</b> with regard to <b>a laborer, if you muzzled</b> him you are <b>exempt</b> from punishment for violating the transgression of muzzling an ox while it is working.

### Part 12
After refuting the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, the Gemara inquires: <b>Rather, from where do we</b> derive that <b>a person</b> may eat <b>from detached</b> produce? The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states</b> the term <b>“standing,” “standing” twice:</b> “When you come into your neighbor’s standing grain…but you shall not move a sickle on your neighbor’s standing grain” (Deuteronomy 23:26). <b>If</b> the second expression is <b>not</b> applied to the <b>matter of</b> the right of <b>a person</b> to eat <b>from attached</b> produce, as that <i>halakha</i> has been derived from the first mention of “standing,” <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of</b> the right of <b>a person</b> to eat <b>from detached</b> produce.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ami stated</b> an alternative answer: <b>A verse is not required</b> to teach the right of <b>a person</b> to eat <b>from detached</b> produce, as <b>it is written: “When you come into your neighbor’s vineyard,</b> then you may eat grapes” (Deuteronomy 23:25). <b>Are we not dealing</b> even with a case in <b>which</b> the employer <b>hired</b> the laborer <b>to transport</b> the grapes out of the vineyard, <b>and</b> yet <b>the Merciful One states</b> that <b>he may eat?</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>an ox</b> must be allowed to eat <b>from attached</b> produce? The Gemara answers: This is derived by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the case of <b>a person. And if a person, who may not eat from detached</b> produce, i.e., there is no explicit verse that permits him to do so, nevertheless <b>may eat from attached</b> produce, then with regard to <b>an ox, which</b> must be allowed to <b>eat from detached</b> produce, <b>is it not right that it</b> must also be allowed to <b>eat from attached</b> produce? The Gemara rejects this inference: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a person?</b> He is notable <b>in that you are commanded to sustain him.</b> Can <b>you say</b> that a similar <i>halakha</i> should apply in a case <b>of an ox, when you are not commanded to sustain it?</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But let one be commanded to sustain an ox,</b> to prevent the suffering of living creatures, <b>by an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference from the case of a person: <b>And if,</b> with regard to <b>a person, where you are not commanded concerning his muzzling,</b> nevertheless <b>you are commanded to sustain him,</b> then in the case of <b>an ox, where you are commanded concerning its muzzling, is it not right that you are commanded to sustain it?</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: This cannot be the case, as <b>the verse states: “And your brother shall live with you”</b> (Leviticus 25:36), which indicates that the mitzva to provide sustenance applies only to <b>your brother, but not</b> to <b>an ox.</b> After refuting the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, the Gemara inquires: <b>Rather, from where do we</b> derive that <b>an ox</b> must be allowed to eat <b>from attached</b> produce? The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states</b> the term <b>“your neighbor,” “your neighbor” twice</b> (Deuteronomy 23:26). <b>If</b> the second expression <b>is not</b> applied to the <b>matter of</b> the right of <b>a person</b> to eat <b>from attached</b> produce, as that <i>halakha</i> has been derived from the first mention of “your neighbor,” <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of an ox,</b> that it must be allowed to eat <b>from attached</b> produce.

### Part 17
<b>Ravina said: Verses are not necessary either</b> for the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a person</b> may eat <b>from detached</b> produce, <b>or</b> for the <i>halakha</i> that <b>an ox</b> must be allowed to eat <b>from attached</b> produce, <b>as it is written: “You shall not muzzle an ox in its threshing”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:4).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC