
### Part 1
<b>who could say</b> that the deposit <b>will be stolen? And if you say it</b> will <b>be stolen, who could say</b> that <b>the thief</b> will <b>be found? And</b> even <b>if the thief</b> will <b>be found, who could say</b> that <b>he</b> will <b>pay</b> the double payment? <b>Perhaps he will confess and will be exempted</b> from the double payment. <b>Rava said</b> in response: <b>It is as though</b> the owner <b>said to</b> the bailee at the time that he gave him the deposit: <b>When it will be stolen, and you will wish</b> to refrain from taking an oath, <b>and you will pay me</b> instead, ownership of <b>my cow is hereby transferred to you from this time,</b> and the cow is an entity that already came into the world. Since ownership of the cow is retroactively transferred to the bailee from the time of the deposit, any profits generated by the cow, e.g., the double payment, belong to the bailee.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Zeira objects to this: If so,</b> then even the <b>fleece and offspring of</b> the animal that grew while it was in the bailee’s possession should be the property of the bailee. <b>Why,</b> then, <b>is it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the bailee receives all profits generated by the animal <b>except for its fleece and its offspring? Rather, Rabbi Zeira says</b> that <b>it is as though</b> the owner <b>said to</b> the bailee: My animal is hereby transferred to you from this time <b>except for its fleece and its offspring.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>why</b> was this <i>halakha</i> stated in the mishna <b>without qualification?</b> Does every owner necessarily have that condition in mind? The Gemara answers: <b>Typically, profit that comes from elsewhere,</b> e.g., the double payment from a thief, which is difficult to anticipate, <b>a person is apt to transfer</b> to the bailee. But <b>profit that</b> originates <b>from the body</b> of the animal, which can be anticipated, <b>a person is not apt to transfer</b> to the bailee.

### Part 4
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Rava says</b> his response differently. <b>It is as though</b> the owner <b>said to</b> the bailee at the time of the deposit: <b>When it will be stolen, and you will wish</b> to refrain from taking an oath, <b>and you will pay me</b> instead, ownership of my animal <b>is transferred to you adjacent to,</b> i.e., immediately before, <b>its theft.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the difference <b>between</b> the formulations in Rava’s two responses?

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>the difficulty</b> raised <b>by Rabbi Zeira</b> with regard to fleece and offspring, which is irrelevant according to the second formulation. <b>Alternatively,</b> there is a difference in a case <b>where</b> the animal is <b>standing in a marsh [<i>ba’agam</i>]</b> at the time of its theft. Since the animal was not on the bailee’s property at that time, he could not acquire it.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that if the bailee <b>paid</b> the owner <b>and did not wish to take an oath,</b> the thief pays the double payment to the bailee. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> When the mishna says: If the bailee <b>paid,</b> it does <b>not</b> mean that he <b>actually paid. Rather, once</b> the bailee <b>said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay, even if he did not</b> yet actually <b>pay,</b> he acquired the double payment and all other profits.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises an objection from that which <b>we learned</b> in the mishna: If the bailee <b>paid</b> the owner <b>and did not wish to take an oath,</b> the thief pays the double payment to the bailee. The Gemara infers: If the bailee <b>paid, yes,</b> he acquires these rights; if the bailee <b>did not pay,</b> he does <b>not.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: In the case of a bailee who <b>took an oath and did not wish to pay,</b> the thief pays the double payment to the owner. The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that the thief pays the owner is <b>that</b> the bailee <b>did not wish</b> to pay. <b>But</b> if the bailee <b>wished</b> to pay, <b>although he did not</b> actually <b>pay,</b> he acquires the rights to the double payment. <b>Rather,</b> because the inference from the first clause and the inference from the latter clause are contradictory, <b>no</b> inference is <b>to be learned from this</b> mishna.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> In the case of <b>one who rents a cow from another, and it was stolen, and the other</b> party, the renter, <b>said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay and I will not take an oath, and the thief was located thereafter,</b> the thief <b>pays</b> the <b>double payment to the renter.</b> Apparently, once the renter chooses to pay, he acquires the rights to the double payment.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Pappa says:</b> In the case of <b>an unpaid bailee, once he stated: I was negligent,</b> thereby rendering himself liable to compensate the owner, the owner <b>transfers</b> rights to <b>the double payment to him, as, if</b> the unpaid bailee <b>wishes,</b> he can <b>exempt himself</b> from that liability <b>with</b> the claim of <b>theft.</b> Admitting negligence is tantamount to agreeing to pay rather than taking an oath. Likewise, in the case of <b>a paid bailee, once he stated: It was stolen,</b> the owner <b>transfers</b> rights to <b>the double payment to him, as, if</b> the paid bailee <b>wishes,</b> he can <b>exempt himself</b> from that liability <b>with</b> the claim that the animal was <b>maimed or died</b> due to circumstances beyond his control.

### Part 10
By contrast, in the case of <b>a borrower who says: I hereby</b> choose <b>to pay,</b> the owner <b>does not transfer</b> the rights to <b>the double payment to him.</b> The borrower’s statement that he chooses to pay is ineffectual, as he is liable to pay even without it. Because the statement is ineffectual, it does not confer any rights. <b>With what</b> claim would a borrower be able <b>to exempt himself</b> from payment? It is only <b>with</b> the claim that the animal <b>died due to</b> ordinary <b>labor.</b> A case of an animal that <b>died due to</b> ordinary <b>labor is uncommon,</b> and this claim is therefore accepted only with corroborating proof.

### Part 11
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> In the case of <b>a borrower, once he stated: I hereby</b> choose <b>to pay,</b> the owner <b>transfers</b> rights to <b>the double payment to him, as, if</b> a borrower <b>wishes,</b> he can <b>exempt himself</b> from that liability <b>with</b> the claim that the animal <b>died due to</b> ordinary <b>labor. Rav Zevid said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Abaye said: A borrower</b> acquires the rights to the double payment <b>only when he</b> actually <b>pays</b> for the item. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Since all of the benefit</b> accrues <b>to</b> the borrower, as he enjoys the use of the item without payment, <b>the owner does not transfer</b> the rights to <b>the double payment to</b> the borrower <b>due to</b> his <b>statement</b> that he chooses to pay.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Zevid:</b> In the case of <b>one who borrows a cow from another, and it was stolen, and the borrower went ahead and paid, and the thief was located thereafter,</b> the thief <b>pays</b> the <b>double payment to the borrower.</b> This indicates that the borrower receives the double payment only if he actually paid the owner for the item.

### Part 13
The Gemara comments: <b>According to the first version of</b> the statement of <b>Rav Pappa,</b> that the owner transfers rights to the double payment to the borrower only if he actually pays the owner, this <i>baraita</i> <b>certainly is not a conclusive refutation [<i>teyuvta</i>]</b> of the opinion of Rav Pappa, as the <i>baraita</i> corresponds to his opinion. <b>According to the latter version</b> of Rav Pappa’s statement, that the owner transfers rights to the double payment to the borrower even if the borrower merely says that he chooses to pay, <b>shall we say</b> that this <i>baraita</i> <b>would be a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of Rav Pappa?

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Pappa</b> could have <b>said to you: Is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>stronger than the mishna, which teaches</b> that the bailee receives the double payment if he already <b>paid</b> the owner, <b>and</b> nevertheless, <b>we established</b> that the mishna is referring <b>to</b> one who <b>states</b> his intent to pay but has not yet paid? <b>Here, too,</b> establish the <i>baraita</i> as referring <b>to</b> one who <b>states</b> his intent to pay but has not yet paid.

### Part 15
The Gemara questions this: <b>Are</b> these cases <b>comparable? There,</b> in the mishna, it <b>is not taught</b> that he <b>went ahead</b> and paid. <b>Here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, it <b>is taught</b> that he <b>went ahead</b> and paid, which indicates that he actually paid and not merely that he agreed to pay. The Gemara responds: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>went ahead?</b> It means that <b>he went ahead and stated</b> his intent to pay, although he did not yet actually pay.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the <i>baraita</i> cited earlier <b>with regard to a renter</b> with the formulation: <b>And he said</b> that he would pay, <b>and</b> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to a borrower</b> the <i>tanna</i> uses the formulation: <b>Went ahead, conclude from it that</b> the <i>baraita</i> concerning a borrower <b>is teaching specifically</b> that he actually paid. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Are</b> these two <i>baraitot</i> <b>taught together</b> so that one can draw a conclusion based on a discrepancy in their formulation? Perhaps the <i>baraitot</i> are unrelated and are simply formulated in different styles.

### Part 17
The Gemara comments: The Sages <b>asked the <i>tanna’im</i> of the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Oshaya,</b> experts in <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i>, if these <i>baraitot</i> were formulated together. <b>And they said</b> that the <i>baraitot</i> <b>were taught together</b> as one long <i>baraita</i>, and therefore one can draw a conclusion based on a discrepancy in their formulation.

### Part 18
§ The Gemara comments that it is <b>obvious</b> that if the bailee initially <b>said: I will not pay, and then said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay</b> rather than taking an oath, he is entitled to the double payment, as <b>didn’t</b> he ultimately <b>say: I hereby choose to pay?</b> The Gemara raises a dilemma: <b>But</b> if he initially <b>said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC