
### Part 1
<b>lest one delay his ascension</b> to Jerusalem due to this exchange, <b>as sometimes</b> the silver <b>coins do not amount to the</b> entire gold <b>dinar, and he will not ascend</b> to Jerusalem until he has collected enough silver dinars to exchange for a gold dinar. <b>And Beit Hillel hold: We do not issue a decree lest he delay his ascension, as even if</b> the silver coins <b>do not amount to the</b> entire gold <b>dinar he will ascend with</b> the silver coins. <b>But with regard to</b> desacralizing <b>produce with dinars, everyone agrees that we desacralize</b> produce in this manner, due to the fact <b>that since</b> the produce <b>rots,</b> he certainly <b>does not delay</b> taking the produce to Jerusalem until they equal an entire gold dinar.

### Part 2
<b>And one said: Even with regard to</b> the exchange of <b>produce for dinars</b> there is <b>a dispute,</b> due to the concern that one will delay bringing his produce to Jerusalem until the value of his second-tithe produce is equal to a gold coin.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to that version</b> of the dispute in <b>which you said that</b> everyone agrees the exchange of silver <i>sela</i> coins for gold dinars is <b>permitted by Torah law and</b> it <b>is the Sages who issued a decree</b> forbidding <b>it, this</b> is the reason <b>that</b> the dispute between Beit Hillel and Beit Shammai <b>is taught</b> in terms of the formulation: <b>One may do, and: One may not do,</b> as this is the language of a prohibition <i>ab initio</i>. <b>But according to that version</b> of the dispute in <b>which you said that</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>by Torah law</b> that <b>they disagree, it should have</b> been phrased in terms of the formulation: <b>We desacralize, and: We do not desacralize,</b> since if the practice is forbidden by Torah law, the exchange of silver <i>sela</i> coins for gold dinars is ineffective even after the fact. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, according to the latter version, it is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>It was stated</b> that there is a dispute between <b>Rav and Levi. One said: Money can be</b> an item used to effect <b>exchange. And one said: Money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange,</b> as that form of transaction is effective only with regard to items such as produce and vessels. <b>Rav Pappa said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the one who says</b> that <b>money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange?</b> It is <b>because</b> the <b>mind of</b> the one acquiring the coin is <b>on the form</b> minted on the coin, not the value of the metal, <b>and</b> the value due to <b>the form is apt to be canceled</b> by the authorities. Therefore, in the eyes of the party acquiring it, the coin itself has no real value and therefore cannot be an item used to effect exchange.

### Part 5
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins. <b>What,</b> is the reference <b>not</b> to a case where the gold coins were given in order to acquire the silver coins <b>by means of exchange, and</b> therefore one can <b>learn from it</b> that <b>a coin can be</b> an item used to effect <b>exchange?</b> The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No,</b> it is referring to a standard purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If so,</b> the language of the mishna is imprecise, as what is the meaning of: When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins? It <b>should have</b> stated: When one party takes possession of the gold coins, it <b>obligates him</b> to give the silver coins. The Gemara answers: Emend the text and <b>teach:</b> When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins, it <b>obligates him</b> to give the silver coins.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to interpret the mishna in that manner, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that it teaches</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna: When one party takes possession of <b>the silver</b> coins, the other party <b>does not acquire the gold</b> coins. <b>Granted, if you say</b> that this is a purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money, this is</b> the meaning <b>of</b> that <b>which we said: Gold is a commodity, and silver is currency, and currency does not effect acquisition of a commodity. But if you say</b> that the mishna is referring to an acquisition effected <b>by means of exchange, let both acquire</b> the coins simultaneously <b>from each other.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And furthermore, it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When one party takes possession of <b>the silver</b> coins, the other party <b>does not acquire the gold</b> coins. <b>How</b> so? If <b>one sold twenty-five silver dinars to</b> another <b>for a gold dinar, even though he pulled the silver</b> into his possession, <b>he does not acquire</b> it <b>until</b> the other person <b>pulls the gold</b> into his possession. <b>Granted, if you say</b> that this is a purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money,</b> it is <b>due to that</b> reason that <b>he does not acquire</b> the gold coins; the transaction is effected only by taking possession of the purchase item. <b>But if you say</b> that this is an acquisition effected <b>by means of exchange, let him acquire</b> the gold by pulling the silver; in a transaction of exchange the two parties acquire the two items simultaneously.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues: <b>Rather, what</b> then is the nature of the transaction? Is it a purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money? If so,</b> then <b>say the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins. <b>How</b> so? If <b>one sold a gold dinar to</b> another <b>for twenty-five silver dinars, once he pulled the gold</b> coin into his possession the <b>silver</b> coins <b>are acquired wherever</b> they <b>are.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that this is an acquisition effected <b>by means of exchange, this is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is taught:</b> The <b>silver</b> coins <b>are acquired wherever</b> they <b>are,</b> as that is the nature of the transaction of exchange. <b>But if you say</b> that this is a purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money, this</b> phrase: The <b>silver</b> coins <b>are acquired wherever</b> they <b>are,</b> is incorrect, as the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> stated: Once he pulled the gold coin into his possession <b>the man is obligated</b> to pay for his acquisition, as he is not required to pay with those particular silver coins.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi said: Actually,</b> the reference is to a purchase effected <b>by means of</b> giving <b>money. And what</b> is the meaning of: <b>Wherever</b> they <b>are?</b> It means, <b>as</b> they <b>are,</b> i.e., exactly <b>as</b> the owner of the silver <b>said to him,</b> and he cannot replace them with a different classification of coins. How so? <b>If</b> the owner of the silver coins <b>said to</b> the owner of the gold coin: <b>I will give you</b> payment <b>from a purse</b> in which there are <b>new</b> coins, <b>he cannot give him</b> payment <b>from a purse</b> in which there are <b>old</b> coins, <b>even though</b> old coins are <b>preferable</b> relative <b>to</b> new coins because people trust that used coins are authentic. <b>What is the reason</b> that the owner of the gold would prefer new silver coins? It is <b>that</b> he <b>says to</b> the owner of the silver: <b>I need them</b> in order <b>to age them;</b> i.e., these coins will remain in my possession for a long time, and old coins will blacken in these circumstances.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa says: Even according to the one who says: Money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange,</b> this means only that money <b>does not effect</b> a transaction of <b>exchange;</b> but he concedes that money <b>is acquired by</b> means of a transaction of <b>exchange.</b> If one party pulls a vessel into his possession, the other party acquires silver coins in exchange, <b>just as it is with regard to produce, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Naḥman.</b> Is it <b>not</b> the case that <b>even though</b> according to the opinion of Rav Naḥman <b>produce itself does not effect</b> a transaction of <b>exchange,</b> nevertheless produce <b>is acquired by</b> means of a transaction of <b>exchange? Currency, too,</b> is <b>no different.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav Pappa from a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>was standing on the threshing floor and had no money in his hand,</b> and wanted to desacralize his second-tithe produce without paying an additional one-fifth. The <i>halakha</i> is that one who desacralizes his own produce must add one-fifth to its value. This man wants to engage in artifice as if he sold the produce to another, thereby enabling him to desacralize it without adding one-fifth. To that end, <b>he says to another: This produce is hereby given to you as a gift,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC