
### Part 1
Rabba bar Avuh now asks Elijah another question: <b>From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to a naked person that he may not separate <i>teruma</i>?</b> He replied: <b>As it is written: “And He see no unseemly thing in you”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:15). This verse indicates that one may not recite any words of sanctity, including the blessing upon separating <i>teruma</i>, in front of one who is naked.

### Part 2
The <i>amora</i> proceeded to ask Elijah a different question and <b>said to him: Is not the Master a priest? What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master</b> is <b>standing in a cemetery?</b> Elijah <b>said to him: Has the Master not studied</b> the mishnaic order of <b><i>Teharot</i>? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says</b> that <b>the graves of gentiles do not render</b> one <b>impure, as it is stated: “And you, My sheep, the sheep of My pasture, are man”</b> (Ezekiel 34:31), which teaches that <b>you,</b> i.e., the Jewish people, <b>are called “man,” but gentiles are not called “man.”</b> Since the Torah states with regard to ritual impurity imparted in a tent: “If a man dies in a tent” (Numbers 19:14), evidently impurity imparted by a tent does not apply to gentiles.

### Part 3
Rabba bar Avuh <b>said to him:</b> How could I be familiar with that <i>baraita</i>? If <b>I cannot</b> be proficient <b>in</b> the more commonly studied <b>four</b> orders of the Mishna, <b>can I</b> be knowledgeable <b>in</b> all <b>six?</b> Elijah <b>said to him: Why</b> are you not learned in them all? Rabba bar Avuh <b>said to him: The matter</b> of a livelihood is <b>pressing for me,</b> and I am therefore unable to study properly. Elijah <b>led him and brought him into the Garden of Eden</b> and <b>said to him: Remove your cloak, gather up</b> and <b>take</b> some <b>of these leaves</b> lying around. Rabba Bar Avuh <b>gathered</b> them <b>up</b> and <b>took</b> them.

### Part 4
<b>When</b> he <b>was exiting,</b> he <b>heard</b> a voice <b>that declared: Who</b> else <b>consumes his World</b>-to-Come <b>like Rabba bar Avuh,</b> who takes his merit of the next world for his use in the present one? <b>He spread</b> out his cloak and <b>threw away</b> the leaves. <b>Even so,</b> when he <b>brought his cloak</b> back, he discovered that <b>the cloak</b> had <b>absorbed</b> such a good <b>scent</b> from those leaves that he <b>sold it for twelve thousand dinars.</b> Since he knew that this was taken from his portion in the World-to-Come, he did not want to benefit from it himself, and he therefore <b>divided</b> the sum <b>among his sons-in-law.</b>

### Part 5
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse: <b>“If he be a poor man, you shall not sleep with his collateral”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:12), <b>but</b> if he is <b>wealthy,</b> one may <b>lie down.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>saying? Rav Sheshet said</b> that <b>this</b> is what he <b>is saying: And if he be a poor man, you shall not sleep while his collateral is with you;</b> rather, you must restore it to him before the sun sets. <b>But</b> if he is <b>a wealthy</b> man, you may <b>lie down while his collateral is with you.</b>

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught:</b> One <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another is not permitted to take collateral from him, and is not obligated to return</b> it <b>to him, and transgresses all of these labels [<i>shemot</i>]</b> of prohibitions. The meaning of this <i>baraita</i> is unclear, and the Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>saying? Rav Sheshet said: This</b> is what he <b>is saying:</b> One <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another is not permitted to take collateral from him, and if</b> he did <b>take collateral from him,</b> he is <b>obligated to return</b> it <b>to him.</b> As for the clause: <b>And</b> he <b>transgresses all of these labels</b> of prohibitions, this is referring <b>to the latter clause,</b> i.e., the case implicit in the <i>baraita</i>, where the creditor took collateral from the debtor and did not return it, and the <i>baraita</i> explains that such a person violates all of the Torah prohibitions that apply to this situation.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: This</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying:</b> One <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another is not permitted to take collateral from him, and if</b> he did <b>take collateral from him,</b> he is <b>obligated to return</b> it <b>to him. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is referring to <b>where he took collateral from him when</b> it was <b>not at the time of the loan,</b> but rather as a means of ensuring payment. <b>But</b> if he <b>took collateral from him at the time of the loan,</b> in which case the collateral serves as a guarantee of the loan, <b>he is not obligated to return</b> it <b>to him.</b> According to this interpretation, the statement: <b>And</b> he <b>transgresses of all these labels</b> of prohibitions, is referring <b>to the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, concerning the prohibition against taking collateral.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Sheizevi taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rava:</b> With regard to the verse: “And if you take as collateral your neighbor’s garment, <b>you shall restore it to him until the sun goes down”</b> (Exodus 22:25), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>a garment</b> worn at <b>night</b> and teaches that the garment is returned during the day; and with regard to the verse: <b>“You shall restore to him the collateral when the sun goes down”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:13), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>a garment</b> worn during the <b>day.</b> Rava <b>said to him:</b> This statement is puzzling, as with regard to a garment worn <b>in the day, why do I</b> need it <b>at night, and</b> as for a garment worn <b>at night, why do I</b> need it <b>in the day?</b> What purpose is served by giving back the garments at such times?

### Part 9
Rav Sheizevi <b>said to him:</b> Do you think this <i>baraita</i> is so corrupt that <b>I</b> should <b>erase it,</b> i.e., no longer teach it? Rava <b>said to him: No,</b> do not erase it, because <b>this</b> is what it <b>is saying:</b> With regard to the verse <b>“You shall restore it to him until when the sun goes down,” this</b> is referring to <b>a garment</b> worn during the <b>day, which may be taken as collateral by night</b> but must be returned to the debtor for the day. With regard to the verse <b>“You shall restore to him the collateral when the sun goes down,” this</b> is referring to <b>a garment</b> worn at <b>night, which may be taken as collateral by day.</b>

### Part 10
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If he <b>took collateral from him,</b> returned it, <b>and</b> then the debtor <b>died,</b> the creditor may <b>take</b> the collateral <b>from</b> the debtor’s <b>children</b> and is under no obligation to leave it with them. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Meir said: But since</b> one <b>takes collateral, why does</b> he <b>return</b> it? The Gemara expresses surprise at this question: <b>Why does</b> he <b>return</b> it? <b>The Merciful One states</b> to <b>return</b> it. <b>Rather,</b> the question is as follows: <b>Since</b> he must <b>return</b> it,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC