
### Part 1
<b>in</b> the case of one <b>who purchases</b> produce <b>from a merchant,</b> who acquired the produce from several suppliers and is unable to determine the source of the coins. <b>But in</b> the case of one <b>who purchases</b> produce <b>from</b> a single <b>owner,</b> he is <b>obligated to return</b> the coins to the seller. <b>And likewise, the <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall of Rav Naḥman <b>taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Naḥman:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that the coins belong to the buyer <b>only in</b> the case of one <b>who purchases</b> produce <b>from a merchant, but in</b> the case of one <b>who purchases</b> produce <b>from a</b> single <b>owner,</b> he is <b>obligated to return</b> the coins to the seller.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Naḥman said to</b> the <i>tanna</i>: <b>But does</b> the <b>owner thresh</b> the grain <b>himself?</b> His workers thresh the grain, and the coins could belong to one of them. The <i>tanna</i> <b>said to</b> Rav Naḥman: Based on the difficulty you raise, <b>should I delete it</b> from the collection of authoritative <i>baraitot</i>? Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> the <i>tanna</i>: <b>No. Interpret the <i>baraita</i></b> as referring to a case <b>where</b> the grain <b>was threshed by his Canaanite slave or maidservant,</b> and therefore any coins found intermingled with the produce belong to the owner.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna is an excerpt from a halakhic midrash concerning lost items, based on the verse: “You shall not see your brother’s ox or his sheep wandering, and disregard them; you shall return them to your brother…And so shall you do with his donkey; and so shall you do with his garment; and so shall you do with every lost item of your brother, which shall be lost from him, and you have found it; you may not disregard it” (Deuteronomy 22:1, 3). <b>The garment was also</b> included <b>in the generalization</b> that one must return <b>all of these</b> items. <b>And why did it emerge</b> from the generalization that is should be specified? <b>To draw an analogy to it and to say to you: What</b> is notable <b>about a garment?</b> It is notable <b>in that there are distinguishing marks concerning it and it has claimants</b> asserting ownership, and its finder is obligated to proclaim his find. <b>So too</b> with regard to <b>any item concerning which there are distinguishing marks and it has claimants</b> asserting ownership, its finder is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> When the mishna says that the garment was included <b>in the generalization</b> that one must return <b>all of these</b> items, in <b>what</b> generalization is it included? <b>Rava said:</b> It is included <b>in the generalization:</b> “And so shall you do with his donkey; and so shall you do with his garment; and so shall you do with <b>every lost item of your brother,</b> which shall be lost from him, and you have found it; you may not disregard it” (Deuteronomy 22:3).

### Part 5
<b>Rava says: Why do I</b> need all the specific items <b>that the Merciful One writes</b> that one must return: <b>An ox, a donkey, a sheep, and a garment?</b> One of them would seem to suffice.

### Part 6
Rava answers: They <b>are</b> all <b>necessary,</b> as a unique <i>halakha</i> is derived from each example. <b>As, if the Merciful One had written</b> only <b>“garment,” I would say: This matter,</b> i.e., the mitzva to return a lost item, <b>applies</b> only in a case <b>where</b> the owner brings <b>witnesses</b> capable of testifying <b>about</b> the item <b>itself or</b> he describes <b>distinguishing marks concerning</b> the item <b>itself; but</b> with regard to returning <b>a donkey</b> to its owner in a case <b>where</b> he brings <b>witnesses with regard to the saddle or</b> describes <b>distinguishing marks concerning the saddle</b> and not on the donkey, <b>say</b> that <b>we do not return</b> the donkey <b>to</b> the owner. To counter this, <b>the Merciful One writes: “Donkey,”</b> from which it is derived <b>that a donkey</b> is returned to its owner <b>even</b> in a case <b>where</b> he describes <b>distinguishing marks</b> on <b>the saddle.</b>

### Part 7
Rava continues: With regard to the specific mentions of <b>“ox” and “sheep” that the Merciful One writes, why do I</b> need them? Rava answers: From <b>“ox”</b> it is derived <b>that</b> one must return <b>even the sheared</b> wool <b>of its tail; and</b> from <b>“sheep”</b> it is derived <b>that</b> one must return even <b>its sheared</b> wool. The Gemara challenges: <b>And let the Merciful One write</b> only <b>“ox,”</b> from which it is derived <b>that</b> one must return <b>even the sheared</b> wool <b>of its tail, and</b> derive <b>all the more so that</b> one must return the more substantial <b>sheared</b> wool <b>of a sheep.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The term <b>“donkey”</b> stated <b>with regard to</b> damage in the category of <b>Pit, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> (see Exodus 21:33 and Bava Kamma 54a), <b>and</b> the term <b>“sheep”</b> stated <b>with regard to a lost item, according to</b> the opinion of <b>everyone,</b> are <b>difficult.</b> There is no explanation for why they are stated.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>And say</b> that the term “sheep” <b>comes to</b> teach the obligation to return the animal’s <b>dung?</b> The Gemara answers: One need not return <b>dung,</b> because the owner has <b>renounced its ownership.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>And perhaps</b> the term “sheep” <b>comes to</b> teach the obligation to return an item based on its owner providing <b>distinguishing marks, as we raised a dilemma:</b> Is the <i>halakha</i> that an item can be identified using <b>distinguishing marks by Torah law or</b> is it <b>by rabbinic law?</b> Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “Sheep”</b> in order to teach <b>that</b> it is not only through the testimony of witnesses, but <b>even</b> based <b>on distinguishing marks</b> that <b>we return</b> lost items to their owner. Resolve the dilemma <b>and</b> conclude that the <i>halakha</i> that an item can be identified using <b>distinguishing marks</b> is <b>by Torah law.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this proof. The Sages <b>say:</b> One can understand the matter <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the <i>tanna</i> teaches</b> the concept of <b>distinguishing marks together</b> with the term <b>garment.</b> As <b>it is taught</b> in the mishna: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a garment?</b> It is notable <b>in that there are distinguishing marks concerning it and it has claimants</b> asserting ownership, and its finder is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. <b>So too</b> with regard to <b>any item concerning which there are distinguishing marks and it has claimants</b> asserting ownership, its finder is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. <b>Conclude from it that</b> the term <b>“sheep” does not come to</b> teach the obligation to return an item based on its owner providing <b>distinguishing marks</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And so shall you do with his donkey; and so shall you do with his garment; and so shall you do with every lost item of your brother, <b>which shall be lost</b> from him, and you have found it” (Deuteronomy 22:3). The Rabbis derive that this phrase serves <b>to exclude a lost item in which there is not the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> which due to its negligible value is not considered lost. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is derived from the conclusion of that verse: “Which shall be lost from him, <b>and you have found it.”</b> The term “and you have found it” serves <b>to exclude a lost item in which there is not the value of one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the practical difference <b>between</b> the two opinions? Ostensibly, the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda both state the same <i>halakha</i>. <b>Abaye said:</b> There is no practical difference. Rather, the <b>interpretation of the meaning</b> of the verse <b>is</b> the difference <b>between</b> them. One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>derives it from</b> the phrase: <b>“Which shall be lost</b> from him”; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>derives it from</b> the term: <b>“And you have found it.”</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the first Sage, the Rabbis, <b>who derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“which shall be lost</b> from him,” <b>what does he do with</b> the term: <b>“And you have found it”?</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: According to the Rabbis, <b>that</b> term <b>is necessary for</b> the derivation of the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbenai. As Rabbenai says</b> in interpreting the verse: “And so shall you do with every lost item of your brother’s, which he has lost, and you have found it” (Deuteronomy 22:3), that the term <b>“and you have found it” means that</b> it assumes the status of a found item only <b>when</b> it actually <b>enters his possession.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>who derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> from the term: <b>“And you have found it,” what does he do with</b> the phrase: <b>“Which has been lost</b> from him”?

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: According to Rabbi Yehuda, <b>that</b> phrase <b>is necessary for</b> the derivation of the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan. As Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a lost item that the river swept away that it is permitted</b> for its finder to keep it? It is derived from this verse, <b>as it is written:</b> “And so shall you do with his donkey; and so shall you do with his garment; and <b>so shall you do with every lost item of your brother, which shall be lost from him, and you have found it”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:3). The verse states that one must return <b>that which is lost from him,</b> the owner, <b>but is</b> available to be <b>found by any person. Excluded</b> from that obligation is <b>that which is lost from him and is not</b> available to be <b>found by any person;</b> it is ownerless property and anyone who finds it may keep it.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, Rabbi Yehuda, who derived from the term: “And you have found it,” that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i>, <b>from where</b> does he derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rabbenai</b> that the item assumes the status of a found item only when it actually comes into his possession? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yehuda <b>derives it from</b> the superfluous conjunction “and” in the term <b>“and you have found it.”</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks further: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, the first <i>tanna</i>, who derives from the phrase “which shall be lost from him” that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i>, <b>from where</b> do they derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan that</b> one need not return an item that is lost from him and is not available to be found by every person? The Gemara answers: He <b>derives it</b> from the superfluous term <b>“from him,”</b> in the phrase “which shall be lost from him.” <b>And</b> as <b>for the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, Rabbi Yehuda, <b>he does not learn</b> anything from the term <b>“from him.”</b>

### Part 19
Abaye explained that there is no practical difference between the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yehuda. By contrast, <b>Rava said:</b> The practical difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to an item that was worth <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> when it was lost but <b>that was</b> then <b>devalued</b> and was worth less than one <i>peruta</i> when it was found. According to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“which shall be lost</b> from him,” <b>there is</b> an obligation to return the item, as that verse is referring to the value of the item when it was lost. <b>And</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“And you have found it,” there is no</b> obligation to return the item, as that verse is referring to the value of the item when it is found.

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> even <b>according to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“which shall be lost</b> from him,” <b>do we not require</b> the item to be worth one <i>peruta</i> when it is found, based on the term <b>“and you have found it”? And</b> in this case, <b>it is not</b> worth one <i>peruta</i> when it is found, so he should agree that it need not be returned.

### Part 21
<b>Rather,</b> the practical difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to an item worth less than <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> when it was lost <b>that appreciated in value</b> and is worth one <i>peruta</i> when it is found. According to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived from the term: <b>“And you have found it,” there is</b> an obligation to return the item, as that verse is referring to its value when it is found. <b>And</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“Which shall be lost</b> from him,” <b>there is no</b> obligation to return the item, as that verse is referring to the value of the item when it was lost.

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> even <b>according to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived <b>from</b> the term <b>“and you have found it,” do we not require</b> the item to be worth one <i>peruta</i> when it is lost, based on the phrase <b>“which shall be lost</b> from him”? <b>And</b> in this case, <b>it is not</b> worth one <i>peruta</i> when it was lost, so he should agree that it need not be returned.

### Part 23
<b>Rather,</b> the practical difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to the case of an item worth <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> when it was lost <b>that appreciated in value and was devalued</b> in the interim and was worth less than one <i>peruta</i>, <b>and</b> then <b>appreciated in value</b> and is worth one <i>peruta</i> when it is found. According to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived from the phrase: <b>“Which shall be lost</b> from him,” <b>there is</b> an obligation to return the item, as the verse is referring to its value only when it was lost and when it is found. <b>And</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one need not return a lost item worth less than one <i>peruta</i> is derived from: <b>“And you have found it,”</b> there is no obligation to return the item, as <b>we require that there will be the value</b> of one <i>peruta</i>, the requisite <b>measure</b> of <b>a lost item, from the time of</b> its <b>loss and until the time of</b> its <b>finding,</b> as the conjunction “and” connects the time of the finding to the time of the loss.

### Part 24
§ <b>A dilemma was raised</b> before the Sages: Is identification of an item on the basis of <b>distinguishing marks by Torah law or</b> is it <b>by rabbinic law?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What difference is</b> there whether it is by Torah law or by rabbinic law?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC