
### Part 1
<b>The opposite is reasonable.</b> An oath concerning sacrificial animals for which one does not bear responsibility is considered to be a matter related to the Lord even more than an oath concerning a sacrificial animal for which one bears responsibility, as in the latter case it is owned by the person in some respects. The <i>tanna</i> <b>said to him: Should I delete</b> this <i>baraita</i> because it is corrupted?

### Part 2
Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Abba <b>said to him: No, this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> is <b>saying:</b> For an oath taken concerning <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>for which one bears responsibility,</b> one is <b>liable</b> to bring an offering for a false oath, <b>as it is included</b> due to the phrase <b>“against the Lord, and deals falsely.”</b> It is derived from this that one is liable for taking a false oath even with regard to an item which belongs, to a certain degree, to the Lord. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>for which one does not bear responsibility,</b> one is <b>exempt, as it is excluded</b> by the phrase: <b>With his neighbor and deals falsely.</b> It is derived from this that one is liable to bring an offering for a false oath only if it pertained to property that belongs to a layman, i.e., his neighbor, but not for an item that belongs completely to God, as is the case with regard to sacrificial animals for which one does not bear responsibility.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who sells a Torah scroll, a pearl, or an animal,</b> those items <b>are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who sells a Torah scroll,</b> it <b>is not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation, as there is no limit to its value.</b> It is the Torah of God, which is priceless. <b>An animal and a pearl are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation because a person seeks to pair them.</b> An animal is paired with an animal of similar strength so that they can be yoked together to work in the field. A pearl is paired with a similar pearl to fashion jewelry. Since there is a need to obtain a specific variant of these items, one is not particular about the price.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The Rabbis <b>said to him: But isn’t</b> it the case that with regard to <b>every item, a person seeks to pair</b> them with similar items under certain circumstances? According to your explanation, the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation would never apply. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> respond to that question? He claims that <b>these are significant to</b> a person, <b>but those are not significant to him.</b> In other words, it is particularly important to find a precise match for an animal and a pearl. The Gemara continues to analyze Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion. <b>And up to how much</b> can one deviate from the value of items for which exploitation does not apply, as Rabbi Yehuda is clearly not saying that any deviation is acceptable? <b>Ameimar said:</b> One can deviate <b>up to</b> double <b>their value.</b>

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says: Even</b> in the case <b>one who sells a horse, or a sword, or a helmet [<i>veḥatitom</i>] during wartime,</b> these items <b>are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation, because they</b> then <b>have</b> the capacity to preserve <b>life,</b> and a person is willing to pay any price for them.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Just as</b> there is a prohibition against <b>exploitation [<i>ona’a</i>] in buying and selling, so is there <i>ona’a</i> in statements,</b> i.e., verbal mistreatment. The mishna proceeds to cite examples of verbal mistreatment. <b>One may not say to</b> a seller: <b>For how much</b> are you selling <b>this item, if he does not wish to purchase</b> it. He thereby upsets the seller when the deal fails to materialize. The mishna lists other examples: <b>If one is a penitent,</b> another <b>may not say to him: Remember your earlier deeds. If one is the child of converts,</b> another <b>may not say to him: Remember the deeds of your ancestors, as it is stated: “And a convert shall you neither mistreat, nor shall you oppress him”</b> (Exodus 22:20).

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> It is written: <b>“And you shall not mistreat [<i>tonu</i>] one man his colleague;</b> and you shall fear your God, for I am the Lord your God” (Leviticus 25:17). The <i>tanna</i> explains: <b>The verse is speaking with regard to verbal mistreatment.</b> The <i>baraita</i> proceeds: Do <b>you say</b> that it is speaking of <b>verbal mistreatment [<i>be’ona’at devarim</i>], or</b> perhaps <b>it is</b> speaking <b>only with regard to monetary exploitation [<i>be’ona’at mammon</i>]? When it says</b> in a previous verse: <b>“And if you sell to your colleague an item that is sold, or acquire from your colleague’s hand,</b> you shall not exploit [<i>tonu</i>] his brother” (Leviticus 25:14), <b>monetary exploitation is</b> explicitly <b>stated. How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of the verse: <b>“And you shall not mistreat one man his colleague”?</b> It is <b>with regard to verbal mistreatment.</b>

### Part 8
<b>How so? If one is a penitent,</b> another <b>may not say to him: Remember your earlier deeds. If one is the child of converts,</b> another <b>may not say to him: Remember the deed of your ancestors. If one is a convert and</b> he <b>came to study Torah,</b> one <b>may not say to him:</b> Does the <b>mouth that ate unslaughtered carcasses and animals that had wounds that would have caused them to die within twelve months [<i>tereifot</i>],</b> and <b>repugnant creatures, and creeping animals, comes to study Torah that was stated from the mouth of the Almighty?</b>

### Part 9
<b>If torments are afflicting</b> a person, <b>if illnesses are afflicting him, or if he is burying his children,</b> one <b>may not speak to him in the manner that</b> the <b>friends of Job spoke to him: “Is not your fear of God your confidence, and your hope the integrity of your ways? Remember, I beseech you, whoever perished, being innocent?”</b> (Job 4:6–7). Certainly you sinned, as otherwise you would not have suffered misfortune.

### Part 10
Likewise, <b>if donkey drivers are asking</b> to purchase <b>grain from</b> someone, and he has none, <b>he may not say to them: Go to so-and-so, as he sells grain, if he knows about him that he never sold</b> grain at all. He thereby causes the donkey drivers and the would-be seller anguish. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One may not even cast his eyes on the merchandise</b> for sale, creating the impression that he is interested, <b>at a time when he does not have money</b> to purchase it. Verbal mistreatment is not typically obvious, and it is difficult to ascertain the intent of the offender, <b>as the matter is given to the heart</b> of each individual, as only he knows what his intention was when he spoke. <b>And with regard to any matter given to the heart, it is stated: “And you shall fear your God”</b> (Leviticus 25:17), as God is privy to the intent of the heart.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Greater is</b> the transgression of <b>verbal mistreatment than</b> the transgression of <b>monetary exploitation, as with regard to this,</b> verbal mistreatment, <b>it is stated: “And you shall fear your God.” But with regard to that,</b> monetary exploitation, <b>it is not stated: “And you shall fear your God.” And Rabbi Elazar said</b> this explanation: <b>This,</b> verbal mistreatment, affects <b>one’s body; but that,</b> monetary exploitation, affects <b>one’s money. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says: This,</b> monetary exploitation, <b>is given to restitution; but that,</b> verbal mistreatment, <b>is not given to restitution.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara relates that <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall <b>taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak: Anyone who humiliates another in public, it is as though he were spilling blood.</b> Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak <b>said to him: You have spoken well, as we see that</b> after the humiliated person blushes, <b>the red leaves</b> his face <b>and pallor comes</b> in its place, which is tantamount to spilling his blood. <b>Abaye said to Rav Dimi: In the West,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, <b>with regard to what</b> mitzva <b>are they</b> particularly <b>vigilant?</b> Rav Dimi <b>said to him:</b> They are vigilant <b>in</b> refraining from <b>humiliating</b> others, <b>as Rabbi Ḥanina says: Everyone descends to Gehenna except for three.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>Does it enter your mind</b> that <b>everyone</b> descends to Gehenna? <b>Rather, say: Anyone who descends to Gehenna</b> ultimately <b>ascends, except for three who descend and do not ascend, and these are they: One who engages in intercourse with a married woman,</b> as this transgression is a serious offense against both God and a person; <b>and one who humiliates another in public; and one who calls</b> another <b>a derogatory name.</b> The Gemara asks with regard to <b>one who calls</b> another a derogatory name: <b>That is</b> identical to <b>one who shames</b> him; why are they listed separately? The Gemara answers: <b>Although</b> the victim <b>grew accustomed to</b> being called that name <b>in</b> place of <b>his name,</b> and he is no longer humiliated by being called that name, since the intent was to insult him, the perpetrator’s punishment is severe.

### Part 14
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC