
### Part 1
<b>Learn from it</b> that the legal status of <b>its one-fifth</b> payment is <b>like</b> that of the principal <b>itself,</b> in that it must be paid from non-sacred property. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that it is so.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rava said: With regard to robbery, it is written:</b> “And he shall restore the robbed item that he robbed…<b>and he shall add its one-fifth payments to it”</b> (Leviticus 5:23–24), <b>and we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 103a): If the robber <b>gave</b> the robbery victim <b>the principal and took</b> a false <b>oath to him concerning the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, asserting that he had already paid it, then the additional one-fifth is considered a new principal obligation. <b>This</b> robber <b>adds</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>apart from</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment about which he had taken a false oath. If he then takes a false oath concerning the second one-fifth payment, he is assessed an additional one-fifth payment for that oath, <b>until the principal,</b> i.e., the additional one-fifth payment about which he has most recently taken the false oath, <b>is reduced to less than the value of one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 3
Rava continues: <b>With regard to <i>teruma</i></b> too, <b>it is written: “If a man eats that which is sacred unwittingly, then he shall add its one-fifth payment to it”</b> (Leviticus 22:14), <b>and as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 6:1): <b>One who partakes of <i>teruma</i> unwittingly pays</b> the <b>principal and</b> an additional <b>one-fifth.</b> This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>whether</b> it concerns <b>one who partakes of</b> <i>teruma</i>, <b>or one who drinks</b> it, <b>or one who applies</b> oil to himself; or <b>whether</b> it is <b>ritually pure <i>teruma</i> or ritually impure <i>teruma</i>. He pays its one-fifth</b> payment, <b>and</b> if he partook of that one-fifth, he pays <b>one-fifth of its one-fifth.</b> Rava concludes: <b>While with regard to</b> second <b>tithe,</b> it <b>is neither written</b> in the Torah, <b>nor taught</b> in <b>a mishna, nor raised as a dilemma before us</b> by the <i>amora’im</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara pursues a similar line of inquiry: <b>With regard to consecrated</b> property <b>it is written: “And if he who consecrated it will redeem his house, then he shall add one-fifth of the money of your valuation</b> unto it, and it shall be his” (Leviticus 27:15), <b>and we learned</b> in a mishna (55b): <b>One who redeems his</b> own <b>consecrated</b> property that he consecrated himself <b>adds one-fifth</b> to the sum of the redemption. <b>We learned one-fifth; we did not learn one-fifth of the one-fifth. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara elaborates: <b>With regard to <i>teruma</i> it is written: “Then he shall add,”</b> and <b>with regard to consecrated</b> property <b>too, isn’t it written: “Then he shall add”?</b> Apparently, in a case of consecrated property one also pays one-fifth of the one-fifth.

### Part 5
<b>Or perhaps</b> we should learn the <i>halakha</i> as follows: <b>With regard to <i>teruma</i> it is written: “Then he shall add [<i>veyasaf</i> ],”</b> and the <i>halakha</i> of one-fifth of the one-fifth is derived in this manner: <b>If you take the</b> letter <b><i>vav</i> of</b> the word <b><i>veyasaf</i>, and cast it to</b> the end of the word <b><i>ḥamishito</i>,</b> its one-fifth payment, <b>it</b> then <b>becomes</b> the plural <b><i>ḥamishitav</i>,</b> its one-fifths payments, as it is written in the case of robbery, indicating that one pays one-fifth of one-fifth. <b>With regard to consecrated</b> property, <b>it is written: “Then he shall add [<i>veyasaf</i> ] one-fifth [<i>ḥamishit</i>].” Even when you take the <i>vav</i> of <i>veyasaf</i> and cast it to</b> the end of the word <b><i>ḥamishit</i>, ultimately it is</b> only <b><i>ḥamishito</i>,</b> in the singular, indicating payment of only a single one-fifth. What is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>And why not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of consecrated property from the fact <b>that it is</b> tantamount to <b>a second consecration.</b> When one redeems consecrated property with another item, although that item is thereby consecrated, not all the <i>halakhot</i> of consecrated property apply to it. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: For</b> redemption of <b>first consecration one adds one-fifth; for</b> redemption of <b>second consecration one does not add one-fifth. Rav Pappi said to Ravina</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rava said:</b> The legal status of the additional <b>one-fifth is like</b> that <b>of initial consecration,</b> not like that of second consecration.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> halakhic conclusion <b>was</b> reached <b>about</b> this dilemma? <b>Rav Tavyumei said in the name of Abaye</b> that <b>the verse states</b> with regard to one who redeems a house that he consecrated: <b>“Then he shall add one-fifth of the money of your valuation</b> unto it” (Leviticus 27:15). The Torah <b>juxtaposes its</b> payment of <b>one-fifth to the money of its valuation,</b> i.e., the consecrated house: <b>Just as</b> when redeeming <b>the money of its valuation one adds one-fifth, so too,</b> when redeeming <b>the money of its one-fifth, one adds one-fifth as well.</b>

### Part 8
§ The Gemara analyzes <b>the</b> matter <b>itself. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: For</b> redemption of <b>first consecration one adds one-fifth; for</b> redemption of <b>second consecration one does not add one-fifth. Rava said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi?</b> It is as <b>the verse states: “And if he who consecrated it will redeem his house,</b> then he shall add one-fifth of the money of your valuation unto it” (Leviticus 27:15), from which it may be inferred that when <b>he who consecrates</b> the house redeems it, he adds one-fifth, <b>but</b> this is <b>not</b> so with regard to <b>one who associates</b> an item with an existing sanctity, as in this case, where the sanctity of the one-fifth is derived from its association with the sanctity of the house.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates that <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall <b>taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rabbi Elazar.</b> It is written: <b>“And if it is of a non-kosher animal, then he shall redeem it according to your valuation”</b> (Leviticus 27:27). This verse teaches that <b>just as a non-kosher animal</b> that was consecrated <b>is unique</b> in <b>that it is</b> an example of <b>initial consecration and it is</b> devoted <b>entirely to Heaven,</b> as neither the owner nor anyone else may derive benefit from it after its consecration, <b>and one</b> violates the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>by</b> using <b>it</b> after it was consecrated, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item that both undergoes <b>initial consecration and is</b> devoted <b>entirely to Heaven, one</b> violates the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>by</b> using <b>it</b> after it was consecrated.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Elazar said to the <i>tanna</i>: Granted,</b> the statement: <b>It is</b> devoted <b>entirely to Heaven,</b> serves <b>to exclude offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> e.g., peace-offerings. <b>Since the owners have</b> a share <b>in them,</b> as they may partake of those offerings, <b>they are not subject to</b> the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. <b>But what</b> does the mention of <b>initial consecration</b> in the <i>baraita</i> serve <b>to exclude?</b> Is it that <b>initial consecration is subject to</b> the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property and <b>ultimate consecration is not subject to</b> the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property? Even the property consecrated last in a series of redemptions is full-fledged consecrated property. <b>Perhaps</b> it is with regard <b>to</b> the <b>matter of</b> the payment of <b>one-fifth</b> that <b>you are saying</b> this, <b>and</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi?</b> The <i>tanna</i> <b>said to him: Yes, that is</b> what <b>I am saying.</b>

### Part 11
Apropos that <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rav Ashi said to Ravina:</b> Is it so that <b>a non-kosher animal is</b> subject <b>to initial consecration</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC