
### Part 1
<b>Now,</b> consider: <b>All matters,</b> i.e., all animals, <b>are</b> included <b>in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>muzzling, as we derive</b> a verbal analogy between the term <b>“an ox”</b> stated here and the term <b>“an ox”</b> stated <b>with regard to Shabbat.</b> Just as the prohibition against having one’s animal perform labor on Shabbat applies not only to oxen but to all animals, as explicitly stated in the Torah (Deuteronomy 5:14), so too the <i>halakha</i> of muzzling includes all animals, not merely oxen. <b>If so,</b> and the term “ox” in this verse does not limit the <i>halakha</i> to that animal alone, <b>let the Merciful One write</b> in general terms: <b>You shall not thresh while muzzling; why do I need</b> the word <b>“ox” that the Merciful One writes?</b>

### Part 2
It serves <b>to juxtapose</b> and compare the one who <b>muzzles to the muzzled</b> animal, <b>and</b> likewise to compare <b>the muzzled</b> animal <b>to the one who muzzles: Just as the one who muzzles,</b> a person, may <b>eat from</b> produce <b>attached</b> to the ground, <b>so too the muzzled</b> animal <b>may eat from attached</b> produce. <b>And just as the muzzled</b> animal <b>may eat from detached</b> produce, <b>so too the one who muzzles may eat from detached</b> produce.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> another exposition with regard to the wording in the verse: “You shall not muzzle the ox in its threshing.” The verse mentions <b>threshing. Just as threshing is unique</b> in <b>that</b> it applies to <b>an item grown from the ground, and</b> it is performed <b>at the time of the completion of</b> its <b>work, and a laborer may eat</b> from <b>it, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>that is grown from the ground, a laborer may eat it.</b> This serves to <b>exclude one who milks</b> a cow, <b>one who makes butter</b> from cream, <b>and one who makes cheese</b> from milk, <b>as</b> these <b>are not grown from the ground, and</b> therefore <b>a laborer may not eat them.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need this exposition? This <i>halakha</i> can be <b>derived from</b> the words in the verse: <b>“When you come into your neighbor’s vineyard”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:25), as these actions are not performed in a vineyard. The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i>, as <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since</b> the Merciful One <b>writes: “Standing”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:26), and, as explained earlier, this serves <b>to include all items that stand,</b> i.e., produce of all kinds, one might have thought that it <b>also</b> serves <b>to include items that are not grown from the ground.</b> The <i>tanna</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies only to food that grows from the ground.

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>, with regard to the same term: <b>Threshing,</b> that <b>just as threshing is unique</b> in that it applies to <b>an item that is at the time of the completion of</b> its <b>work</b> and <b>a laborer may eat</b> from <b>it, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>that is at the time of the completion of</b> its <b>work, a laborer may eat it.</b> This serves to <b>exclude one who weeds garlic and onions,</b> i.e., one hired to remove the wild growths from among garlic and onions. The reason is that <b>since it is not the completion of</b> their <b>work, a laborer may not eat from them.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need this exposition? It can be <b>derived from: “But you shall not put any in your vessel”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:25), which indicates that if the laborer does not place the food into the owner’s vessels, he is not permitted to eat. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> to teach the following <i>halakha</i>: <b>Even though he</b> also <b>plucks</b> and removes <b>the small ones from between the thick ones,</b> and therefore the work of the small garlic and onions has been completed, nevertheless, the laborer may not eat from them, as this is not the completion of the work of the entire field.

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> concerning the term: <b>Threshing,</b> that <b>just as threshing is unique</b> in that it applies to <b>an item whose work is not</b> yet <b>completed for tithes,</b> and <b>a laborer may eat</b> from <b>it, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>whose work is not completed for tithes, a laborer may eat it.</b> This serves to <b>exclude one who separates dates and dried figs,</b> which are initially gathered together and stuck to each other before the laborer splits them apart with a rake. The reason is that <b>since its work is completed for tithes</b> when it has been gathered from the field, <b>a laborer may not eat from it.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who separates dates and dried figs,</b> this <b>laborer may eat from it? Rav Pappa said: When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught,</b> it is referring <b>to unripe dates,</b> which are plucked before they are ready, and placed on the ground in order to ripen fully. The work of these fruits has not yet been completed even after they have been separated from each other.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>, with regard to the same term: <b>Threshing,</b> that <b>just as threshing is unique</b> in that it applies to <b>an item whose work is not</b> yet <b>completed for <i>ḥalla</i>, and a laborer may eat</b> from <b>it, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>whose work is not completed for <i>ḥalla</i>, a laborer may eat it.</b> This serves to <b>exclude one who kneads</b> dough, <b>and one who smooths</b> it over with water and oil, <b>and one who bakes, as its work is completed for <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> and therefore <b>a laborer may not eat from it.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> why do I need this <i>halakha</i>; <b>hasn’t its work</b> already <b>been completed for tithes</b> when the produce is brought inside the house? It was already stated that once the work has been completed for produce which is subject to tithes, a laborer may no longer partake of it.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> since in this <i>baraita</i> <b>we are dealing with</b> places <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>where there is no</b> obligation of <b>tithes.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If so,</b> that this is referring to a place outside of Eretz Yisrael, the obligation to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i> also</b> does <b>not</b> apply. <b>Rather,</b> the ruling in the <i>baraita</i> is <b>actually</b> stated <b>with regard to Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>and</b> it is <b>not difficult,</b> as it is referring <b>to</b> those <b>seven</b> years in <b>which they conquered</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>and to the seven</b> in <b>which they divided</b> it. <b>As the Master said:</b> During the <b>seven</b> years in <b>which</b> the Jewish people <b>conquered</b> Eretz Yisrael <b>and</b> the <b>seven</b> in <b>which they divided</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they were obligated in <i>ḥalla</i> but they were not obligated in</b> the separation <b>of tithes.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara raises a difficulty concerning this answer: <b>Is</b> the obligation to separate <b>tithes</b> the decisive <b>factor</b> with regard to a laborer? That is not the case, as <b>the completion of the work is</b> the decisive <b>factor,</b> while the obligation to separate tithes is mentioned only because it coincides with the completion of the work. Even if there is no mitzva to separate tithes, nevertheless the work is completed at the same stage.

### Part 12
<b>Rather, Ravina said:</b> One should <b>combine</b> the two <i>baraitot</i> <b>and teach</b> them as one, as follows: With regard to the term <b>threshing, just as threshing is unique</b> in that it applies to <b>an item whose work is not</b> yet <b>completed for tithe,</b> in the case of most produce, <b>and</b> an item which is not completed <b>for <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> in the case of species of grain, and <b>a laborer may eat</b> from <b>it, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>whose work is not completed for tithe or for <i>ḥalla</i>, a laborer may eat it.</b>

### Part 13
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>a laborer, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning the possibility <b>that he may singe</b> fruit or grain <b>in fire,</b> to improve its taste, <b>and eat</b> it? The question is <b>whether</b> this <b>is</b> considered <b>like</b> eating <b>grapes and something else,</b> which is prohibited, <b>or not?</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this problem from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A homeowner is permitted to give</b> his <b>laborers wine to drink, so that they will not eat many grapes</b> from his harvest, and for their part the <b>laborers are permitted to dip their bread in brine, so that they will eat many grapes.</b> This <i>baraita</i> indicates that such a practice is permitted.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC