
### Part 1
<b>And</b> their consumption <b>is prohibited to non-priests; and they are the property of the priest</b> in every sense, e.g., to sell them to another priest or betroth a woman with them; <b>and</b> if they were intermingled with non-sacred produce <b>they are negated</b> only if the ratio is <b>one</b> part <i>teruma</i> <b>in one hundred</b> parts non-sacred produce; <b>and they require the washing of</b> one’s <b>hands</b> before partaking of them; <b>and</b> one who was impure and immersed must wait for <b>sunset</b> before partaking of them. <b>These</b> are <i>halakhot</i> that are in effect <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i> and first fruits, which is not so with regard to</b> second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Which is not so with regard to</b> second <b>tithe?</b> Is it <b>not, by inference, that</b> second <b>tithe is negated in a majority</b> of non-sacred produce? <b>And if it is so that</b> the opinion of <b>Ḥizkiyya</b> is correct and even second-tithe produce worth less than one <i>peruta</i> can be redeemed, second tithe <b>is an item whose</b> prohibition <b>has permitting</b> factors, <b>and</b> the principle is that <b>any item whose</b> prohibition <b>has permitting</b> factors is <b>not negated even</b> if it is in a mixture <b>with one thousand</b> permitted parts.

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>And from where</b> is it learned that from the phrase: <b>Which is not so with regard to</b> second <b>tithe,</b> one infers <b>that</b> second tithe is <b>negated in</b> a simple <b>majority? Perhaps</b> infer that second tithe <b>is not negated at all.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>You cannot say so, as with regard to <i>teruma</i>,</b> the <i>tanna</i> in the mishna <b>is teaching the stringencies of <i>teruma</i></b> but <b>he is not teaching the leniencies of <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach: And they are the property of the priest,</b> which is a leniency? Apparently, the <i>tanna</i> did not restrict his treatment of the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>teruma</i> to stringencies.

### Part 4
The Gemara states: The inference that second tithe is not negated at all should <b>not enter your mind, as it is taught explicitly</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Second tithe is negated in</b> a simple <b>majority. And with regard to which second tithe did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> this? It is <b>with regard to</b> second <b>tithe that is not worth</b> even <b>one <i>peruta</i>, and which entered Jerusalem and exited.</b> The Gemara states its objection to the ruling of Ḥizkiyya: <b>And if it is so that</b> the opinion <b>of Ḥizkiyya</b> is correct and even second-tithe produce worth less than one <i>peruta</i> can be redeemed, <b>let him take action according to Ḥizkiyya and redeem</b> the second tithe <b>upon the first coins.</b> Therefore, as an item whose prohibition has permitting factors, it should not be negated at all. The Gemara answers: This is a case <b>where he did not redeem</b> his second tithe, and therefore he has no first coins upon which to redeem the produce.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And let him bring</b> other second-<b>tithe</b> produce worth half a <i>peruta</i> <b>that he has, and join it</b> to the second tithe worth half a <i>peruta</i> intermingled with the non-sacred produce, and desacralize them together. It remains an item whose prohibition has permitting factors. The Gemara answers: Second tithe <b>by Torah law and</b> second tithe <b>by rabbinic law do not join.</b> By Torah law second tithe is negated in a majority of non-sacred produce and retains no sanctity, and it is by rabbinic law that an item whose prohibition has permitting factors is not negated. Therefore, the half-<i>peruta</i> of second tithe that he brought, which is not in a mixture and is second tithe by Torah law, cannot be redeemed.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues: <b>And let him bring</b> half a <i>peruta</i> of second-tithe produce from <b>doubtfully tithed produce [<i>demai</i>],</b> which is by rabbinic law, and join it to the intermingled half-<i>peruta</i>. The Gemara explains: One may not do so <i>ab initio</i> <b>lest he come to bring</b> a half-<i>peruta</i> from produce that is <b>definitely</b> untithed, as in practice one treats <i>demai</i> in the same manner that he treats untithed produce.

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests: <b>And let him bring two <i>perutot</i> and desacralize</b> second <b>tithe</b> worth <b>one and a half <i>perutot</i> upon them, and desacralize this</b> half-<i>peruta</i> of second tithe <b>upon that remaining</b> half-<i>peruta</i>. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Do you hold</b> that the sanctity of second-tithe produce worth <b>one and a half <i>perutot</i> takes effect</b> on <b>two <i>perutot</i>? No,</b> the sanctity of <b>one <i>peruta</i> takes effect</b> on <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> of the coins, <b>and</b> the sanctity of the <b>half-<i>peruta</i></b> of produce <b>does not take effect</b> on anything. Once <b>again</b> it <b>becomes</b> a case of one half-<i>peruta</i> of produce that is second tithe <b>by Torah law and</b> the half-<i>peruta</i> in mixture that is second tithe <b>by rabbinic law, and</b> second tithe <b>by Torah law and</b> second tithe <b>by rabbinic law do not join.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And let him bring an <i>issar</i>,</b> worth eight <i>perutot</i>, and redeem second tithe worth almost that much, and redeem the intermingled half-<i>peruta</i> of second tithe upon the rest. The Gemara answers: One may not do so <i>ab initio</i>, <b>lest he come to bring <i>perutot</i></b> to redeem the produce, in which case the sanctity of the tithe will not take effect on a half-<i>peruta</i>, and the remedy will be ineffective.

### Part 9
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And which entered Jerusalem and exited.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And why</b> is the matter of negation in a majority relevant? <b>Let him bring it back</b> into Jerusalem and partake of it there. The Gemara answers: The reference is to second tithe <b>that became ritually impure</b> outside Jerusalem. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>let him redeem it,</b> in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Elazar? <b>As Rabbi Elazar says: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to second-tithe</b> produce <b>that became ritually impure that one may redeem it</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC