
### Part 1
<b>And likewise, Rabba says: They enhanced</b> the property, and the profit goes <b>to the middle. Abaye said to him: Are</b> these matters <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case that the adult and minor brothers were together, the <b>adults are aware that the minors</b> exist <b>and forgo</b> payment for their effort on behalf of their younger brothers. <b>Here,</b> in the case of Mari bar Isak, <b>was</b> the older brother <b>aware</b> of the existence of the younger brother so <b>that he could forgo</b> payment for his labor?

### Part 2
<b>The matter continued</b> to develop <b>and came before Rabbi Ami. He said</b> to those who reported Rav Ḥisda’s ruling: The Sages <b>stated a more far-reaching</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>than that:</b> In the case of relatives who tend to the property of a captive, the court <b>appraises their</b> work <b>as</b> one would appraise the work of <b>a sharecropper.</b> Although the property they tended did not belong to them at all, they receive wages for their labor. Why, then, is the ruling <b>now,</b> in the case of Mari bar Isak, that payment for labor on property that is <b>his, we do not give him?</b> Mari bar Isak should be reimbursed for his expenditures.

### Part 3
<b>They returned</b> and related <b>this</b> matter <b>before Rav Ḥisda.</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to them: Are</b> these matters <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case of the captive’s property, it was <b>with authorization</b> from the court that the relative <b>descended</b> to tend to the property. <b>Here,</b> it was <b>without authorization</b> that Mari bar Isak <b>descended</b> to tend to the property of his brother. <b>And furthermore,</b> Mari bar Isak’s brother was <b>a minor</b> when Mari inherited the property, <b>and</b> the court <b>does not authorize a relative to descend</b> and manage <b>the property of a minor.</b>

### Part 4
<b>They returned</b> and related <b>this</b> response <b>before Rabbi Ami.</b> Rabbi Ami <b>said to them: They did not complete</b> conveying all the details of the case <b>before me,</b> and I was unaware <b>that</b> Mari’s brother <b>was a minor.</b> Rav Ḥisda is correct.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who deposits produce with another,</b> and the bailee provides him with different produce in return, <b>that</b> bailee <b>deducts</b> from the produce that he returns an amount equal to the standard <b>decrease</b> of the produce. The decrease is calculated according to this formula: <b>For wheat and for rice,</b> he deducts <b>nine half-<i>kav</i> per <i>kor</i>,</b> which is 180 <i>kav</i>; <b>for barley and millet,</b> he deducts <b>nine <i>kav</i> per <i>kor</i>; for spelt and flaxseed,</b> he deducts <b>three <i>se’a</i>,</b> which total eighteen <i>kav</i>, <b>per <i>kor</i>. The entire</b> calculation is <b>according to the measure, and the entire</b> calculation is <b>according to the time</b> elapsed. This is the amount of produce that the bailee deducts per one <i>kor</i> of produce over the course of one year.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri said: And what do the mice care</b> how much produce the bailee is safeguarding? <b>Don’t they eat the same</b> amount <b>whether</b> it is <b>from much</b> produce <b>and whether</b> it is <b>from little</b> produce? <b>Rather, he deducts</b> an amount equal to the standard <b>decrease of just one <i>kor</i></b> of produce. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the deposit <b>was a large measure,</b> the bailee <b>does not deduct</b> the <b>decrease</b> from <b>it, due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> for different reasons <b>it increases.</b> Therefore, he returns the measure of produce that was deposited with him, because the increase offsets the decrease.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara challenges: After decrease, <b>rice is lacking a greater</b> amount than what is recorded in the mishna. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>with regard to shelled rice</b> that the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>taught</b> the mishna. The mishna teaches: <b>For spelt and flaxseed,</b> he deducts <b>three <i>se’a</i> per <i>kor</i>. Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya says:</b> It is <b>with regard to flaxseed on</b> its <b>stalks</b> that the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>taught</b> the mishna, and that is why the rate of decrease is so great. The Gemara comments: <b>That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>For spelt and for flaxseed on</b> its <b>stalks and for unshelled rice,</b> he deducts <b>three <i>se’a</i> per <i>kor</i>.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna teaches: <b>The entire</b> calculation is <b>according to the measure,</b> and the entire calculation is according to the time elapsed. It is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>That</b> is the measure of decrease <b>for each and every <i>kor</i>, and that</b> is the measure of decrease <b>for each and every year.</b>

### Part 9
The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri said:</b> And what do the mice care how much produce the bailee is safeguarding? <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the Sages <b>said to Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> The reduction is due not only to mice eating the produce. <b>Much of</b> the produce is <b>lost,</b> and <b>much of</b> the produce is <b>scattered.</b>

### Part 10
It is <b>taught: In what</b> cases <b>is this statement said,</b> that the bailee deducts these measures for the decrease? It is in a case <b>where</b> the bailee <b>mixed</b> the produce that he is safeguarding <b>with his</b> own <b>produce,</b> and he is unable to distinguish between them. <b>But</b> if <b>he designated a corner</b> for the produce that he is safeguarding, the bailee <b>says to</b> the owner of the produce: <b>That which is yours is before you,</b> and he does not calculate the decrease.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And when he mixed</b> the produce that he is safeguarding <b>with his</b> own <b>produce, what of it?</b> Why must he calculate the decrease? <b>Let him see how much his</b> produce <b>was,</b> add the amount that was deposited with him, and calculate how much the produce diminished over time. He can then divide the loss proportionately between his produce and the deposited produce. The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the bailee <b>took supplies from</b> that produce, and therefore it is impossible to ascertain the rate of decrease.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And let him see how much</b> produce <b>he took</b> as <b>supplies</b> and include this in his calculation. The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the bailee <b>does not know</b> with <b>how much he took</b> as <b>supplies,</b> and therefore he must calculate the decrease based on the measures enumerated in the mishna.

### Part 13
The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the deposit <b>was</b> a large measure, the bailee does not deduct the decrease from it. The Gemara asks: <b>How much is a large measure? Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>ten <i>kor</i>. This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How much is a large measure?</b> It is <b>ten <i>kor</i>.</b>

### Part 14
<b>The <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> <b>taught before Rav Naḥman: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said,</b> that the bailee deducts the decrease from the produce he returns? It is in a case <b>where</b> the owner of the produce <b>measured</b> the produce <b>for</b> the bailee <b>from his</b> own <b>threshing floor, and</b> the bailee <b>returned</b> the produce <b>to him from his</b> own <b>threshing floor.</b> The measures used in all threshing floors were equal, and tended to err on the side of increasing the amount measured. <b>But</b> in a case <b>where</b> the owner <b>measured</b> the produce <b>for</b> the bailee <b>from his</b> own <b>threshing floor and</b> the bailee <b>returned</b> the produce <b>to him</b> as measured by a measure <b>from his</b> own <b>house,</b> which were more precise than those used on the threshing floor, <b>he does not deduct</b> the <b>decrease</b> when returning the produce. This is <b>because</b> the produce the owner deposited was measured with the <b>increased</b> measure of the threshing floor, and that offsets the decrease.

### Part 15
Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: And are we dealing with fools, who give</b> the deposit <b>with a large measure and take</b> the produce back <b>with a small measure?</b> Clearly, the same measure was used in both cases. <b>Perhaps you are stating</b> a ruling about <b>the season of the threshing floor,</b> and this is what it means: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said in a case <b>where he measured</b> the produce <b>for</b> the bailee <b>during the season of the threshing floor and</b> the bailee <b>returned</b> the produce <b>to him during the season of the threshing floor,</b> i.e., in the same period. <b>But</b> in a case where <b>he measured</b> the produce <b>for</b> the bailee <b>during the season of the threshing floor and</b> the bailee <b>returned</b> the produce <b>to him during the rainy season, he does not deduct</b> the <b>decrease</b> when returning the produce, <b>because</b> the produce that he received absorbed moisture and <b>expanded,</b> so that he ultimately returns the same measure.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: If so,</b> if the volume of the grain expands during the rainy season, <b>the jug</b> in which the grain is placed <b>should burst</b> due to that expansion. The Gemara relates: There <b>was an incident and the jug burst. If you wish, say</b> instead that the volume contracted <b>due to compression.</b> When the produce was deposited it was loose and had greater volume. When the bailee returned it, the produce was tightly packed in the jug, resulting in lesser volume.

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> When the bailee returns liquids that were deposited with him, <b>he deducts one-sixth</b> of the amount <b>for wine,</b> to offset the decrease in volume due to absorption into the cask and evaporation. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> He deducts <b>one-fifth. He deducts three <i>log</i> of oil for one hundred</b> <i>log</i>: <b>A <i>log</i> and a half for sediment</b> that sinks to the bottom of the cask, <b>and a <i>log</i> and a half</b> for <b>absorption</b> into the cask. <b>If it was refined oil, he does not deduct</b> any of the oil <b>for sediment</b> because it was filtered. <b>If</b> the oil <b>was</b> stored in <b>old casks</b> that are already saturated, <b>he does not deduct</b> any of the oil for <b>absorption. Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in a case of <b>one who sells refined oil to another all the days of the year, this</b> buyer <b>accepts upon himself</b> that the seller will deduct <b>a <i>log</i> and a half of sediment for one hundred</b> <i>log</i>, as that is the standard measure of sediment.

### Part 18
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yehuda <b>do not disagree</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i>. Rather, this <b>Sage</b> ruled <b>in accordance with</b> the custom of <b>his locale, and</b> this <b>Sage</b> ruled <b>in accordance with</b> the custom of <b>his locale. In the place of</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>they coat</b> the casks <b>with wax [<i>bekira</i>] and it does not absorb much. In the place of</b> the other <b>Sage,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yehuda, <b>they coat</b> the casks <b>with pitch and it absorbs much. If you wish, say</b> instead that <b>it is due to the</b> quality <b>of earth [<i>gargishta</i>]</b> from which they make the casks. Barrels made from <b>this</b> earth <b>absorb much, and</b> barrels made from <b>that</b> earth <b>do not absorb much.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara relates: <b>In Rav Yehuda’s place they would place</b> the contents of <b>forty-eight pitchers</b> of oil <b>into a barrel,</b> as that was the standard size of barrels there. <b>The barrel went</b> for <b>six dinars,</b> and <b>Rav Yehuda divided</b> the oil and sold it at <b>six</b> pitchersful <b>for one dinar.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC