
### Part 1
the agents must <b>take the oath</b> of a bailee <b>to the treasurers</b> that they did not misappropriate the coins. <b>If</b> the collection of the chamber was <b>not</b> yet performed, the lost or stolen shekels remain the property of the residents of the city. Therefore, the agents <b>take an oath to the residents of the city. The residents of the city</b> then <b>contribute other</b> shekels <b>in place</b> of the original shekels. <b>If</b> the original shekels <b>were</b> then <b>found or the thieves returned them,</b> both <b>these,</b> the original shekels, <b>and those,</b> the replacement shekels, assume the status of consecrated <b>shekels</b> and belong to the Temple. <b>But</b> the two half-shekels that they contributed this year <b>do not count</b> to absolve them from their obligation to contribute the shekels <b>for the following year.</b> This mishna teaches that an unpaid bailee does take an oath concerning consecrated property, contrary to the mishna here.

### Part 2
<b>Shmuel said: Here we are dealing with paid bailees,</b> and the purpose of the oath is not to exempt them from their liability to pay for the theft. Rather, <b>they take an oath</b> that they performed their task properly, in order <b>to collect their wages.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> is this phrase accurate: <b>They take an oath to the treasurers?</b> The <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> taught: They take an oath <b>to the residents of the city,</b> from whom they are claiming their wages. <b>Rabba said: They take an oath to the residents of the city in the presence of the treasurers, so that</b> the treasurers <b>will not suspect</b> that the residents of the city did not contribute their shekels at all. <b>Alternatively,</b> the agents take an oath that they executed their mission properly, <b>so that</b> the Temple treasurers <b>will not call them negligent.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the mishna: <b>And</b> the coins <b>were stolen or were lost</b> en route, <b>and paid bailees are liable</b> to pay <b>in</b> cases of <b>theft and loss? And here too,</b> when safeguarding consecrated property, <b>although</b> paid bailees <b>do not pay</b> for the theft, as a paid bailee is exempt, <b>let them at least forfeit their wages,</b> as their responsibility to safeguard the money includes preventing theft and loss.

### Part 4
<b>Rabba said:</b> When the <i>tanna</i> says that <b>they were stolen,</b> the reference is to a case where the item was stolen <b>by armed bandits.</b> When he said that <b>they were lost,</b> the reference is to a case where the agent’s <b>ship sank at sea.</b> Since the shekels left his possession through circumstances beyond his control, this is considered an unavoidable accident, for which a paid bailee is exempt.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who says: Consecrated</b> items <b>for which one bears responsibility</b> to replace <b>them are</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation, and</b> therefore <b>one takes an oath concerning them.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well</b> if the <b>contribution</b> of the chamber <b>had not</b> yet <b>been collected</b> into the baskets. At that stage, residents of the city bear responsibility to replace the shekels, and that is why Rabbi Shimon deems the agent liable to take an oath. But if the shekels were lost or stolen <b>once the contribution</b> of the chamber <b>had been collected,</b> the shekels are tantamount to <b>sacrificial animals for which one does not bear responsibility,</b> and the residents of the city should be exempt, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One collects</b> shekels in the Temple chamber with the intention of fulfilling the obligation <b>for</b> those coins <b>that are lost</b> on the way, <b>and for</b> those <b>that are collected</b> but did not yet arrive, <b>and for</b> those <b>that are destined to be collected</b> in the future. Apparently, the residents of the city no longer bear responsibility for the shekels.

### Part 7
The Gemara concludes: <b>Rather, Rabbi Elazar said: This oath</b> of the agents <b>is a rabbinic ordinance,</b> instituted <b>so that people will not treat consecrated property with contempt.</b> If they knew that there is no oath, they would neglect to safeguard the shekels properly.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A paid bailee does not pay</b> if these items were stolen or lost. <b>Rav Yosef bar Ḥama raises a contradiction before Rabba. We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>A paid bailee does not pay. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who hires</b> a day <b>laborer to watch the</b> red <b>heifer</b> to ensure that it is not disqualified, <b>to watch the child</b> to ensure that he remains ritually pure from birth in order to draw the water mixed with the ashes of the heifer, or <b>to safeguard the seeds</b> for the barley that will be used in the <i>omer</i> offering, <b>does not give him wages for Shabbat. Therefore, if</b> the items that the day laborer was entrusted to watch <b>were lost</b> on Shabbat, financial <b>responsibility for</b> their loss on <b>Shabbat is not</b> incumbent <b>upon him,</b> since he is not a paid bailee on that day.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: But if he was a laborer <b>hired for a week, hired for a month, hired for a year,</b> or <b>hired for seven years,</b> the one who hired him <b>gives him wages</b> for labor performed on <b>Shabbat</b> as well. <b>Therefore,</b> if the items were lost on Shabbat, financial <b>responsibility for</b> their loss on <b>Shabbat is</b> incumbent <b>upon him. What, is it not</b> that he is liable <b>to pay</b> for the loss he caused? As the list of the items being safeguarded includes consecrated items, this <i>baraita</i> apparently rules that a paid bailee bears responsibility for consecrated property.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> the ruling of the <i>baraita</i> stating that the bailee is responsible is only <b>with regard to forfeiting his wages</b> because he was derelict in safeguarding the items with which he was entrusted. Rav Yosef bar Ḥama asks: <b>If so,</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>which teaches</b> that financial <b>responsibility for</b> their loss on <b>Shabbat is not</b> incumbent <b>upon him,</b> is this <b>also with regard to forfeiting his wages? But does he have wages for</b> the work he did on <b>Shabbat? But isn’t it taught that one does not give him wages for Shabbat?</b> Clearly, the reference is to responsibility to pay for the safeguarded items themselves. Rabba <b>was silent,</b> unable to answer.

### Part 11
Rabba <b>said to</b> Rav Yosef bar Ḥama: <b>Have you heard anything with regard to this?</b> Rav Yosef bar Ḥama <b>said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rav Sheshet says:</b> The ruling of the latter clause is stated <b>with regard to</b> a case <b>where</b> the laborers made a commitment to the one who hired them to take responsibility for the items, and <b>they performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the one who hired them to reinforce that commitment. <b>And likewise Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The ruling of the latter clause is stated <b>with regard to</b> a case <b>where</b> the laborers made a commitment to the one who hired them to take responsibility for the items, and <b>they performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with him.</b>

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Sacrificial</b> animals <b>for which one bears responsibility</b> to replace <b>them are</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation, and</b> those <b>for which one does not bear responsibility</b> to replace <b>them are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation.</b> The Gemara relates that <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall <b>taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Abba</b> with regard to the source of the opinion of Rabbi Shimon. It is derived from the verse: “If anyone sins, and commits a trespass against the Lord, and deals falsely with his colleague in a matter of deposit, or of pledge, or of robbery, or has oppressed his neighbor” (Leviticus 5:21).

### Part 13
In that <i>baraita</i>, it is taught: For an oath concerning <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>for which one bears responsibility,</b> one is <b>liable</b> to bring an offering for taking a false oath, <b>as I apply</b> the phrase <b>“against the Lord, and deals falsely.” And</b> for an oath concerning sacrificial animals <b>for which one does not bear responsibility,</b> one is <b>exempt, as I read in their regard: With his neighbor, and deals falsely.</b> That reading indicates that even one who deals falsely in matters related to the Lord, e.g., sacrificial animals, is liable to bring an offering for a false oath.

### Part 14
Rabbi Yitzḥak <b>said to him: Isn’t it the opposite</b> [<b><i>kelapei layya</i></b>]?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC