
### Part 1
<b>or</b> it must have been that the other party accepted <b>one-half of the loss</b> and that Rav Ilish was entitled to <b>two-thirds of the profit.</b> Either way, the disparity in the terms served as payment to Rav Ilish for his effort, removing any concern about violation of the prohibition of interest.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Kahana said: I said this <i>halakha</i> before Rav Zevid of Neharde’a and he said to me:</b> Why is it certain that the document included all the details of the transaction? <b>Perhaps Rav Ilish immersed</b> his bread <b>in brine together with</b> the other party? According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, this would suffice to avoid the prohibition of interest, <b>and Rav Naḥman says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> Rav Kahana <b>said to</b> Rav Zevid: <b>It was not stated</b> by Rav Naḥman that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>but rather it was stated</b> that a single <b>opinion</b> is common to three Sages: Rabbi Yehuda; Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel; and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. This does not establish the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with their statements, but on the contrary, they all hold one common opinion that is not accepted as the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>This too stands to reason, as, if you do not say so, why did</b> Rav Naḥman <b>list</b> them individually <b>and say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of so-and-so, and the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of so-and-so? Instead <b>let</b> Rav Naḥman <b>say</b> simply: The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as he is <b>the most lenient of all of them,</b> and their rulings can be derived from his. Since Rav Naḥman did not state this, it is reasonable to say that he was not issuing a ruling in accordance with their opinion, but simply clarifying that these three opinions are actually one.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav says:</b> If one says to another: I am giving you a calf to fatten, and let us divide the profit between us when it is sold, and <b>the surplus</b> over <b>one-third</b> of its current value <b>is your wages,</b> meaning that they will split the profits up to one-third of the value of the calf, and any additional profits will belong exclusively to the one who fattened the animal and serve as his wages, <b>this</b> arrangement <b>is permitted,</b> because the one fattening the calf is compensated for his efforts, and there is therefore no interest on the part that is a loan. <b>And Shmuel says:</b> It is not permitted, because if <b>there is no surplus</b> over <b>one-third</b> and <b>he goes home empty-handed,</b> he will have worked for free, and this is considered interest. <b>Rather, Shmuel says:</b> The owner of the calf must <b>set aside a dinar for</b> the other, to compensate him for his efforts in the event that there is no surplus over one-third.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rav hold that he is not</b> required to <b>set aside a dinar for him? But doesn’t Rav say</b> a different way to structure such an arrangement, that <b>the head of the calf</b> is given <b>to the fattener,</b> i.e., they may divide most of the profits evenly, but the head of the calf is given as a supplement to the one who does the fattening? <b>What, is it not that he said to him: The surplus</b> over <b>one-third is your wages,</b> and according to Rav the calf’s owner must nevertheless also give him the head in case there is no surplus?

### Part 6
The Gemara refutes this: <b>No,</b> Rav was referring to a case <b>where</b> the owner of the calf <b>said to him: Either</b> he will receive <b>the surplus</b> over <b>one-third, or</b> the <b>head of the calf</b> will serve as wages <b>to the fattener.</b> Or <b>if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>When Rav says</b> that if the owner said to him: <b>The surplus</b> over <b>one-third is your wages it is permitted,</b> this was a case <b>where</b> the one fattening the calf already <b>had his own animal</b> to fatten, <b>as people say</b> in a common adage: <b>Mix</b> food <b>for an ox, mix for oxen,</b> meaning that since he already has to prepare food for one ox, it is not a big inconvenience and expense for him to add food for an additional ox, so the surplus over one-third is sufficient to compensate him.

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Elazar of Hagronya purchased an animal, and gave it to his sharecropper</b> to <b>fatten it, and gave him the head as his wages and gave</b> him <b>one-half of the profits.</b> The sharecropper’s <b>wife said to him: If you would have participated with him</b> in the purchase of the animal <b>he would have given you the tail also.</b> The next time, the sharecropper <b>went and purchased</b> the calf <b>with</b> Rabbi Elazar, <b>and</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>gave him one-half of the tail</b> and then <b>said to him: Let’s divide the head.</b> The sharecropper <b>said to him: Now will you not also give me as</b> you did <b>initially?</b> Before, when I was not a partner in the animal but accepted it only in order to fatten it, you gave me the entire head. Now that I am a partner with you, are you going to give me only one-half of the head?

### Part 8
Rabbi Elazar <b>said to him: Until now the money was mine,</b> and <b>had I not given you a little more</b> value as compensation for your efforts, <b>it would have appeared</b> to be <b>like interest.</b> But <b>now</b> that <b>we are partners, what</b> can <b>you say? That you</b> must <b>exert a little more</b> effort than I do to take the animal in and out of the pasture? As <b>people say</b> in a common adage: <b>An ordinary sharecropper subjugates himself</b> to the owner <b>to bring him pasture.</b> Sharecroppers are accustomed to expending extra effort on behalf of the owner of the field. Therefore we are equal partners and divide everything.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>one who appraises an animal for another</b> to raise, <b>how long</b> is the other <b>obligated to care for it</b> if they did not stipulate this explicitly? <b>Sumakhos says: For female donkeys, eighteen months; for flocks</b> of sheep or goats, <b>twenty-four months. And if</b> one of them <b>comes to divide,</b> i.e., if he wishes to sell the animal and divide the profits, <b>within the time,</b> i.e., before the time for taking care of it has ended, <b>the other can prevent him</b> from doing so, <b>but the</b> effort involved in the <b>care of</b> the animal for <b>this year is not comparable to the care of another year.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: With regard to the word <b>but</b> that was said here, <b>what is it saying?</b> It does not seem to belong in the statement. <b>Rather,</b> the text must be corrected as follows: <b>Because the care of this year is not comparable to the care of another year.</b> The profits are not necessarily divided evenly during the entire time of the animal’s growth, and therefore either party can insist that the contract be carried through to the end of the specified period.

### Part 11
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who appraises an animal for another</b> to raise, for <b>how long is</b> the latter <b>obligated to care for the offspring</b> that are born to it? <b>For</b> a species of <b>small</b> animals, he is obligated to care for the offspring for <b>thirty days, and for</b> a species of <b>large</b> animals, <b>fifty days. Rabbi Yosei says: For</b> a species of <b>small</b> animals, he is obligated to care for the offspring for <b>three months, as it</b> requires <b>a lot of care.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>A lot of care?</b> It means that <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that its teeth are thin,</b> its food has to be cut up for it, which is not necessary for a species of large animals. <b>From this</b> point <b>forward,</b> the one raising the animal <b>takes one-half</b> of the offspring as <b>his</b> share, since one-half of the animal is his, <b>and</b> he takes <b>one-half of one-half of the other’s</b> share of the offspring, i.e., one-fourth of the total, as wages for caring for the animal and raising it.

### Part 12
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Menashya bar Gadda</b> accepted an animal to raise, and of the offspring <b>he took his one-half and one-half of the other’s one-half.</b> This matter <b>came before Abaye.</b> Abaye <b>said to</b> Rav Menashya bar Gadda: <b>Who divided</b> it <b>for you?</b> Since he did this on his own, there is a concern that he may not have divided it fairly. <b>And furthermore,</b> this place <b>is a place where it is customary</b> for the one raising the animal <b>to raise</b> the offspring, <b>and we learned</b> in a mishna (69b): In <b>a place where it is customary to raise</b> the offspring, <b>they should be raised</b> by the one raising the mother, and not divided between them.

### Part 13
The Gemara relates: There were <b>these two Samaritans who entered into a joint venture with each other. One of them went</b> and <b>divided the money without the knowledge of the other. They came</b> for judgment <b>before Rav Pappa.</b> Rav Pappa <b>said</b> to the plaintiff: <b>What difference</b> is there, meaning: What did you lose? <b>This is</b> what <b>Rav Naḥman said: Money is</b> considered <b>as though</b> it were already <b>divided.</b> It is not viewed as a single sum.

### Part 14
<b>The</b> next <b>year</b> these same two <b>purchased wine together,</b> and <b>the other one arose</b> and <b>divided</b> the wine <b>without the knowledge of the other.</b> And again, <b>they came</b> for judgment <b>before Rav Pappa.</b> Rav Pappa <b>said to</b> the defendant: <b>Who divided</b> it <b>for you?</b> You did not act properly since you did not get your partner’s permission to divide the wine. The Samaritan <b>said to him: I see that the Master pursues me</b> in order to harass me, since last year, when we came with what appears to be essentially the same case, you gave a different ruling in favor of the other. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC