
### Part 1
The Gemara now analyzes Rav Yehuda’s calculation: <b>Subtract thirty-six</b> pitchersful that were sold <b>for six</b> dinars <b>each,</b> with which he recoups the purchase price of the barrel. <b>Twelve</b> pitchersful <b>remained for him. Subtract eight</b> pitchers full, which is <b>one-sixth</b> of the total amount, as that is the measure absorbed in the barrels. <b>Four</b> pitchersful <b>remained</b> as profit for Rav Yehuda.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Shmuel say</b> that <b>one who profits</b> from the sale of matters related to one’s existence <b>may not profit more than one-sixth?</b> One can infer that it is permitted for one to profit up to one-sixth. But according to the calculation, Rav Yehuda’s profit was much lower. Why did he not sell the oil at a higher price?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>There are the barrel and the sediment</b> to account for. These remain in his possession, as he purchased the barrel and all its contents for six dinars, and they supplement the profit. The Gemara challenges: <b>If so,</b> once the barrel and sediment are taken into account, the profit <b>is greater than one-sixth.</b> How did Rav Yehuda profit beyond the permitted amount? The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> the payment for <b>his exertion,</b> as he sold the oil, <b>and</b> there is the <b>payment for tapping,</b> as a craftsman is needed to install a tap in the barrel. When those payments are included in the calculation, the profit is precisely one-sixth.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>If it was refined oil, he does not deduct</b> any of the oil <b>for sediment.</b> If they were stored in old casks that are already saturated, he does not deduct any of the oil for absorption. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it impossible that</b> the cask <b>did not absorb</b> any oil at all, even if it was saturated? <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> It is <b>with regard to</b> casks <b>coated with pitch</b> that the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>taught</b> the mishna, and if the cask is old and coated with pitch it does not absorb anything. <b>Abaye said: Even if you say that</b> the mishna is <b>not</b> referring to casks <b>coated with pitch, once they are saturated they are saturated,</b> and no more oil is absorbed.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who sells refined oil to another all the days of the year, this</b> buyer <b>accepts upon himself</b> that the seller will deduct <b>a <i>log</i> and a half of sediment for one hundred</b> <i>log</i>, as that is the standard measure of sediment. <b>Abaye said: When</b> you analyze the matter, <b>you will find</b> it necessary <b>to say</b> that <b>according to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> it is <b>permitted to mix sediment</b> that settled at the bottom of the barrel with the clear oil and sell the mixture. <b>And according to the statement of the Rabbis,</b> it is <b>prohibited to mix sediment</b> with the clear oil.

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates. <b>According to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> it is <b>permitted to mix sediment, and that is the reason that</b> the buyer <b>accepts</b> upon himself that the seller will deduct a <i>log</i> and a half of sediment for one hundred <i>log</i>, <b>as</b> the seller <b>says to him: If I wished to mix</b> sediment and sell it <b>to you, couldn’t I mix</b> it and sell it <b>to you? Now too, accept</b> upon yourself the deduction due to sediment.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the buyer <b>say to him: If you had mixed</b> sediment <b>into</b> the oil, <b>it</b> could <b>have been sold for me</b> to another. <b>Now what will I do with it?</b> The sediment <b>cannot be sold on its own,</b> and I will suffer a loss. The Gemara answers: <b>We are dealing with</b> a buyer who is <b>a homeowner,</b> not a merchant. He needs oil for his own use, <b>and filtered</b> oil <b>is preferable for him,</b> as his use of the oil is facilitated by removal of the sediment. The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the buyer <b>say to him: From</b> the fact <b>that you did not mix</b> the sediment with the oil <b>for me,</b> it is an indication that <b>you renounced</b> your rights to <b>it to me.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as he is not</b> of the opinion that one can presume <b>renunciation,</b> and therefore the buyer cannot presume that the seller renounced his right to receive the standard price, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Batra</i> 77b): If <b>one sold the yoke [<i>tzemed</i>] to</b> another, <b>he did not sell the cattle to him.</b> Literally, <i>tzemed</i> means the yoke that holds the animals together [<i>tzamud</i>] while plowing. It can be understood as referring to the two animals held together by the yoke. If <b>one sold the cattle to</b> another, <b>he did not sell the yoke to him.</b> The sale is limited to the literal meaning of what he said.

### Part 9
The mishna continues: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The money informs</b> the scope of the sale. Based on the price, one can determine what is included in the sale. <b>How so?</b> If the buyer <b>said to</b> the seller: <b>Sell me your <i>tzemed</i> for two hundred dinars, the matter is well-known that a yoke</b> does <b>not</b> cost <b>two hundred dinars,</b> and he certainly meant the cattle. <b>And the Rabbis say: The money is not a proof,</b> as it is possible that one of the parties renounced part of the sale price.

### Part 10
The Gemara concludes its elaboration of the statement of Abaye: <b>According to the statement of the Rabbis,</b> it is <b>prohibited to mix sediment, and this is the reason</b> that the buyer <b>does not accept</b> that the seller deduct a <i>log</i> and a half of sediment for one hundred <i>log</i>, <b>as</b> the buyer <b>says to him: If you wished to mix</b> sediment and sell it, <b>would it be permitted for you</b> to do so? <b>Now too, I do not accept</b> that deduction.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: On the contrary, the opposite is reasonable. According to the statement of the Rabbis,</b> it is <b>permitted to mix sediment. And this is the reason</b> that the buyer <b>does not accept</b> the deduction, <b>as</b> the buyer <b>said to</b> the seller: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that you did not mix</b> the sediment <b>for me,</b> apparently <b>you renounced</b> that sum <b>to me. According to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> it is <b>prohibited to mix sediment. And this is the reason</b> that the buyer <b>accepts</b> the deduction, <b>as</b> the seller <b>says to him: If I wished to mix</b> sediment, <b>it is prohibited for me to mix</b> it <b>for you,</b> and if you <b>do not accept</b> the deduction, I earn nothing from this sale. That is unacceptable according to the maxim: One who <b>buys and sells</b> at the same price, is <b>he called a merchant?</b>

### Part 12
It is <b>taught:</b> The legal status of <b>both one who buys and one who deposits</b> oil with regard <b>to residue [<i>piktim</i>],</b> e.g., olive pits floating on the oil, is the same. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: With regard <b>to residue? If we say that</b> this is teaching: <b>Just as the buyer does not accept</b> upon himself a deduction in the quantity of oil to account for the <b>residue,</b> so <b>too, the one who deposits</b> the oil <b>does not accept</b> upon himself a deduction in the quantity of oil to account for the <b>residue</b> when he returns the oil and is required to return the full amount deposited with him, this is difficult. <b>But let</b> the bailee <b>say to</b> the owner: <b>What shall I do with your residue?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> it is teaching: <b>Just as the one who deposits</b> the oil <b>accepts the residue</b> when his oil is returned to him, so <b>too, the buyer accepts the residue</b> with the oil he purchases. The Gemara asks: <b>And does the buyer accept</b> upon himself a deduction for <b>residue? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The Sages <b>stated</b> that the loss for <b>murky oil</b> is <b>only for the seller, as the buyer accepts upon himself</b> a deduction for <b>a <i>log</i> and a half of sediment without residue?</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult, as this</b> <i>baraita</i>, in which it is taught that the buyer accepts residue, is referring to a case <b>where</b> the buyer <b>gave the seller money in Tishrei,</b> when olives are harvested, <b>and he takes</b> the oil <b>from him in Nisan according to</b> the <b>measure of Tishrei.</b> In Tishrei, due to the substantial supply, the price is lower, and immediately after the harvest the oil is murky. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, in which it is taught that the loss for murky oil is only for the seller, is referring to a case <b>where</b> the buyer <b>gave the seller money in Nisan, and he takes</b> the oil <b>from him in Nisan according to</b> the <b>measure</b> of <b>Nisan,</b> as in Nisan both the buyer and the seller assume that the oil is refined.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who deposits a barrel with another, and the owners did not designate</b> a specific <b>place for</b> the barrel to be stored in the bailee’s house, and the bailee <b>moved it and it broke, if it broke while</b> still <b>in his hand,</b> there is a distinction: If he moved the barrel <b>for his purposes,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to pay for the damage. If he moved the barrel <b>for its</b> own <b>purposes,</b> to prevent it from being damaged, he is <b>exempt. If, after he replaced</b> the barrel <b>it broke, whether</b> he initially moved it <b>for his purposes</b> or <b>whether</b> he moved it <b>for its</b> own <b>purposes,</b> he is <b>exempt.</b> But if <b>the owners designated</b> a specific <b>place for</b> the barrel, <b>and</b> the bailee <b>moved it and it broke, whether</b> it broke <b>while</b> still <b>in his hand or whether</b> it broke <b>after he replaced</b> the barrel, if he moved it <b>for his purposes</b> he is <b>liable</b> to pay, and if he moved it <b>for its</b> own <b>purposes,</b> he is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 16
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, who says:</b> When a thief returns an item that he stole, <b>we do not require the knowledge of the owner</b> for the item to be considered returned, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case of <b>one who steals a lamb from the flock or a <i>sela</i> from the purse, he should return it to the place from which he stole</b> it, and it is unnecessary to inform the owner; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC