
### Part 1
<b>sixteen</b> <i>se’a</i> of <b>barley,</b> he is <b>liable.</b> This indicates that if he added only <b>three <i>kav</i>,</b> i.e., half a <i>se’a</i>, he is <b>exempt. Abaye interpreted</b> the <i>baraita</i> as referring <b>to smoothed-over</b> barley, a precisely measured load, where the volume of the barley was not measured with heaped measuring utensils, but leveled flat. Consequently, it is roughly a <i>se’a</i> less than the usual amount.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught: A <i>kav</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for a porter,</b> and therefore if the porter is injured by the additional weight, the owner must pay him. <b>An <i>adriv</i>,</b> half a <i>kor</i>, is too large an addition <b>for a small boat [<i>areiva</i>]; a <i>kor</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for</b> a regular <b>boat; three <i>kor</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for a large ship [<i>burnei</i>].</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Master said: A <i>kav</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for a porter.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If it is so, that he cannot withstand this</b> load, the porter <b>is a sensible person; let him throw it off</b> and avoid injury. <b>Abaye said:</b> This is referring <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> the load <b>knocked him down immediately,</b> before he could remove it from his back. <b>Rava said: Even if you say</b> that it is referring to a case <b>where it did not knock him down immediately</b> the <i>baraita</i> is <b>not</b> difficult, as <b>it is necessary only</b> with regard <b>to the extra pay</b> that he can demand for this addition. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> Even if the porter is a sensible man, perhaps <b>he thought it was</b> a momentary <b>weakness that seized him</b> and did not realize that the load itself was excessive.

### Part 4
§ The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>A <i>kor</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for</b> a regular <b>boat; three <i>kor</i></b> is too large an addition <b>for a large ship. Rav Pappa said: Learn from here</b> that <b>unspecified boats</b> can <b>bear thirty <i>kor</i>,</b> i.e., this is the volume of a ship’s cargo. The reason for this claim is that in all these cases the addition that causes damage is one-thirtieth of the normal load. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> resulting from this observation? The Gemara answers: The difference is with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of buying and selling,</b> i.e., one who purchases a boat of unspecified dimensions should know that this is its expected capacity.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>All artisans</b> and laborers who take raw materials to their homes <b>are</b> considered <b>paid bailees</b> for those items until they return them to the owner. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>all those who said</b> to the owner: I finished the work, and therefore <b>take</b> what is <b>yours,</b> i.e., this item, <b>and bring money</b> in its stead, from that point on each of them is considered <b>an unpaid bailee.</b> If one person says to another: <b>Safeguard</b> my property <b>for me and I will safeguard</b> your property <b>for you,</b> each of them is a <b>paid bailee,</b> as each receives the services of the other as payment for his safeguarding. If one says: <b>Safeguard for me, and</b> the other <b>says to him: Place it before me,</b> the second individual is <b>an unpaid bailee.</b>

### Part 6
<b>One who lent to</b> another based <b>on collateral</b> is <b>a paid bailee</b> for the collateral. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One who lent</b> another <b>money</b> is <b>an unpaid bailee</b> for the collateral, whereas <b>one who lent</b> another <b>produce</b> is <b>a paid bailee. Abba Shaul says:</b> It is <b>permitted</b> for <b>a person to rent out a poor person’s collateral</b> that was given to him for a loan, <b>so that by setting</b> a rental price <b>for it</b> he will thereby <b>progressively</b> reduce the debt, i.e., the lender will subtract the rental money he receives from the amount owed by the borrower, <b>because this is</b> considered <b>like returning a lost item.</b> The borrower profits from this arrangement, whereas if the lender does not use the collateral in this manner it provides benefit to no one.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a renter,</b> whose legal status is not stated explicitly in the Torah, <b>how does he pay</b> in the event that a rented article is lost or stolen? <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> He pays <b>like an unpaid bailee,</b> i.e., only in cases where the loss of the item was due to his negligence. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> He pays <b>like a paid bailee,</b> i.e., even in cases where the loss of the item was not due to his negligence. Skilled laborers are similar to renters, as they take possession of the item to earn a profit from it, and the mishna teaches that skilled laborers are like paid bailees. Consequently, the ruling of the mishna is apparently not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this claim. <b>You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> and the reason skilled laborers are considered like paid bailees is that <b>through that benefit</b> that the worker receives from the fact <b>that</b> the owner of the item <b>leaves</b> aside <b>everyone else and hires him, he becomes a paid bailee over</b> the item. The Gemara challenges this reasoning: <b>If so,</b> with regard to <b>a renter as well,</b> it can be said that <b>through that benefit</b> he receives from the fact <b>that</b> the owner <b>leaves</b> aside <b>everyone else and rents to him, he</b> should <b>become a paid bailee over</b> the item.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> in light of this refutation the Gemara suggests a different reason that <b>you</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir: Through that benefit that</b> the skilled laborer receives from the fact <b>that</b> the owner <b>gives him a little more</b> money, <b>he becomes a paid bailee.</b> Since it is impossible to calculate the precise sum to which a skilled laborer is entitled, it is assumed that he is slightly overpaid.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>a renter as well, are we not dealing</b> even <b>with a case where</b> the owner <b>gives him a little more value</b> for his money, and yet Rabbi Meir claims that he is considered like an unpaid bailee? <b>Rather, you</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> for a different reason: <b>Through that benefit</b> that the skilled laborer receives from the fact <b>that he holds</b> onto the item <b>so that he is not required to go in and go out for</b> his <b>money, he becomes a paid bailee over</b> the item.

### Part 11
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead that the mishna can be explained in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir without these explanations, <b>as Rabba bar Avuh reversed</b> the opinions <b>and teaches</b> that the <i>baraita</i> says: With regard to <b>a renter, how does he pay? Rabbi Meir says: Like a paid bailee; Rabbi Yehuda says: Like an unpaid bailee.</b>

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> in the case of <b>all those who said</b> to the owner: <b>Take</b> what is <b>yours,</b> i.e., this item, <b>and bring money</b> in its stead, each of them is considered <b>an unpaid bailee. We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (98b): If the <b>borrower said to</b> the lender: <b>Send</b> the animal that you agreed to lend me with the person whom you said would deliver it, <b>and he sent it</b> to him <b>and it died</b> on the way, the borrower is <b>liable, and similarly when he returns it.</b> The borrower is responsible for the animal as long as it has not actually been returned to the owner.

### Part 13
<b>Rafram bar Pappa said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only when</b> the borrower <b>returned it during the period of its loan,</b> as he accepted responsibility for the animal for the stipulated duration of the loan. <b>But</b> if he returned it <b>after the period of its loan,</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> as once the duration of the loan is complete he no longer has the status of a borrower. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Pappa raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>And all those who said: Take</b> what is <b>yours and bring money,</b> each of them is considered <b>an unpaid bailee.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC