
### Part 1
<b>which circulate,</b> in the sense that they are universally accepted by merchants, in contrast to gold coins, which merchants are less willing to accept as payment for inexpensive items, <b>are currency; gold</b> coins, <b>which do not circulate, are a commodity. And</b> the principle is: When one party takes possession of <b>the commodity,</b> the other party <b>acquires the currency.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Ashi said: It is reasonable</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> that which he taught in <b>his youth.</b> This is <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> later in the mishna: When one party takes possession of <b>the copper</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins.

### Part 3
Rav Ashi explains: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that <b>the silver</b> coins <b>relative to the gold</b> coins <b>are a commodity, that is</b> the reason <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches:</b> When one party takes possession of <b>the copper</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins, <b>as, even though relative to the gold</b> coins, <b>the silver</b> coins <b>are a commodity,</b> the <i>tanna</i> teaches that <b>relative to copper</b> coins, they <b>are currency. But if you say</b> that <b>the silver</b> coins <b>relative to the gold</b> coins <b>are currency</b> the subsequent ruling is self-evident, as <b>now, relative to the gold</b> coins, <b>which are more valuable than</b> the silver coins, <b>you say</b> that silver coins <b>are currency,</b> then <b>relative to copper</b> coins, <b>as</b> the silver coins <b>are</b> more <b>valuable</b> than the copper coins <b>and they</b> also <b>circulate</b> more easily, <b>is it necessary</b> for the mishna to state that the silver coins are currency and the copper coins are a commodity?

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this proof. Even if you teach the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi in his old age, it <b>was necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> to teach the <i>halakha</i> of silver and copper coins as well. This is because it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>in a place where these</b> copper <b><i>perutot</i> circulate, they circulate</b> more easily <b>than silver</b> coins. Therefore, <b>say</b> that they <b>are</b> the <b>currency</b> and the silver coins are the commodity. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us</b> that <b>since</b> silver coins are universally accepted as currency and <b>there is a place where</b> copper coins <b>do not circulate,</b> the copper coins <b>are a commodity.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara comments: <b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya, as well, holds</b> that <b>gold</b> coins <b>are currency</b> relative to silver. This is seen from the incident <b>where Rav borrowed</b> gold <b>dinars from the daughter of Rabbi Ḥiyya. Ultimately, the</b> gold <b>dinars appreciated</b> in value. Rav <b>came before Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> to ask his opinion. Rav was concerned that by returning more valuable dinars than he borrowed, this would violate the prohibition against paying interest. Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to</b> Rav: <b>Go</b> and <b>pay her unflawed and weighed</b> dinars. Return the number of dinars that you borrowed, as their monetary value is irrelevant. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that <b>the gold</b> coins <b>are currency,</b> this works out <b>well,</b> as he borrowed and repaid the same coins. <b>But if you say</b> that the gold coins <b>are a commodity, this is</b> parallel to the case of one who borrows <b>a <i>se’a</i></b> of produce and repays <b>a <i>se’a</i></b> of produce, which is <b>prohibited,</b> as the price of the produce may increase in the interim (see 75a).

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this proof. The dinars that Rav received from the daughter of Rabbi Ḥiyya did not constitute a standard loan, as <b>Rav had dinars</b> elsewhere, but he needed money immediately. <b>And since he had dinars, it is tantamount to saying to her: Lend me</b> money <b>until my son comes or until I find</b> the <b>key.</b> As the mishna on 75a teaches, when the borrower possesses the same item he is borrowing, and merely does not have momentary access to it, this type of borrowing and repayment is permitted.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: This</b> following <b><i>tanna</i></b> also <b>holds that the gold</b> coins <b>are currency, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b><i>peruta</i></b> of <b>which</b> the Sages <b>spoke</b> in all places in the mishna is <b>one-eighth of an Italian <i>issar</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> that emerges from this calculation? Ostensibly, a <i>peruta</i> is a <i>peruta</i>. The Gemara explains: Its consequences are <b>for the betrothal of a woman</b> with money, which can be effected only with money or an item worth at least one <i>peruta</i>. This <i>peruta</i> is assessed by means of the Italian <i>issar</i>. The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>An <i>issar</i></b> is <b>one twenty-fourth of a silver dinar.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> that emerges from this calculation? The Gemara answers: Its consequences are <b>for buying and selling,</b> to establish its value for use in commercial transactions.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>A silver dinar</b> is <b>one twenty-fifth of a gold dinar. What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> that emerges from this calculation? The Gemara explains: Its consequences are <b>with regard to redemption of the</b> firstborn <b>son.</b> The father of a firstborn gives the priest five <i>sela</i>, which are worth twenty silver dinars. Were he to give the priest a gold dinar he would receive five silver dinars change.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that the gold coins <b>are currency, the <i>tanna</i> calculates</b> the value of the coins <b>based on an item whose</b> value is <b>fixed.</b> The value of the gold coin is the currency with fixed value, relative to which the silver dinar is a commodity, whose value fluctuates. <b>But if you say</b> that gold <b>is a commodity,</b> would <b>the <i>tanna</i> calculate</b> the value of a silver coin <b>based on an item that appreciates and depreciates?</b> If the value of gold fluctuates, <b>sometimes the priest returns</b> more than five silver dinars to the father who redeemed his son with a gold dinar, <b>and sometimes</b> the father <b>must add to</b> the gold dinar and give this additional sum along with the gold dinar <b>to the priest</b> to complete the sum of five <i>sela</i>. <b>Rather, learn from it</b> that the <i>tanna</i> holds that the gold coins <b>are currency.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 10
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 2:7): <b>Beit Shammai say: A person may not transfer</b> silver <b><i>sela</i> coins</b> of tithe money or other consecrated coins into <b>gold dinars</b> through redemption, <b>and Beit Hillel permit</b> doing so. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish</b> disagreed. <b>One said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> between Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel is <b>with regard to</b> exchanging silver <b><i>sela</i> coins for</b> gold <b>dinars, as Beit Shammai hold</b> that <b>the silver</b> coins <b>are currency and the gold</b> coins <b>are a commodity, and we do not desacralize currency with a commodity. And Beit Hillel hold</b> that <b>the silver</b> coins <b>are a commodity and the gold</b> coins <b>are currency, and we desacralize a commodity with currency. But everyone agrees</b> that <b>we desacralize produce with</b> gold <b>dinars.</b>

### Part 11
<b>What is the reason</b> for the difference between <i>sela</i> coins and produce? The reason is <b>just as it is with regard to silver</b> coins <b>according to Beit Hillel.</b> With regard to <b>silver</b> coins <b>according to Beit Hillel, although silver</b> coins <b>relative to gold</b> coins <b>are a commodity, relative to produce</b> they <b>are currency. So too</b> is the status of <b>gold</b> coins <b>according to Beit Shammai: Although gold</b> coins <b>are a commodity relative to silver</b> coins, <b>relative to produce</b> they <b>are currency.</b> Therefore, one may desacralize produce with gold dinars. <b>And one said: Even with regard to</b> the exchange of <b>produce for dinars</b> there is <b>a dispute</b> between Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says:</b> There is <b>a dispute even with regard to</b> the exchange of <b>produce for dinars,</b> then <b>rather than disagreeing with regard to</b> the exchange of <b><i>sela</i> coins for dinars let them disagree with regard to</b> the fundamental case of desacralizing, the exchange of <b>produce for dinars.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Had they disagreed with regard to</b> the exchange of <b>produce for dinars, I would say: This matter</b> applies only <b>with regard to</b> the exchange of <b>produce for dinars. But with regard to</b> the exchange of <b><i>sela</i> coins for dinars, Beit Hillel concede to Beit Shammai that gold</b> coins <b>relative to silver</b> coins <b>are a commodity, and we do not desacralize</b> currency with a commodity. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us</b> that they disagree in that case as well.

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests: <b>Conclude that</b> in this dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish <b>it is Rabbi Yoḥanan who said: One does not desacralize</b> produce with gold dinars, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC