
### Part 1
<b>as</b> it is <b>satisfactory for</b> the master <b>that</b> the work habits of <b>his slave not be undone.</b>

### Part 2
Rava <b>said to him: This statement</b> of Rav Daniel applies <b>when</b> the one who seizes the slave <b>is not owed money</b> by the owner of the slave. But <b>since the Master is owed money by</b> the owner of the slave, this <b>has</b> the <b>appearance of interest, as Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says: Even though</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one who resides in another’s courtyard without his knowledge does not have to pay him rent,</b> nevertheless, if <b>he lent</b> a courtyard owner money <b>and</b> then <b>resides in his courtyard,</b> the lender <b>must pay him rent.</b> Rav Yosef <b>bar Ḥama said to him: I retract</b> my opinion, and I will no longer seize the slaves of my debtors.

### Part 3
§ <b>Abaye said:</b> In the case of <b>this one, who was owed a dinar of interest by another, and wheat was going</b> for the price of <b>four <i>se’a</i> [<i>gerivei</i>] for a dinar in the market, and</b> the borrower <b>gave</b> the lender <b>five</b> <i>se’a</i> of wheat as the interest payment, <b>when we,</b> the court, <b>remove</b> the interest the lender took <b>from</b> the borrower, <b>we remove</b> only <b>four</b> <i>se’a</i>, worth one dinar, <b>from</b> the lender. As <b>the other,</b> additional <i>se’a</i> <b>is a discount he granted him,</b> it is merely a favor, not counted as part of the interest. <b>Rava said: We take</b> all <b>five</b> <i>se’a</i> <b>from him, as</b> all of the wheat <b>initially came into his possession in the form of interest,</b> and therefore it is all classified as interest.

### Part 4
<b>And Abaye said:</b> In the case of <b>this one, who was owed four dinars of interest by another, and</b> the borrower <b>gave him a cloak</b> as payment <b>for it, when we take</b> the interest <b>from</b> the lender <b>we take four</b> dinars <b>from him, but we do not take the</b> actual <b>cloak from him,</b> as the giving of the cloak is considered a sale. <b>Rava said: We take the cloak from him. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>So that</b> people <b>should not say</b> that <b>the cloak</b> so-and-so <b>is wearing is a cloak</b> procured as <b>interest.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rava</b> further <b>said:</b> Consider the case of <b>this one, who was owed twelve dinars of interest by another, and</b> the lender <b>rented a courtyard from</b> the borrower that was <b>generally rented for ten</b> dinars, <b>but he rented</b> it <b>to him</b> with the price inflated <b>to twelve</b> dinars. The borrower agreed to forgo the entire rental payment, thereby effectively repaying the twelve dinars of interest. <b>When we take</b> the interest <b>from</b> the lender <b>we take twelve</b> dinars <b>from him</b> to pay for the rental, as this was the amount of interest he is considered to have collected from him.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Aḥa of Difti said to Ravina: But let</b> the lender <b>say</b> to the borrower: If I were to rent it now, I would pay not twelve dinars, but only ten. As <b>when I rented it from you</b> at the higher price it was because <b>I profited from it</b> by not having to pay for it, but <b>now that I am not profiting, I</b> will <b>rent it as everyone else rents,</b> for ten. The Gemara responds: This claim is rejected, <b>as we say to him: You considered and</b> willingly <b>accepted it</b> for the price of twelve dinars.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may increase</b> the price of <b>rent</b> to be received at a later date instead of at an earlier one, <b>but one may not</b> similarly <b>increase</b> the price of <b>a sale. How so?</b> If a courtyard owner <b>rented his courtyard to</b> a renter, <b>and</b> the owner <b>said to</b> the renter: <b>If you give me</b> the payment <b>now,</b> the rental <b>is yours for ten <i>sela</i> a year, but if</b> you pay <b>on a monthly</b> basis it will cost <b>a <i>sela</i> for</b> each <b>month,</b> equaling twelve <i>sela</i> a year. Such a practice is <b>permitted,</b> despite the fact that he charges more for a monthly payment. If a field owner <b>sold his field to</b> a buyer <b>and said to him: If you give me</b> the payment <b>now, it is yours for one thousand dinars,</b> but <b>if</b> you wait and pay me <b>at</b> the time of <b>the harvest,</b> it is yours <b>for twelve hundred</b> dinars, this transaction is <b>prohibited</b> as interest.

### Part 8
gemara The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is different</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, <b>and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause?</b> Why is the additional charge for later payment permitted in the case of rent but prohibited in the case of a sale? <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that the obligation <b>to pay a rental</b> fee is incurred <b>only at the end</b> of the rental period, <b>and</b> therefore, in <b>this</b> case, <b>since its time to be claimed had not</b> yet <b>arrived</b> at the beginning of the rental, the early payment is <b>not</b> considered <b>payment for waiting.</b> Rather, the opposite is the case: <b>This</b> higher price <b>is the value it is worth, and that which he says to him: If you give me</b> payment <b>now it is yours for ten <i>sela</i> a year, is a discount that he offers him</b> for the early payment, and therefore it is not interest.

### Part 9
By contrast, in <b>the latter clause, since it is a sale, and</b> the owner of the field <b>wants</b> to <b>take</b> the <b>money from now,</b> if he agrees to a later payment at a higher price, this is <b>therefore</b> considered <b>payment for waiting, and</b> it is <b>forbidden. Rava said: The Sages examined this matter closely and established</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is derived <b>from the verse</b> that states: <b>“Like a hired laborer, year by year”</b> (Leviticus 25:53). It is derived from this verse that the obligation <b>to pay the rental</b> fee <b>of this year is</b> incurred <b>only in the following year.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: If the field owner said: <b>But if</b> you wait and pay me <b>at</b> the time of <b>the harvest,</b> the field is yours <b>for twelve hundred</b> dinars, this is <b>prohibited. Rav Naḥman said: Tacit interest [<i>tarsha</i>]</b> is <b>permitted.</b> In other words, one may make a contract for a sale with a later payment date at an increased price, as long as he does not specify that the higher price is due to the delay but merely states a price and a date.

### Part 11
<b>Rami bar Ḥama raised an objection to Rav Naḥman, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Ukva bar Ḥama</b> who raised the objection <b>to Rav Naḥman:</b> The mishna states: <b>But if</b> you wait and pay me <b>at</b> the time of <b>the harvest,</b> the field is yours <b>for twelve hundred</b> dinars, this is <b>prohibited.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b> There is a difference between the two cases. <b>There,</b> in the case of the mishna, <b>he fixed</b> the price <b>for him</b> as interest, as he explicitly stated that there was an additional cost for a later payment, whereas <b>here,</b> in the case concerning which I stated my ruling, <b>he did not fix</b> it <b>for him</b> as interest, but merely quoted a higher price.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Pappa said: My tacit interest</b> arrangement that I offer customers, where I sell my liquor at the times when the market price is low and agree to have the buyer pay me for it later on when the market price is higher, is <b>permitted. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>My liquor would not be lost</b> were I to store it for a while, <b>and I do not need money</b> at the present time. I could therefore simply hold it to sell at a higher price later. I sell it early because <b>it is I who am performing</b> a beneficial <b>matter for the customer,</b> by selling it to him earlier without demanding immediate payment, and this is not interest.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Sheshet, son of Rav Idi, said to Rav Pappa: What does the Master see to</b> indicate that you should <b>follow yourself,</b> i.e., consider this matter from your perspective, and therefore conclude that it is permitted because you are not earning interest? You could equally <b>follow their</b> side, and consider the matter from the perspective of your customers, <b>as, if they had money</b> available <b>they would buy</b> liquor <b>at</b> the <b>current</b> price, but <b>now that they have no money</b> available <b>they buy</b> it <b>in accordance with the future,</b> more <b>expensive</b> rate. Consequently, they are actually paying interest in exchange for the delay in payment. Rav Pappa did not respond.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Ḥama said: My tacit interest</b> arrangement is <b>certainly permitted.</b> He would contract to sell merchandise in a location where its price was low while setting the price according to the more expensive rate in effect in a different location. Those who would purchase the merchandise from him would then take the merchandise to the other location to sell at the highest price, while Rav Ḥama would accept upon himself a certain measure of responsibility for the risks incurred during transport. This deal is considered a sales partnership, not interest.

### Part 15
<b>What is the reason</b> for this? Rav Ḥama said: It is <b>convenient for them</b> that the merchandise remains <b>established in my domain, as anywhere that they go,</b> the authorities <b>leave them alone</b> with regard to <b>taxes and</b> other people <b>maintain the market for</b> these sellers. The merchants selling Rav Ḥama’s wares received preferential treatment, as Rav Ḥama was a scholar from the house of the Exilarch, whose members would receive assistance from all. The higher price they paid was in consideration for these advantages; it was not payment for waiting.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC