
### Part 1
<b>that is explicitly written</b> in the Torah <b>he teaches,</b> and those matters <b>that are derived through interpretation he does not teach.</b> Consequently, no proof can be brought from the mishna.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one borrowed</b> an animal <b>and borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner with it,</b> or <b>rented it and hired its owner with it,</b> or <b>borrowed it and hired its owner with it,</b> or <b>rented it and borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner with it;</b> in all of these cases, <b>although the owner performed</b> the <b>work</b> for him <b>in another place,</b> i.e., not near the animal, <b>and it dies,</b> the borrower or renter is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara notes: The scholars in the study hall <b>assumed that this</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion? It <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that <b>one who rents</b> an item is responsible for it <b>like a paid bailee.</b> According to his understanding, the <i>baraita</i> teaches that the exemption from liability applies to both a borrower and a paid bailee. Consequently, the <i>baraita</i> can serve as a proof: <b>Doesn’t this <i>tanna</i> teach</b> even <b>a matter that is derived through interpretation,</b> i.e., the fact that exemption from liability applies to a paid bailee, <b>while he</b> still <b>does not teach</b> that it applies to <b>an unpaid bailee?</b> It would appear that this is a proof that exemption from liability does not apply to an unpaid bailee, since it does not apply to a mishap that is the result of the bailee’s negligence.

### Part 4
The Gemara refutes this proof, as one could counter: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>? It <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says</b> that the liability of <b>one who rents</b> an item <b>is like</b> that of <b>an unpaid bailee. And,</b> according to his understanding, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that the exemption from liability applies to <b>an unpaid bailee, and</b> it is understood that <b>the same is true for a paid bailee.</b> Understood like this, the <i>baraita</i> explicitly applies the exemption from liability to a case of negligence. Since, ultimately, it is unclear according to whose opinion the <i>baraita</i> is taught, no proof can be drawn from it.

### Part 5
<b>If you wish, say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> can be understood as referring to an unpaid bailee, even if it is assumed to be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>As Rabba bar Avuh reversed</b> their opinions <b>and taught: How does one who rents</b> an item <b>pay</b> in the case of a mishap? <b>Rabbi Meir says: Like a paid bailee. Rabbi Yehuda says: Like an unpaid bailee.</b>

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Hamnuna says</b> that the exemption from liability when one borrows an item together with the services of its owner exists only in very specific circumstances: A borrower <b>is always liable, unless</b> the item entrusted to him <b>is a cow and</b> its owner <b>plows with it</b> in the service of the borrower, or it is <b>a donkey and</b> its owner <b>drives it</b> by walking <b>behind it</b> in the service of the borrower, i.e., the owner and his animal are engaged in the same work. <b>And</b> even so, the borrower will not be exempt <b>unless the owner</b> is working for him <b>from</b> the <b>time of the borrowing</b> of the animal <b>until</b> the <b>time when it is injured or dies.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Evidently,</b> Rav Hamnuna <b>holds</b> that the phrase: <b>“Its owner is with him”</b> (Exodus 22:14), <b>teaches</b> that the exemption from liability applies only when the owner is working for the borrower <b>for the entire matter.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rava raises an objection</b> from the <i>baraita</i> cited previously: If <b>one borrowed</b> an animal <b>and borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner with it,</b> or <b>rented it and hired its owner with it,</b> or <b>rented it and borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner with it,</b> or <b>borrowed it and hired its owner with it;</b> in all these cases, <b>although the owner performed</b> the <b>work</b> for him <b>in another place,</b> i.e., not near the animal, <b>and it died,</b> the borrower or renter is <b>exempt.</b> Rava explains how the <i>baraita</i> poses a challenge: <b>What, is it not</b> referring to a case where the owner was engaged <b>with different work</b> than his animal? The <i>baraita</i> proves that the exemption from liability applies even in such a case.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case where the owner was engaged <b>with</b> the <b>same work</b> as the animal. The Gemara asks: <b>But,</b> if so, <b>what</b> does the <i>baraita</i> mean by saying: He performed the work <b>in another place?</b> The Gemara explains: For example, it is a case <b>where</b> the owner <b>loosens</b> the hard soil with a hoe <b>while walking ahead</b> of the animal. He is engaged in the same work, but not in the same place.

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But from</b> the fact that <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case where the owner was working <b>alongside it,</b> it may be inferred that <b>the first clause,</b> i.e., the passage of the <i>baraita</i> cited above, is referring to a case where the owner was engaged <b>with different work. As the latter clause teaches:</b> If <b>he borrowed it and afterward borrowed</b> the services of <b>its owner,</b> or <b>rented it and afterward hired its owner with it,</b> in both these cases, <b>although the owner was plowing alongside it and</b> at that time <b>it died,</b> the borrower or renter is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 10
In resolution of this difficulty, the Sages <b>say:</b> Both <b>the first clause and the latter clause</b> pertain to a case where the owner was engaged <b>with the same work</b> as the animal. <b>And</b> the difference in formulation of the two clauses is because <b>the first clause teaches us a novelty and the latter clause teaches us a novelty. The first clause teaches us the novelty that although</b> the owner <b>was not</b> actually working <b>alongside</b> his animal <b>but</b> was merely engaged <b>with the same work, since</b> the <b>owner was</b> working for the borrower <b>at</b> the <b>time of the borrowing,</b> the borrower is <b>exempt. The latter clause teaches us the novelty that although</b> the owner <b>was</b> actually working <b>alongside</b> his animal, <b>since</b> the <b>owner was not</b> working for the borrower <b>at</b> the <b>time of the borrowing,</b> the borrower is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara is puzzled: <b>What is this? Granted, if you say</b> that <b>the first clause</b> is referring to a case where the owner is engaged <b>in different work</b> than his animal, <b>and the latter clause</b> is referring to a case where he is engaged <b>in</b> the <b>same work</b> as his animal, then <b>this is the novelty</b> of mentioning what type of work he did: It teaches that it is irrelevant whether the owner did or did not work together with his animal. Rather, the liability of the borrower depends on whether or not the owner was working for the borrower when he entrusted the borrower with his animal.

### Part 12
<b>But if you say</b> that <b>the first clause and the latter clause</b> both pertain to a case where the owner is engaged <b>in</b> the <b>same work</b> as his animal, <b>what is the novelty</b> of mentioning what type of work he did? Both <b>this</b> clause <b>and that</b> clause concern similar cases, in which the owner is engaged <b>in</b> the <b>same work</b> as his animal. It is therefore apparent that the clauses concern different cases. The first clause teaches that the borrower is exempt even in a case where the owner was engaged in different work than his animal. The first part of Rav Hamnuna’s ruling, that the owner needs to be engaged in the same work as his animal, is thereby refuted.

### Part 13
<b>And furthermore,</b> even the second part of Rav Hamnuna’s ruling, that the exemption applies only when the owner was working for the borrower from the time of the borrowing of the animal until the time of the mishap, can be refuted, as <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From the implication of that which is stated: “If its owner is with him, he does not pay”</b> (Exodus 22:14), <b>do I not</b> already <b>know</b> what is stated in the next verse, <b>that “if its owner is not with him, he shall pay”</b> (Exodus 22:13)? <b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Its owner is not with him”?</b> It serves <b>to tell you:</b> If <b>he was with him,</b> i.e., working for him, <b>at</b> the <b>time of borrowing, he does not need to be with him at</b> the <b>time when</b> the animal is <b>injured or dies</b> for the exemption from liability to apply; but if he <b>was with him at</b> the <b>time when</b> the animal is <b>injured or dies, he</b> does <b>need to have been with him at</b> the <b>time of borrowing</b> for the exemption from liability to apply.

### Part 14
<b>And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>From the implication of that which is stated: “If its owner is not with him, he shall pay,” do I not</b> already <b>know</b> what is stated in the preceding verse, <b>that “if its owner is with him, he does not pay”? Rather, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “If its owner is with him”?</b> It serves <b>to tell you: Once</b> the animal <b>has left the domain of the lender,</b> i.e., its owner, and has been entrusted to the borrower, <b>with</b> its <b>owner</b> working for the borrower at that time, even for only <b>one moment, and</b> then <b>it dies,</b> the borrower is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>The refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rav Hamnuna</b> provided by these <i>baraitot</i> <b>is</b> indeed <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 15
§ The Gemara explains how the first of these <i>baraitot</i> arrives at its conclusion: <b>Abaye holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoshiya,</b> that when the Torah mentions two details together in reference to a <i>halakha</i>, it is presumed that the <i>halakha</i> applies only when both details are in effect (see 94b), <b>and he</b> likewise <b>explains the</b> two <b>verses in accordance with Rabbi Yoshiya. Rava holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yonatan,</b> that it is presumed that the <i>halakha</i> applies even when only one of the details is in effect, <b>and he explains the verses in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yonatan.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara clarifies: When the Torah refers to an owner working for the borrower, it should be understood as referring to the time of the borrowing and the time of the mishap. According to Rabbi Yoshiya’s opinion, this indicates that the owner worked for him at both times, whereas according to Rabbi Yonatan’s opinion, this implies that he worked for him at either time. Based on this, Abaye and Rava explain the verses: <b>Abaye holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoshiya, and he</b> likewise <b>explains the</b> two <b>verses in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoshiya,</b> thereby arriving at the conclusion of the <i>baraita</i>, as follows: From the verse: <b>“If its owner is not with him, he shall pay,”</b> it appears that <b>the reason</b> the borrower is liable is <b>that</b> the owner <b>was not</b> working for him <b>at either</b> point in time. By inference, if <b>he</b> worked for him <b>at one</b> of those times <b>but not at</b> the other <b>one,</b> the borrower is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But isn’t it written: “If its owner is with him, he does not pay”?</b> From this verse it appears that <b>the reason</b> the borrower is exempt is <b>that</b> the owner <b>was</b> working for him <b>at both</b> points in time. By inference, <b>if he was</b> working for him <b>at one</b> of those times <b>but not at</b> the other <b>one,</b> the borrower is <b>liable.</b> The two verses appear to contradict each another.

### Part 18
To reconcile the verses, one must say that the phrase “if its owner is with him” serves <b>to tell you:</b> If <b>he was with him,</b> i.e., working for him, <b>at</b> the <b>time of borrowing, he does not need to be with him at</b> the <b>time when</b> the animal is <b>injured or dies</b> for the exemption from liability to apply; but if he <b>was with him at</b> the <b>time when</b> the animal is <b>injured or dies, he</b> does <b>need to have been with him at</b> the <b>time of borrowing</b> for the exemption to apply.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC