
### Part 1
This serves <b>to include</b> misuse of consecrated property <b>less than the value of one <i>peruta</i> in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>restitution</b> to the Temple treasury. The Gemara infers: <b>To</b> the <b>Temple</b> treasury, <b>yes,</b> one must return that which he took; <b>but to an ordinary person [<i>hedyot</i>], no,</b> one need not pay restitution for theft of less than one <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, if</b> Rav Ketina’s ruling <b>was stated, this</b> is how <b>it was stated: Rav Ketina says: If the court attends to</b> a monetary claim of <b>the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> the judges <b>conclude</b> adjudicating and issue a ruling <b>even</b> if the item in question depreciated to <b>less than the value of one <i>peruta</i>.</b> For <b>the beginning of the legal</b> proceedings, <b>we require</b> a claim worth <b>one <i>peruta</i>,</b> whereas for <b>the verdict, we do not require</b> a claim worth <b>one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In this mishna, as in the previous one, the <i>tanna</i> enumerates several <i>halakhot</i> that share a common element. <b>There are five</b> halakhic situations where <b>one-fifth</b> is added to the value of the principal, and <b>these are they:</b> A non-priest <b>who eats</b> either <b><i>teruma</i>, or <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> which the Levite separates from the first tithe and gives to a priest, <b>or <i>teruma</i> of the tithe of <i>demai</i>, or <i>ḥalla</i>, or first fruits;</b> in each of these cases, <b>he adds one-fifth</b> when paying restitution to the priest who owned the produce. <b>And one who redeems his</b> own fruit of <b>a fourth-year sapling or second-tithe</b> produce <b>adds one-fifth. One who redeems his</b> own <b>consecrated</b> property <b>adds one-fifth. One who derives benefit worth one <i>peruta</i> from consecrated</b> property <b>adds one-fifth. And one who robs the value of one <i>peruta</i> from another and takes</b> a false <b>oath</b> in response <b>to his</b> claim <b>adds one-fifth</b> when paying restitution.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rava says: Rabbi Elazar</b> found the <i>halakha</i> in the mishna with regard to <b><i>teruma</i> of the tithe of <i>demai</i></b> to be <b>difficult.</b> He asked: <b>And</b> since the obligation to tithe <i>demai</i> is by rabbinic law, <b>did the Sages reinforce their pronouncements</b> and render them <b>parallel to Torah</b> law by requiring the addition of one-fifth when paying restitution?

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says: The Sages reinforced their pronouncements</b> and rendered them <b>parallel to Torah</b> law, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to an agent <b>who brings a bill of divorce from a country overseas,</b> if <b>he gave it to</b> the woman <b>but did not say to her: It was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence,</b> as is the requirement by rabbinic ordinance, one who marries that woman <b>must divorce</b> her, <b>and</b> any <b>offspring</b> born of that marriage is <b>a <i>mamzer</i>;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> Although he is in violation of the ordinance, <b>the offspring is not a <i>mamzer</i>. How</b> then <b>should</b> the agent <b>proceed? He should take</b> the bill of divorce <b>from her and give it to her again,</b> this time <b>in the presence of two</b> witnesses, <b>and say to her: It was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Meir,</b> although the bill of divorce was otherwise valid, merely <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he did not say to her: It was written in my presence and it was signed in my presence, must he divorce her and the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> as <b>Rabbi Meir</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as Rav Hamnuna says in the name of Ulla</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir would say:</b> In the case of <b>anyone who</b> gives a bill of divorce that <b>deviates from the formula coined by the Sages with regard to bills of divorce,</b> one who then marries the divorced woman on the basis of that bill of divorce <b>must divorce her, and the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> Concerning <i>teruma</i> of the tithe of <i>demai</i> as well, Rabbi Meir reinforced the pronouncements of the Sages and rendered them parallel to Torah law.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Sheshet raises an objection</b> to this principle from a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 1:2), which teaches: <b>One may desacralize silver</b> coins of second tithe of <i>demai</i> <b>upon</b> other <b>silver</b> coins, and <b>copper</b> coins <b>upon copper</b> coins, and <b>silver</b> coins <b>upon copper</b> coins, <b>and copper</b> coins <b>upon produce, and he may then redeem</b> that <b>produce</b> with money; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: That produce</b> that redeemed the copper coins <b>must be taken up and eaten in Jerusalem.</b> It may not be redeemed again.

### Part 8
Rav Sheshet continues: <b>And can one desacralize silver</b> coins <b>with copper</b> coins? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 2:6): In the case of a silver <b><i>sela</i> of second tithe and</b> a <i>sela</i> <b>of non-sacred</b> property <b>that were intermingled, one brings</b> copper <b><i>ma’a</i></b> equaling the value of <b>a <i>sela</i> and says: Wherever there is a <i>sela</i> of second tithe</b> among these two coins, it is <b>redeemed upon these</b> copper <b><i>ma’a</i>,</b> which assume the sanctity of second tithe. <b>And he selects the better-</b>quality <i>sela</i> <b>among</b> the two <b>and redeems</b> the copper coins <b>upon</b> that <i>sela</i>. The result is that the better-quality <i>sela</i> is second tithe, while the other <i>sela</i> and the copper coins are non-sacred.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC