
### Part 1
<b>but</b> when <b>the time of his obligation</b> to pay <b>arrives, he applies himself and remembers</b> all the details, so as not to violate the prohibition of delaying payment of the laborer’s wages.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: Why would one rely upon the presumption that the employer would not transgress? <b>But is the hired laborer</b> suspected of <b>violating</b> the <b>prohibition of stealing?</b> The Gemara replies: <b>There,</b> concerning the credibility of an employer, there are <b>two presumptions,</b> whereas <b>here,</b> concerning the credibility of a laborer, there is only <b>one presumption.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Concerning</b> the credibility of <b>an employer there are</b> the following <b>two presumptions: One</b> is <b>that the employer does not violate</b> the <b>prohibition of delaying</b> payment of wages, <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> is <b>that a hired laborer does not delay</b> the request for <b>his wages. But here,</b> concerning the credibility of the laborer, there is only <b>one presumption,</b> i.e., that the laborer does not violate the prohibition of stealing.

### Part 3
The mishna teaches: <b>If there are witnesses</b> who testify <b>that he claimed</b> the money from <b>him, he takes an oath and receives</b> the money. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> what need is there for witnesses that he lodged a claim, when <b>he is claiming</b> it from <b>him in front of us? Rabbi Asi said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> is referring to witnesses <b>that</b> testified that he <b>claimed</b> it from <b>him at its</b> proper <b>time.</b> The Gemara challenges: Even if the laborer claimed the money at the proper time, <b>perhaps</b> the employer <b>paid</b> him <b>afterward. Abaye said:</b> The witnesses testify <b>that he claimed</b> it from <b>him the entire time,</b> i.e., from the time he completed his labor until the end of that day.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues: <b>And</b> is it <b>always</b> assumed that the employer <b>did not pay</b> the laborer? Why does the fact that he claimed his money at the proper time mean that his claim against his employer is always accepted? <b>Rav Ḥama bar Ukva said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> means that he is given another day <b>corresponding to that day of</b> his <b>claim</b> during which the laborer can claim that he has not been paid.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to one <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another</b> and the debtor fails to repay it at the end of the term of the loan, the creditor <b>may take collateral from him</b> to ensure payment <b>only by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court,</b> not of his own accord. <b>And he may not enter</b> the debtor’s <b>house to take his collateral, as it is stated:</b> “When you lend your neighbor any manner of loan, you shall not go into his house to take his collateral. <b>You shall stand outside,</b> and the man to whom you lend shall bring forth the collateral to you outside” (Deuteronomy 24:10–11). If the debtor <b>had two utensils</b> of the same kind, the creditor <b>takes one and leaves</b> the other <b>one</b> in the debtor’s possession.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> in addition, the creditor <b>must return a pillow at night,</b> as the debtor requires it for sleeping, <b>and a plow,</b> which is needed for his daytime work, <b>by day. If</b> the debtor <b>died,</b> he is <b>not</b> required to <b>return</b> it <b>to</b> the debtor’s <b>heirs. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Even to</b> the debtor <b>himself</b> he needs to <b>return</b> the collateral each day <b>only until thirty days</b> have passed, <b>and from thirty days onward,</b> the creditor can <b>sell them in court,</b> with the proceeds going toward payment of the debt.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Shmuel says: An agent</b> of <b>the court</b> who was granted permission to appropriate items from a debtor up to the sum of the loan <b>may seize</b> these items from him in the marketplace, <b>but</b> is <b>not</b> permitted to enter the debtor’s house and <b>take collateral.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that one <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another may take collateral from him only by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court,</b> which proves <b>by inference that</b> when it is taken <b>by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court</b> the agent of the court may enter the debtor’s house and <b>take collateral?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: <b>Shmuel</b> could have <b>said to you: Say</b> that the mishna meant as follows: <b>He may seize it</b> forcibly from him <b>only by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>So, too, it is reasonable</b> that this is correct, <b>as the latter clause</b> of the mishna <b>teaches:</b> And <b>he may not enter</b> the debtor’s <b>house to take his collateral. Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> referring to here? <b>If we say</b> it is referring to <b>the creditor,</b> this clause is not needed, as this <i>halakha</i> can be <b>concluded from the first clause</b> of the mishna, which states that a creditor has no right to take collateral himself. <b>Rather, is it not</b> referring <b>to the court agent?</b> Accordingly, this teaches that even an agent of the court may not enter the debtor’s house to take the collateral.

### Part 9
The Gemara refutes the above claim: <b>If</b> the argument to understand the mishna in that manner <b>is due to that</b> reason, <b>there is no</b> conclusive <b>argument,</b> as it is possible that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> One <b>who lends</b> money to <b>another may take collateral from him</b> by entering the debtor’s house <b>only by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court,</b> which proves <b>by inference that</b> it is permitted to <b>take collateral</b> by entering the debtor’s house <b>by means of</b> an agent of <b>the court.</b> One can then infer: <b>But</b> as for the <b>creditor</b> himself, he may <b>not even seize</b> collateral outside the debtor’s house. This is a rabbinic decree so <b>that</b> he should <b>not enter</b> the debtor’s <b>house to take his collateral.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef raises an objection</b> to Shmuel’s statement from a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states: <b>“He may not take the lower or upper millstone as collateral”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:6). <b>But</b> it may be inferred that <b>other items</b> may be <b>taken as collateral.</b> Similarly, it states: <b>“You may not take a widow’s garment as collateral”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:17), <b>but</b> clothing that <b>belongs to others you may take as collateral.</b> The Gemara analyzes these statements: <b>Who</b> is permitted to do so? <b>If we say</b> that <b>the creditor</b> may take these items, that cannot be, as it <b>is written: “You shall not go into his house to take his collateral”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:10). <b>Rather, is it not</b> referring to <b>the agent of the court,</b> which indicates that the agent of the court may enter the debtor’s house and take collateral, although the Torah places limits on which item he can take?

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa, son of Rav Naḥman, interpreted</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Yosef; and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Pappa, son of Rav Yosef,</b> who interpreted the <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Yosef: Actually,</b> it is referring <b>to a creditor, and</b> the Torah’s additional prohibition against appropriating certain items is given <b>so that he will violate two prohibitions</b> for this action. For example, if he took the lower or upper millstone he violates both the command: “You shall not go into his house,” as well as the more specific prohibition.

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a different <i>baraita</i> that contradicts Shmuel: <b>From the implication of that</b> which <b>is stated: “You shall stand outside,” do I not know that: “And the man to whom you lend shall bring forth outside”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:11)? <b>Rather, why</b> must <b>the verse state</b> the inclusive phrase <b>“And the man</b> to whom you lend shall bring forth outside”? This serves <b>to include the agent of the court.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>What, is it not</b> that <b>the agent of the court</b> has the same status <b>as the debtor</b> himself, indicating that just as the debtor may enter his own house at any time, the court agent may act likewise?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC