
### Part 1
<b>even in Jerusalem,</b> although ritually pure second tithe cannot be desacralized in Jerusalem? It is <b>as it is stated: “For you are unable to carry [<i>se’et</i>] it…</b>and you shall turn it into money, and bind up the money in your hand” (Deuteronomy 14:24–25). <b>And <i>se’et</i> means nothing other than eating, as it is stated: “And he took portions [<i>masot</i>] from before him”</b> (Genesis 43:34). Since ritually impure second-tithe produce may not be consumed, Rabbi Elazar holds that one may desacralize it even if it had been brought into Jerusalem.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i> is taught not with regard to second-tithe produce, but <b>with regard to</b> food <b>acquired with second-tithe money,</b> which cannot be desacralized. The Gemara asks: With regard to food <b>acquired with second-tithe money too, let him redeem it, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 3:10): Food <b>acquired with second-tithe money that became ritually impure should be redeemed.</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says:</b> Food acquired with second-tithe money that became ritually impure <b>must be buried</b> and may not be redeemed.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, why</b> did the <i>tanna</i> teach <b>specifically</b> a case where the food <b>exited</b> Jerusalem? <b>Even</b> if it <b>did not exit</b> Jerusalem, that <i>halakha</i> <b>also</b> applies, as he holds that once the food becomes ritually impure it must be buried. <b>Rather, actually,</b> it is taught in the <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to</b> second tithe that is <b>ritually pure, and what</b> is the meaning of <b>exited?</b> It is not that the produce actually exited Jerusalem. Rather, the <i>baraita</i> is discussing a case <b>where the partitions,</b> i.e., the walls, surrounding the city <b>fell.</b> The legal status of that second-tithe produce is that of produce that exited the city.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rava say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that <b>a partition</b> enables one <b>to eat</b> second-tithe produce is <b>by Torah law,</b> and the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the capability of <b>partitions</b> of the city <b>to gather</b> second-tithe produce into the city is <b>by rabbinic law, and when the Sages issued a decree</b> that partitions gather second-tithe produce in terms of their being considered within the city, they did so only <b>where there are</b> intact <b>partitions,</b> but <b>where there are no</b> intact <b>partitions, the Sages did not issue a decree?</b> The Gemara answers: Once they issued the decree, <b>the Sages did not distinguish between</b> cases where <b>there are</b> intact <b>partitions</b> and cases where <b>there are not</b> intact <b>partitions.</b> Once the Sages issued the decree with regard to partitions and the produce being gathered they applied it globally. This is one manner of explaining the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda</b> said that <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching one</b> <i>halakha</i>: It is <b>with regard to second-tithe</b> produce <b>that is not worth</b> even <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> and <b>which</b> both <b>entered Jerusalem and</b> then <b>exited</b> it. It cannot be redeemed because it is worth less than one <i>peruta</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Why? And let him bring it back</b> into Jerusalem <b>and partake of it</b> there. The Gemara answers: It is a case <b>where the partitions</b> surrounding the city <b>fell.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And let him redeem</b> the second-tithe produce, as <b>doesn’t Rava say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that <b>a partition</b> enables one <b>to eat</b> second-tithe produce is <b>by Torah law,</b> and the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the capability of <b>partitions</b> of the city <b>to gather</b> second-tithe produce into the city is <b>by rabbinic law, and when the Sages issued a decree</b> that partitions gather second-tithe produce in terms of their being considered within the city, they did so only <b>where there are</b> intact <b>partitions,</b> but <b>where there are no</b> intact <b>partitions, the Sages did not issue a decree?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The Sages did not distinguish</b> between cases where there are intact partitions and cases where there are not intact partitions.

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>If so, why</b> did the <i>tanna</i> teach <b>specifically</b> a case where the produce <b>does not have the value of one <i>peruta</i>?</b> The same would hold true <b>even if it has</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>. The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>It is not necessary. It is not necessary</b> to state that if the produce <b>has</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i> the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that the partitions gather it</b> and it can no longer be redeemed, <b>but</b> if <b>it does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>, <b>say</b> that <b>the partitions do not gather it.</b> Therefore, <b>he teaches us</b> that the partitions gather even second-tithe produce worth less than one <i>peruta</i>, and it cannot be redeemed.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> that it is written: <b>“And if a man will redeem of his tithe,</b> he shall add to it the fifth part thereof” (Leviticus 27:31), from which it is inferred: <b>Of his tithe, but not all his tithe.</b> This serves <b>to exclude second tithe that does not have the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> which cannot be redeemed. <b>It was stated</b> that there is an amoraic dispute with regard to this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rav Ami says:</b> The second tithe cannot be redeemed in a case where the produce itself <b>does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>. <b>Rav Asi says:</b> The second tithe cannot be redeemed in a case where <b>its</b> additional payment of <b>one-fifth does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>. Other <i>amora’im</i> dispute the same issue. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The produce itself <b>does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says: Its</b> additional payment of <b>one-fifth does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>second-tithe</b> produce <b>that does not have the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> it is <b>sufficient that he will say: It and its</b> additional payment of <b>one-fifth are desacralized upon the first coins</b> upon which I already redeemed second-tithe produce.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains the objection: <b>Granted, according to the one who says:</b> There is <b>not</b> the value of a <i>peruta</i> <b>in its</b> additional payment of <b>one-fifth, this</b> is the reason <b>that the</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches: It is sufficient,</b> which indicates <b>that even though in</b> the produce <b>itself it has</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i>, <b>since</b> there is <b>not</b> the value of a <i>peruta</i> <b>in its one-fifth</b> payment, it works out <b>well,</b> as it is sufficient if he redeems the produce with other second-tithe produce. <b>But according to the one who says:</b> It is in a case where the produce itself <b>does not have</b> the value of one <i>peruta</i> that the second tithe cannot be redeemed, <b>what</b> is the meaning of: <b>It is sufficient?</b> From the outset, there was never sufficient value for there to be any element of redemption. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>difficult</b> to explain the <i>baraita</i> according to that opinion.

### Part 11
§ Apropos the additional payment of one-fifth, <b>a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is the payment of <b>one-fifth</b> calculated <b>from within,</b> i.e., one-fifth of the value of the redeemed item, <b>or</b> is the payment of <b>one-fifth</b> calculated <b>from without,</b> meaning one-quarter of the value of the redeemed item, which is one-fifth of the eventual payment, i.e., the principal plus the additional one-fifth? <b>Ravina says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of the dilemma from a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>the owner says</b> he is willing to redeem consecrated property <b>for twenty</b> dinars, <b>and any</b> other <b>person</b> is willing to purchase the property <b>for twenty</b> dinars, <b>the owners take precedence</b> and redeem the property <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that they</b> are obligated to <b>add one-fifth,</b> and the Temple treasury profits more from the owner than from anyone else. If <b>one</b> who is not the owner <b>said: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me</b> to desacralize it <b>for twenty-one</b> dinars,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC