
### Part 1
an item <b>worth six</b> <i>ma’a</i> <b>for five</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>who was exploited?</b> It is the <b>seller.</b> Therefore, the <b>seller is at an advantage.</b> If he <b>wishes,</b> he can <b>say to</b> the buyer: <b>Give me</b> back <b>my merchandise</b> and nullify the transaction, <b>or</b> he can say: <b>Give me</b> back the sum <b>which you</b> received by engaging in <b>exploitation</b> of <b>me.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> that one has only until a period of time has passed that would allow him to show the merchandise to a merchant or to his relative in order to claim that he has been exploited, in a case where the disparity between the value of the purchase item and the price paid is <b>less than one-sixth, is</b> there <b>a waiver</b> of the discrepancy and therefore the transaction is finalized <b>immediately, or</b> in this case as well, is the transaction finalized only after <b>the time that</b> it takes the buyer <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative? And</b> in addition, <b>if you say</b> that the transaction is finalized only after <b>the time that</b> it takes <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative, what</b> difference <b>is there between</b> a disparity of <b>one-sixth and</b> a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference, <b>as</b> in the case of a disparity of <b>one-sixth,</b> the one who was exploited <b>has the advantage,</b> since if he <b>wishes,</b> he <b>reneges</b> on the transaction, and if he <b>wishes,</b> the buyer <b>acquires</b> the purchase item, <b>and</b> the one who perpetrated the exploitation <b>returns</b> the sum gained through his <b>exploiting</b> the other, <b>while</b> in the case of a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth,</b> the buyer <b>acquires</b> the purchase item, <b>and</b> the one who perpetrated the exploitation <b>returns</b> the sum gained through his <b>exploiting</b> the other, but there is no option of nullifying the transaction.

### Part 4
The Gemara returns to the dilemma: At <b>what</b> point in time is a disparity of less than one-sixth between the value of the purchase item and the price paid waived? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of the dilemma from the mishna: Rabbi Tarfon said to them: Throughout the entire day it is permitted to renege on the transaction and not merely for the period of time it takes to show the purchase item to a merchant or a relative. The merchants of Lod said to him: Let Rabbi Tarfon leave us as we were, with the previous ruling. <b>They reverted to</b> following <b>the statement of the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the proof. The Sages <b>assumed</b> that the legal status of a disparity of <b>less than one-third according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon,</b> who holds that one-third is the determinative disparity, <b>is like</b> a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that one-sixth is the determinative disparity. <b>Granted, if you say</b> that in the case of a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth according to the Rabbis</b> the buyer can claim exploitation only <b>in the time that</b> it takes him <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative,</b> and <b>according to Rabbi Tarfon</b> the transaction is finalized only after <b>the entire day</b> has passed, it is <b>due to that</b> reason that the merchants of Lod <b>reverted</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis, as there was some benefit to them in following the opinion of the Rabbis. <b>But if you say</b> that in the case of a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth according to the Rabbis</b> the <b>waiver is</b> in effect and the transaction is finalized <b>immediately,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC