
### Part 1
<b>was stated by the Sages,</b> i.e., the wise man mentioned in the verse, <b>and</b> yet <b>they</b> could <b>not explain it.</b> It <b>was stated by the prophets,</b> i.e., those to whom the mouth of the Lord has spoken, <b>and</b> yet <b>they</b> could <b>not explain it, until the Holy One, Blessed be He, Himself explained it, as it is stated</b> in the next verse: <b>“And the Lord says: Because they have forsaken My Torah which I set before them”</b> (Jeremiah 9:12). <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> This does not mean <b>that</b> the Jewish people ceased Torah study altogether; rather, <b>they did not recite a blessing on the Torah prior</b> to its study, as they did not regard Torah study as a sacred endeavor.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Ḥama says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “In the heart of him that has discernment wisdom rests; but in the inward part of fools it makes itself known”</b> (Proverbs 14:33)? <b>“In the heart of him who has discernment wisdom rests”; this</b> is <b>a Torah scholar, son of a Torah scholar. “But in the inward part of fools it makes itself known”; this</b> is <b>a Torah scholar, son of an ignoramus,</b> as his wisdom stands out in contrast to the foolishness of the rest of his family. <b>Ulla said: This</b> explains the adage <b>that people say:</b> A small <b>coin in</b> an empty <b>barrel calls: <i>Kish</i>, <i>kish</i>,</b> i.e., it rattles loudly, whereas a coin in a barrel full of coins is not heard.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zeira: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> with regard to the World-to-Come: <b>“The humble and great are there; and the servant is free from his master”</b> (Job 3:19)? <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>we do not know that the humble and the great are there</b> in the World-to-Come? <b>Rather,</b> this is the meaning of the verse: <b>Anyone who humbles himself over matters of Torah in this world becomes great in the World-to-Come; and anyone who establishes himself as a servant over matters of Torah in this world becomes free in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 4
§ The Gemara continues discussing the greatness of the Sages. <b>Reish Lakish was demarcating</b> burial <b>caves of the Sages. When he arrived at the cave of Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> the precise location of his grave <b>eluded him.</b> Reish Lakish <b>became distressed,</b> as he was apparently unworthy of finding the grave. <b>He said: Master of the Universe! Did I not analyze the Torah like</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya? <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said to him: You did analyze the Torah like him,</b> but <b>you did not disseminate Torah like him.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Ḥiyya would debate</b> matters of Torah, <b>Rabbi Ḥanina</b> would <b>say to Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> Do you think <b>you can debate with me? Heaven forbid! If the Torah were forgotten from the Jewish people, I</b> could <b>restore it with my</b> powers of <b>analysis</b> and intellectual acumen. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya said to Rabbi Ḥanina:</b> Do you think <b>you can debate with me?</b> You cannot compare yourself to me, <b>as I am acting</b> to ensure that <b>the Torah</b> will <b>not be forgotten by the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 6
Rabbi Ḥiyya elaborated: <b>What do I do</b> to this end? <b>I go and sow flax</b> seeds <b>and twine nets</b> with the flax, <b>and</b> then <b>I hunt deer and feed their meat to orphans.</b> Next <b>I prepare parchment</b> from their hides <b>and I write the five books</b> of the Torah on them. <b>I go to a city and teach five children the five books,</b> one book per child, <b>and I teach six</b> other <b>children the six orders</b> of the Mishna, <b>and I say to them: Until I return and come</b> here, <b>read each other</b> the Torah <b>and teach each other</b> the Mishna. This is how <b>I act</b> to ensure that <b>the Torah will not be forgotten by the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara notes that <b>this is what Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: How great are the deeds of</b> Rabbi <b>Ḥiyya! Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: Are his deeds <b>even greater than the Master’s,</b> i.e., yours? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: Yes.</b> Rabbi Yishmael persisted: Are they <b>even</b> greater <b>than</b> those of my <b>father,</b> Rabbi Yosei? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: Heaven forbid! Such</b> a statement <b>shall not be</b> heard <b>among the Jewish people,</b> that someone is greater than your father, Rabbi Yosei.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues discussing the greatness of Rabbi Ḥiyya. <b>Rabbi Zeira said: Last night, Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, appeared to me</b> in a dream. <b>I said to him: Near whom are you placed</b> in the upper realms? <b>He said to me: Near Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> I asked: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan is near whom?</b> He replied: <b>Near Rabbi Yannai. And Rabbi Yannai is near whom? Near Rabbi Ḥanina. And Rabbi Ḥanina is near whom? Near Rabbi Ḥiyya.</b> Rabbi Zeira added: <b>I said to</b> Rabbi Yosei: <b>But isn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> worthy of being placed <b>near Rabbi Ḥiyya? He said to me: In a place of fiery sparks and burning fires, who can bring</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>son of Nappaḥa, there?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥaviva said: Rav Ḥaviva bar Surmakei told me: I</b> once <b>saw one of the Sages whom Elijah</b> the prophet <b>would visit,</b> and <b>his eyes</b> looked <b>beautiful</b> and healthy <b>in the morning, but appeared to be charred by fire in the evening. I said to him: What is this</b> phenomenon? <b>And he said to me: I said to Elijah: Show me the Sages upon their ascension to the heavenly academy.</b> Elijah <b>said to me: You may gaze at all of them except for</b> those in <b>the chariot [<i>miguharka</i>] of Rabbi Ḥiyya, upon whom you may not gaze.</b> I asked Elijah: <b>What are the signs</b> of Rabbi Ḥiyya’s chariot, so I will know when not to look? He said: <b>Angels accompany all</b> of the other Sages’ chariots <b>as they ascend and descend, except for the chariot of Rabbi Ḥiyya, which ascends and descends of its own accord,</b> due to his greatness.

### Part 10
The Sage relating this story continued: <b>I was unable to restrain myself,</b> and <b>I gazed upon</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya’s chariot. <b>Two fiery flames came and struck that man,</b> i.e., me, <b>and blinded his eyes. The next day, I went and prostrated on</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya’s burial <b>cave</b> in supplication. <b>I said: I study the <i>baraitot</i> of the Master,</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya; please pray on my behalf. <b>And</b> my vision <b>was healed,</b> but my eyes remained scorched.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates another incident involving Elijah the prophet. <b>Elijah was</b> often <b>found in the academy of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>One day it was a New Moon,</b> the first of the month, and Elijah <b>was delayed and did not come</b> to the academy. Later, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to</b> Elijah: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master was delayed?</b> Elijah <b>said to him: I</b> had <b>to wake up Abraham, wash his hands, and</b> wait for him to <b>pray, and</b> then <b>lay him down</b> again. <b>And similarly,</b> I followed the same procedure <b>for Isaac, and similarly for Jacob</b> in turn. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi asked Elijah: <b>And let</b> the Master <b>wake them</b> all <b>together.</b> Elijah responded: <b>I maintain</b> that if I were to wake all three to pray at the same time, <b>they</b> would <b>generate powerful prayers and bring the Messiah prematurely.</b>

### Part 12
Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to</b> Elijah: <b>And is there anyone</b> alive <b>in this world</b> who is <b>comparable to them</b> and can produce such efficacious prayers? Elijah <b>said to him: There are Rabbi Ḥiyya and his sons. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>decreed a fast,</b> and the Sages <b>brought Rabbi Ḥiyya and his sons down</b> to the pulpit to pray on behalf of the congregation. Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>recited</b> the phrase in the <i>Amida</i> prayer: <b>Who makes the wind blow, and the wind blew.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>recited</b> the next phrase: <b>Who makes the rain fall, and rain fell. When he was about to say</b> the phrase: <b>Who revives the dead, the world trembled.</b>

### Part 13
<b>They said in heaven: Who is the revealer of secrets in the world? They said</b> in response: It is <b>Elijah. Elijah was brought</b> to heaven, whereupon <b>he was beaten with sixty fiery lashes.</b> Elijah <b>came</b> back down to earth <b>disguised as a bear of fire. He came among</b> the congregation <b>and distracted them</b> from their prayers, preventing Rabbi Ḥiyya from reciting the phrase: Who revives the dead.

### Part 14
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Shmuel Yarḥina’a was the physician of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. One time, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>felt a pain in his eye.</b> Shmuel <b>said to him: I will place a medication in</b> your eye. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: I cannot</b> have the medication placed directly in my eye, as I am afraid it will cause me too much pain. Shmuel <b>said to him: I will apply a salve</b> above your eye, not directly in it. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him:</b> Even that <b>I cannot</b> bear. Shmuel <b>placed</b> the medication <b>in a tube of herbs beneath his pillow, and</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>was healed.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>made efforts to ordain</b> Shmuel Yarḥina’a as a rabbi <b>but was unsuccessful,</b> as Shmuel always demurred. Shmuel Yarḥina’a <b>said to him: The Master should not be upset</b> about my refusal, as I know that I am not destined to be ordained as a rabbi. <b>I myself saw the book of Adam the first</b> man, which contains the genealogy of the human race, <b>and it is written in it</b> that <b>Shmuel Yarḥina’a</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC