
### Part 1
<b>even in the first</b> mishna in this chapter, and Rabbi Yosei holds that even when a bailee pays for the deposit and chooses not to take an oath, the thief pays the double payment to the owner. Is the <b><i>halakha</i></b> in <b>accordance with his</b> opinion even in that case, <b>or</b> is the <b><i>halakha</i> not in accordance with his</b> opinion? Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Rabbi Yosei was in disagreement even in the first</b> mishna in this chapter, <b>and the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with his</b> opinion <b>even in the first</b> mishna.

### Part 2
<b>It was also stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> in Eretz Yisrael disagreed about this matter. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Rabbi Yosei was in disagreement even in the first</b> mishna <b>and the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with his</b> opinion <b>even in the first</b> mishna. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Yosei conceded in the first</b> mishna <b>because</b> the bailee <b>already paid</b> and acquired the animal.

### Part 3
The Gemara questions the formulation of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement: If <b>he paid, yes,</b> the thief pays the double payment to him; if <b>he did not pay, no? But doesn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> himself <b>says:</b> When the mishna says: If the bailee <b>paid,</b> it does <b>not</b> mean that he <b>actually paid; rather, once</b> the bailee <b>said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay, even if he did not</b> yet actually <b>pay,</b> he acquired the double payment? The Gemara answers: Emend the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan and <b>say: Rabbi Yosei conceded in the first</b> mishna <b>because</b> the bailee <b>already said: I hereby</b> choose to <b>pay.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one said to two</b> people: <b>I robbed one of you of one hundred dinars, but I do not know</b> from <b>which of you</b> I took the money, <b>or</b> if one said to two people: <b>The father of one of you deposited one hundred dinars with me, but I do not know</b> the father of <b>which</b> of you <b>he is,</b> then he <b>gives one hundred dinars to this</b> person <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> person. This is <b>because</b> there is no way to determine which of them is entitled to the money, and <b>he admitted</b> his obligation <b>at his own</b> initiative.

### Part 5
In the case of <b>two</b> people <b>who deposited</b> money <b>with one</b> person, and <b>this</b> one deposited <b>one hundred dinars and that</b> one deposited <b>two hundred</b> dinars, and when they come to collect their deposit, <b>this</b> one <b>says: My</b> deposit was <b>two hundred</b> dinars, <b>and that</b> one <b>says: My</b> deposit was <b>two hundred</b> dinars, the bailee <b>gives one hundred dinars to this</b> one <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> one. <b>And the rest</b> of the money, i.e., the contested one hundred dinars, <b>will be placed</b> in a safe place <b>until Elijah comes</b> and prophetically determines the truth.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: If so, what did the swindler lose?</b> He lost nothing by claiming the one hundred dinars that belongs to another, and he has no incentive to admit the truth. <b>Rather, the entire</b> deposit <b>will be placed</b> in a safe place <b>until Elijah comes. As</b> his fraud will cause him to lose even the one hundred dinars that he deposited, perhaps he will be discouraged from making a fraudulent claim.

### Part 7
<b>And likewise,</b> if two people deposited <b>two vessels, one worth one hundred dinars and one worth one thousand dinars,</b> and <b>this</b> one <b>says: The expensive</b> vessel <b>is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: The expensive</b> vessel <b>is mine,</b> the bailee <b>gives the small</b> vessel <b>to one of them, and from the</b> proceeds of the sale of <b>the large</b> vessel <b>he gives the value of the small</b> vessel <b>to the other, and the rest</b> of the money <b>is placed</b> in a safe place <b>until Elijah comes. Rabbi Yosei said: If so, what did the swindler lose? Rather, the entire</b> deposit, i.e., both vessels, <b>are placed</b> in a safe place <b>until Elijah comes</b> or one of them admits his deceit.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> From the fact that the mishna teaches that if the bailee does not know whom he robbed, he gives one hundred dinars to this one and one hundred dinars to that one, <b>apparently, in</b> cases of <b>uncertainty, we expropriate property</b> and return it to those claiming it. <b>And we do not say: Establish the money in the possession of its owner.</b> In this case, the bailee is currently the owner of the money, but the money is not left in his possession.

### Part 9
<b>And raise a contradiction</b> from the continuation of the mishna: In the case of <b>two</b> people <b>who deposited</b> money <b>with one</b> person, and <b>this</b> one deposited <b>one hundred dinars and that</b> one deposited <b>two hundred</b> dinars, and when they come to collect their deposit, <b>this</b> one <b>says: My</b> deposit was <b>two hundred</b> dinars, <b>and that</b> one <b>says: My</b> deposit was <b>two hundred</b> dinars, the bailee <b>gives one hundred dinars to this</b> one <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> one. <b>And the rest</b> of the money <b>will be placed</b> in a safe place <b>until Elijah comes</b> and prophetically determines the truth.

### Part 10
The Sages <b>said to</b> the one who raised the contradiction: <b>Are you raising a contradiction</b> between the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a deposit and</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a robbery?</b> In the case of <b>robbery, where one transgressed a prohibition, the Sages penalized him</b> and ruled that he must pay both possible robbery victims. In the case of <b>a deposit, where he did not transgress a prohibition, the Sages did not penalize him.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And they raised a contradiction</b> between the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a deposit and</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a deposit, and they raised a contradiction</b> between the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a robbery and</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a robbery.</b> There is a contradiction between the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a deposit and</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a deposit,</b> as <b>is it taught</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Or,</b> if one said to two people: <b>The father of one of you deposited one hundred dinars with me, but I do not know</b> the father of <b>which</b> of you <b>he is,</b> he <b>gives one hundred dinars to this</b> person <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> person. The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from the continuation of the mishna cited above: In the case of <b>two people who deposited</b> money with one person, the contested sum is placed in a safe place until Elijah comes.

### Part 12
<b>Rava said:</b> In <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, in the case where the bailee receives money from the father of one person, he <b>becomes like one with whom they deposited</b> sums of money in <b>two</b> separate <b>bundles, as the</b> bailee <b>should have been discerning</b> with regard to who gave him the money. His failure to do so constitutes negligence, and therefore he pays the sum to both claimants. In <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna, in the case where he receives money from two people, he <b>becomes like one with whom they deposited</b> sums of money in <b>one bundle, as</b> there is <b>no</b> expectation <b>that he should have been discerning.</b> It is a case <b>where they both deposited</b> their money <b>together at one time, as</b> the bailee <b>says to them:</b> If <b>you yourselves were not suspicious of each other,</b> should <b>I be suspicious?</b> Therefore, he is required to pay them only the sum that they can prove is theirs.

### Part 13
<b>And they raised a contradiction</b> between the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a robbery and</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in the case of <b>a robbery. It is taught here:</b> If <b>one said to two</b> people: <b>I robbed one of you of one hundred dinars, but I do not know</b> from <b>which of you</b> I took the money, <b>or</b> if one said to two people: <b>The father of one of you deposited one hundred dinars with me, but I do not know</b> the father of <b>which</b> of you <b>he is,</b> then <b>he gives one hundred dinars to this</b> person <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> person.

### Part 14
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 118b): If one <b>robbed one of five</b> people <b>and he does not know which of them</b> he robbed, and <b>this</b> one <b>says: He robbed me, and that</b> one <b>says: He robbed me,</b> the robber <b>places</b> the <b>stolen item between them and withdraws</b> from them; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Tarfon. Apparently,</b> contrary to the mishna, <b>we do not expropriate property due to an uncertainty</b> and return it to those claiming it, <b>and</b> instead <b>we say: Establish the money in the possession of its owner.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where</b> is it known <b>that the mishna here</b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon?</b> Perhaps the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, who holds the robber must pay each of the five possible victims, and there is no contradiction at all. The Gemara answers: It is known that the mishna here is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Tarfon, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>concerning</b> the <i>halakha</i> taught in <b>that</b> mishna, in tractate <i>Yevamot</i>: <b>Rabbi Tarfon concedes</b> that <b>in</b> a case where a robber <b>says to two</b> people: <b>I robbed one of you</b> of <b>one hundred dinars, but I do not know which of you</b> it was, <b>he gives one hundred dinars to this</b> person <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> person, as he has already admitted his obligation on his own. There is an apparent contradiction between the two statements of Rabbi Tarfon.

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> in the mishna where one robbed one of five people of money, it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the claimants <b>demand</b> payment <b>from him.</b> He is required to pay them only one hundred dinars, as the burden of proof rests upon the claimant. By contrast, <b>here,</b> i.e., in this mishna and the statement of Rabbi Tarfon in the <i>baraita</i>, it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the robber <b>comes to fulfill his obligation to Heaven.</b> Only by returning the money to the person he robbed can he atone for his transgression. Therefore, he goes beyond the halakhic requirement and pays both claimants. The Gemara notes: The language of this mishna <b>is also precise, as</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches: Because he admitted</b> his obligation <b>at his own</b> initiative. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from</b> the wording of the mishna that this is the explanation of the mishna.

### Part 17
With regard to returning stolen money, <b>the Master said: There,</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the claimants <b>demand</b> payment <b>from him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> person, the thief, <b>what does he claim</b> in response? <b>Rav Yehuda</b> says that <b>Rav says: The other</b> person <b>is silent,</b> as he does not know to whom he owes the money. <b>Rav Mattana</b> says that <b>Rav says: The other</b> person

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC