
### Part 1
§ After this digression, the Gemara returns to the story of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon. <b>And</b> although his flesh did not putrefy, <b>even so Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon,</b> still <b>did not rely on his</b> own <b>opinion,</b> as he was worried that he may have erred in one of his decisions. <b>He accepted afflictions upon himself</b> as atonement for his possible sins. <b>At night</b> his attendants <b>would spread out sixty felt</b> bed coverings <b>for him. In the morning,</b> despite the bed coverings, <b>they would remove sixty basins of blood and pus from underneath him.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The following day,</b> i.e., every morning, <b>his wife would prepare for him sixty types of relish [<i>lifda</i>]</b> made from figs, <b>and he would eat them and become healthy. His wife,</b> concerned for his health, <b>would not allow him to go to the study hall, so that the Rabbis would not push him</b> beyond his limits.

### Part 3
<b>In the evening, he</b> would <b>say to</b> his pains: <b>My brothers and my friends, come! In the morning he</b> would <b>say to them: Go</b> away, <b>due to</b> the <b>dereliction</b> of <b>Torah</b> study that you cause me. <b>One day his wife heard him</b> inviting his pains. <b>She said to him: You are bringing</b> the pains <b>upon yourself. You have diminished the money of</b> my <b>father’s home</b> due to the costs of treating your self-imposed afflictions. <b>She rebelled</b> against him and <b>went</b> back <b>to her father’s home,</b> and he was left with no one to care for him.

### Part 4
Meanwhile, there were <b>these sixty sailors</b> who <b>came and entered</b> to visit Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon. <b>They brought him sixty servants,</b> each <b>bearing sixty purses, and prepared him sixty types of relish and he ate them.</b> When they had encountered trouble at sea, these sailors had prayed to be saved in the merit of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon. Upon returning to dry land, they presented him with these gifts.

### Part 5
<b>One day,</b> the wife of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>said to her daughter: Go</b> and <b>check on your father</b> and see <b>what he is doing now.</b> The daughter <b>came</b> to her father, who <b>said to her: Go</b> and <b>tell your mother</b> that <b>ours is greater than theirs,</b> i.e., my current financial status is greater than that of your father’s household. <b>He read</b> the verse <b>about himself: “She is like the merchant-ships; she brings her food from afar”</b> (Proverbs 31:14). As he was unhindered by his wife from going to the study hall, Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>ate and drank and became healthy and went out to the study hall.</b>

### Part 6
The students <b>brought sixty</b> questionable <b>samples of blood before him</b> for inspection, to determine whether or not they were menstrual blood. <b>He deemed them</b> all <b>ritually pure,</b> thereby permitting the women to engage in intercourse with their husbands. <b>The Rabbis</b> of the academy <b>were murmuring about</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>and saying:</b> Can it <b>enter your mind</b> that <b>there is not one uncertain</b> sample <b>among them?</b> He must be mistaken. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>said to them: If</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with <b>my</b> ruling, <b>let all</b> the children born from these women <b>be males. And if not, let there be one female among them.</b> It turned out that <b>all</b> of the children <b>were males, and</b> they <b>were called Elazar in his name.</b>

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi lamented and <b>said</b> concerning the wife of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon: <b>How much procreation</b> has <b>this evil woman prevented from the Jewish people.</b> She caused women not to have children by preventing her husband from going to the study hall and rendering his halakhic rulings.

### Part 8
<b>As</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>was dying, he said to his wife: I know that the Rabbis are angry at me</b> for arresting several thieves who are their relatives, <b>and</b> therefore <b>they will not properly tend to my</b> burial. When I die, <b>lay me in my attic and do not be afraid of me,</b> i.e., do not fear that anything will happen to my corpse. <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: Rabbi Yonatan’s mother told me that the wife of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, told her: I laid him in the attic</b> for <b>no less than eighteen</b> years <b>and</b> for <b>no more than twenty-two years.</b>

### Part 9
His wife continued: <b>When I would go up</b> to the attic <b>I would check his hair,</b> and <b>when a hair would fall out from</b> his head, <b>blood would come</b> and appear in its place, i.e., his corpse did not decompose. <b>One day I saw a worm emerging from his ear,</b> and <b>I became</b> very <b>distressed</b> that perhaps his corpse had begun to decompose. My husband <b>appeared to me in a dream</b> and <b>said to me: It is no matter</b> for concern. Rather, this is a consequence for a sin of mine, as <b>one day I heard a Torah scholar being insulted and I did not protest as I should have.</b> Therefore, I received this punishment in my ear, measure for measure.

### Part 10
During this period, <b>when two</b> people <b>would come for adjudication of</b> a dispute, <b>they would stand by the doorway</b> to the home of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon. <b>One</b> litigant <b>would state his</b> side of the <b>matter, and the other</b> litigant would state <b>his</b> side of the <b>matter. A voice would issue forth from his attic, saying: So-and-so, you are guilty; so-and-so, you are innocent.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>One day, the wife of</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>was quarreling with a neighbor.</b> The neighbor <b>said to her</b> as a curse: This woman <b>should be like her husband, who was not buried.</b> When word spread that Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, had not been buried, <b>the Rabbis said: This much,</b> i.e., now that the matter is known, to continue in this state is <b>certainly not proper conduct,</b> and they decided to bury him.

### Part 11
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that the Sages found out that Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, had not been buried when <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai,</b> his father, <b>appeared to them in a dream and said to them: I have a single fledgling among you,</b> i.e., my son, <b>and you do not wish to bring it to me</b> by burying him next to me. Consequently, <b>the Sages went to tend to</b> his burial. <b>The residents of Akhbaria,</b> the town where the corpse of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, was resting, <b>did not allow</b> them to do so, <b>as</b> they realized that <b>all the years that Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, had been resting in his attic, no wild beast had entered their town.</b> The townspeople attributed this phenomenon to his merit and they did not want to lose this protection.

### Part 12
<b>One day,</b> which <b>was Yom Kippur eve,</b> everyone in the town <b>was preoccupied</b> with preparations for the Festival. <b>The Rabbis sent</b> a message <b>to the residents of</b> the adjacent town <b>of Biri</b> instructing them to help remove the body of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, from the attic, <b>and they removed his bier and brought it to his father’s</b> burial <b>cave. They found a serpent [<i>le’akhna</i>] that</b> had placed its tail in its mouth and completely <b>encircled</b> the entrance to <b>the cave,</b> denying them access. <b>They said to it: Serpent, serpent! Open your mouth to allow a son to enter next to his father. It opened</b> its mouth <b>for them</b> and uncoiled, and they buried Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, alongside his father.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues: After this incident, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>sent</b> a messenger <b>to speak with the wife of</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, and propose marriage. <b>She sent</b> a message <b>to him</b> in response: Shall <b>a vessel used by</b> someone <b>sacred,</b> i.e., Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>be used by</b> someone who is, relative to him, <b>profane? There,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say</b> that she used the colloquial adage: <b>In the location</b> where <b>the master of the house hangs his sword,</b> shall <b>the contemptible shepherd hang his basket [<i>kultei</i>]?</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>sent</b> a message back <b>to her: Granted that in Torah he was greater than I, but was</b> he <b>greater than I in pious deeds? She sent</b> a message back <b>to him: Whether</b> he was <b>greater than you in Torah I do not know;</b> but <b>I do know</b> that he was greater than you <b>in</b> pious <b>deeds, as he accepted afflictions upon himself.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to Torah</b> knowledge, <b>what is</b> the event that demonstrated the superiority of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, over Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi? The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa,</b> the leading Sages of the generation, <b>were sitting on benches [<i>asafselei</i>]</b> teaching Torah along with the other Sages, the youthful pair <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>would sit before them on the ground</b> out of respect.

### Part 15
These two young students would engage in discussions with the Sages, in which they would <b>raise difficulties and answer</b> them brilliantly. Seeing the young scholars’ brilliance, the leading Sages <b>said: From their waters we drink,</b> i.e., we are learning from them, <b>and they are</b> the ones <b>sitting on the ground? Benches were prepared for</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and they were promoted</b> to sit alongside the other Sages.

### Part 16
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said to</b> the other Sages present: <b>I have a single fledgling among you,</b> i.e., my son Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and you are seeking to take it from me?</b> By promoting my son to such a prestigious position at such a young age, his chances of being adversely affected by the evil eye are greatly increased. <b>They demoted Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi to sit on the ground, at his father’s request. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said to</b> the Sages: Should <b>one who has a father</b> to care for him, i.e., Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, be demoted so that he may <b>live, while</b> the other <b>one, who does not have a father</b> to care for him, i.e., Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, should be allowed to <b>die?</b> Upon hearing his argument, the Sages <b>also demoted Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon,</b> without explaining to him the reason for his demotion. <b>He became offended</b> and <b>said</b> to them: <b>You are equating</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>to me,</b> by demoting us together. In fact, I am much greater than he.

### Part 17
As a result of that incident, the relationship of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi changed. Up <b>until that day, when Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>would state a matter</b> of Torah, <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, would support him</b> by citing proofs for his opinion. <b>From this</b> point <b>forward, when</b> they were discussing a subject and <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>would say: I have</b> an argument <b>to respond, Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, would</b> preempt him by <b>saying to him: Such and such is what you have to respond,</b> and <b>this is the refutation of your</b> claim. <b>Now</b> that you asked these questions, <b>you have surrounded us with bundles of refutations that have no substance,</b> i.e., you have forced us to give unnecessary answers. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, would anticipate Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s comments and immediately dismiss them as having no value.

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>became offended. He came</b> and <b>told his father</b> what had transpired. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>said</b> to him: <b>My son, do not let</b> his actions <b>offend</b> you, <b>as he is a lion, son of a lion, and you are a lion, son of a fox.</b> Rabbi Elazar’s father, Rabbi Shimon, was a renowned Sage, and therefore Rabbi Elazar’s sagacity is not surprising. In any event, this incident demonstrates the superiority of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi with regard to knowledge of Torah.

### Part 19
The Gemara concludes: <b>This</b> incident <b>is</b> the background to a statement <b>which Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: There are three</b> prototypical <b>modest</b> people, <b>and they are: Father,</b> i.e., Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC