
### Part 1
With regard to <b>sacrificial animals for which one bears responsibility</b> to replace <b>them, they are</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation,</b> as this responsibility indicates a certain aspect of ownership. <b>And</b> those <b>for which one does not bear responsibility</b> to replace <b>them, they are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation. Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who sells a Torah scroll, an animal, or a pearl,</b> these items <b>are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation,</b> as they have no fixed price. The Rabbis <b>said to him:</b> The early Sages <b>stated</b> that <b>only these</b> items listed above are not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? It is <b>as the Sages taught:</b> It is written: <b>“And if you sell to your colleague an item that is sold, or acquire from your colleague’s hand,</b> one shall not exploit his brother” (Leviticus 25:14). This is referring to <b>an item acquired from hand to hand. Land is excluded, as it is not movable. Slaves are excluded, as they are juxtaposed to land</b> in several sources, and therefore their legal status is like that of land in certain respects. <b>Documents are excluded, as it is written: “And if you sell</b> to your colleague <b>an item that is sold,”</b> indicating <b>an item</b> that is <b>itself sold and itself acquired. Documents are excluded, as they are not sold themselves and they are not acquired themselves.</b> They have no intrinsic value, <b>and they exist only for the proof therein.</b>

### Part 3
<b>From here</b> the Sages <b>said:</b> In the case of <b>one who sells his documents</b> that are no longer in use <b>to a perfumer</b> for use in packaging his wares, <b>they are</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> because he is selling the paper itself. The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious?</b> In that case, one sold paper, and it is no different from any other movable property. The Gemara answers: This serves <b>to exclude</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Kahana, who says: There is no exploitation for</b> cases involving <b><i>perutot</i>,</b> as paper is sold for mere <i>perutot</i>. The Sages therefore <b>teach us: There is exploitation for</b> cases involving <b><i>perutot</i>. Consecrated</b> property is excluded, as <b>the verse states:</b> “One shall not exploit <b>his brother”</b> (Leviticus 25:14), indicating that these halakhot apply only to transactions involving <b>“his brother,” but not</b> to transactions involving <b>consecrated</b> property.

### Part 4
<b>Rabba bar Memel objects to this:</b> Is that to say that <b>anywhere that it is written “his hand,”</b> the reference <b>is</b> to <b>his actual hand,</b> and not merely to his possession, in its metaphorical sense? <b>If that is so,</b> that <b>which is written: “And taken all his land from his hand”</b> (Numbers 21:26), would you <b>also</b> explain <b>here</b> that <b>he was holding all his land in his hand? Rather,</b> clearly, “from his hand” means <b>from his possession. Here too,</b> “from your colleague’s hand” in the case of exploitation means <b>from his possession.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: Is that to say that <b>anywhere that it is written “his hand”</b> the reference <b>is not</b> to <b>his actual hand? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“If</b> the theft <b>is found in his hand”</b> (Exodus 22:3): <b>I have</b> derived from here <b>only his hand; from where</b> do I derive that the <i>halakha</i> is the same if the stolen item is found on <b>his roof,</b> in <b>his courtyard, or</b> in <b>his enclosure? The verse states: “If</b> the theft <b>is found [<i>himmatze timmatze</i>]”;</b> the use of the double verb teaches that the <i>halakha</i> applies <b>in any case</b> where the stolen item is in his possession.

### Part 6
The Gemara infers: The <i>halakha</i> applies if the stolen item is found in his possession, and this includes any place in his possession. <b>The reason</b> is that <b>the Merciful One writes: “If the theft is found [<i>himmatze timmatze</i>].”</b> If <b>that</b> were <b>not so, I would say</b> that <b>wherever He writes “his hand,”</b> the reference <b>is</b> to <b>his actual hand. And furthermore, it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written with regard to a bill of divorce: <b>“And place it in her hand”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:1). <b>I have</b> derived <b>only her hand; from where</b> do I derive that the <i>halakha</i> is the same if he places the bill of divorce on <b>her roof,</b> in <b>her courtyard, or</b> in <b>her enclosure? The verse states: And place, in any case</b> that he places it in her possession. Here too, the Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that any place in her possession is included is that <b>the Merciful One writes “and place.”</b> If <b>that</b> were <b>not so, I would say</b> that <b>wherever He writes “his hand,”</b> the reference <b>is</b> to <b>his actual hand.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara rejects Rabba bar Memel’s objection and concludes: <b>Every</b> mention of the term <b>“his hand”</b> in the Torah <b>is</b> a reference to <b>his actual hand. And it is different there,</b> in the verse: “And taken all his land from his hand” (Numbers 21:26), <b>where it cannot be said that</b> the reference is to his actual hand. <b>Rather,</b> it means there: <b>In his possession.</b>

### Part 8
§ <b>Rabbi Zeira raises a dilemma</b> with regard to <b>rental:</b> Is <b>it</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation,</b> or is <b>it not</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation?</b> The Gemara elaborates: Is it <b>an item that is sold</b> about which <b>the Merciful One speaks, but not a rental; or perhaps</b> there <b>is no difference? Abaye said to him: Is it written:</b> And if you sell <b>an item that is sold forever?</b> What <b>is written</b> is <b>simply:</b> “And if you sell <b>an item that is sold,” and indeed for its day</b> the rental <b>is</b> considered <b>a sale.</b> The legal status of a rental is that of a sale for a limited period. Consequently, it is subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation.

### Part 9
<b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> In a case involving <b>wheat</b> kernels, <b>and one sowed them in the ground, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Are <b>they</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation, or</b> are <b>they not</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation?</b> The Gemara elaborates: Is their legal status <b>like</b> that of kernels <b>cast into a jug, and they</b> are subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation,</b> as they remain movable property? <b>Or, perhaps he subordinated them to the ground,</b> and like land they are not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If we say that</b> the hired laborer <b>said: I sowed six</b> <i>kav</i> of grain <b>in</b> the field, <b>and witnesses came and said that he sowed only five</b> <i>kav</i> <b>in it, but doesn’t Rava</b> himself <b>say:</b> With regard to <b>any item that</b> is otherwise subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation, and it is sold <b>by measure, or by weight, or by number, even</b> if the disparity was <b>less than the measure of exploitation</b> in the transaction, the transaction is <b>reversed.</b> A disparity of one-sixth between the value of an item and its price constitutes exploitation only in cases where there is room for error in assessing the value of an item. In a case where the sale item is easily quantifiable, any deviation from the designated quantity results in a nullification of the transaction, even if the wheat kernels are subordinate to the ground.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> it is a case <b>where</b> the hired laborer <b>said: I cast</b> kernels in the field <b>as required,</b> without quantifying the measure of the kernels that he cast, <b>and it was discovered that he did not cast</b> kernels in the field <b>as required.</b> Are <b>they</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> or are <b>they not</b> subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation?</b> Is the legal status of these kernels <b>like</b> that of kernels <b>cast into a jug, and they</b> are subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation? Or, perhaps</b> the laborer <b>subordinated them to the ground?</b>

### Part 12
Rava raises an additional dilemma: If the laborer admitted to part of the claim, does <b>he take an oath with regard to</b> the kernels <b>or</b> does <b>he not take an oath with regard to</b> the kernels? Is their legal status <b>like</b> that of kernels <b>cast into a jug, and one takes an oath with regard to them? Or, perhaps he subordinated them to the ground, and one does not take an oath with regard to them,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>one does not take an oath about</b> a claim involving land.

### Part 13
Rava raises an additional dilemma: Does the sacrifice of the <b><i>omer</i> offering permit</b> one to eat the produce grown from these kernels, <b>or does</b> the sacrifice of the <b><i>omer</i> offering not permit</b> one to eat the produce? The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is a case <b>where</b> the kernels <b>took root, we</b> already <b>learned</b> that <i>halakha</i>. <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where</b> the kernels <b>did not</b> yet <b>take root, we</b> already <b>learned</b> that <i>halakha</i> also. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Menaḥot</i> 70a): <b>If</b> crops <b>took root before</b> the sacrifice of <b>the <i>omer</i> offering,</b> the <b><i>omer</i> offering renders it permitted</b> to eat <b>them. And if not,</b> if they took root only after the sacrifice of the <i>omer</i> offering, <b>it is prohibited to eat them until the</b> time for the sacrifice of the <b>next <i>omer</i> offering will arrive.</b>

### Part 14
<b>No,</b> Rava’s dilemma is not superfluous, as it is <b>necessary</b> to raise it in a case <b>where one reaped</b> grain <b>and sowed</b> its kernels <b>prior to</b> the time of <b>the <i>omer</i> offering, and</b> the time of <b>the <i>omer</i> offering arrived and passed</b> while <b>they</b> were in the ground, <b>and</b> the kernels <b>did not take root before</b> the sacrifice of <b>the <i>omer</i> offering.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC