
### Part 1
<b>the branches</b> pruned from the vines <b>and the poles. And the two of them,</b> i.e., the landowner and the one cultivating the field, both <b>supply the poles.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In <b>a location where</b> those cultivating the land <b>were accustomed to cut</b> the produce, the one cultivating this field <b>is not permitted to uproot</b> it, and in a location where they were accustomed <b>to uproot</b> the produce, <b>he is not permitted to cut</b> it. <b>And the two of them,</b> i.e., the owner and the one cultivating the field, can each <b>prevent the other</b> from deviating from the custom.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains the <i>baraita</i>: In a location where those cultivating the land <b>were accustomed to cut</b> the produce, the one cultivating this field <b>is not permitted to uproot</b> the produce even if he wants to, because <b>this</b> one, i.e., the owner, who wants the produce cut, can <b>say: I want my land to be fertilized with stubble,</b> i.e., the remains of the plants. <b>And</b> if the owner wants him to uproot the produce, <b>that</b> one, i.e., the one cultivating the field, can <b>say: I cannot</b> uproot the produce, since that is too labor intensive. Similarly, if the custom is <b>to uproot</b> the produce, the one cultivating this field <b>is not permitted to cut</b> it even if he wants to, because <b>this</b> one, i.e., the owner, who wants the produce uprooted, can <b>say: I want my land to be cleared</b> of stubble. <b>And</b> if the owner wants him to cut the produce, <b>that</b> one, i.e., the one cultivating the field, can <b>say: I want</b> to uproot what remains so that I can use <b>the stubble.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>And the two of them,</b> i.e., the owner and the one cultivating the field, can each <b>prevent the other</b> from deviating from the custom. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need this statement and what is its purpose? The Gemara answers that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying what</b> the <b>reason</b> is for its ruling: <b>What is the reason</b> that in a location where those cultivating the land were accustomed <b>to cut</b> the produce, the one cultivating this field <b>is not permitted to uproot</b> the produce, and in a location where they were accustomed <b>to uproot</b> the produce, <b>he is not permitted to cut</b> it? It is <b>because the two of them</b> can each <b>prevent the other</b> from deviating from the custom, as each has a justified reason for opposing the deviation desired by the other.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches: If they were accustomed <b>to plow</b> the land <b>after</b> harvesting the produce, this cultivator <b>must plow</b> as well. The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that he cannot deviate from the custom? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary for</b> the situation of <b>a place where</b> the custom is <b>not</b> to <b>weed</b> the fields, <b>and</b> the one cultivating this field <b>went and weeded</b> anyway. <b>Lest you say</b> that he could <b>say to</b> the landowner: When <b>I weeded</b> the field, I did so <b>with the intention of not plowing it</b> subsequently. Therefore, he should not be obligated to plow it. To counter this, the mishna <b>teaches us that</b> the renter <b>should have specified</b> this intention explicitly <b>to</b> the landowner beforehand in order to exempt him from the requirement to plow.

### Part 6
The mishna teaches: <b>All</b> farming of the land shall be conducted <b>in accordance with regional custom.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is added</b> by the use of the term <b>all?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to add that which the Sages taught:</b> In <b>a location where</b> landowners <b>were accustomed to rent out the trees</b> in a field <b>together with the land</b> so that the one cultivating the field receives a share of the fruits despite not needing to care for the trees, the trees are presumed to be <b>rented out.</b> In <b>a location where</b> landowners <b>were not accustomed to rent out</b> the trees in a field together with the land, and the one cultivating the field does not receive a share of the fruits, the trees are <b>not</b> presumed to be <b>rented out.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: In <b>a location where</b> landowners <b>were accustomed to rent out the trees</b> in a field <b>together with the land</b> so that the one cultivating the field receives a share of the fruit despite not needing to care for the trees, the trees are presumed to be <b>rented out.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state this ruling in order to include the case <b>where everyone</b> in that region <b>gives</b> land to sharecroppers to cultivate in return <b>for one-third</b> of the yield, <b>and he,</b> the landowner, <b>went and gave it for one-quarter. Lest you say that</b> the landowner can <b>say to him: This</b> concession on my part, <b>that I reduced</b> my portion of the yield <b>for you,</b> was done <b>with the intention that I would not give you</b> a share of the fruits <b>of the trees</b> in the field, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us that</b> the landowner <b>should have specified</b> this <b>to him</b> in advance.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: In <b>a location where</b> landowners <b>were not accustomed to rent out</b> the trees in a field together with the land, and the one cultivating the field does not receive a share of the fruits, the trees are <b>not</b> presumed to be <b>rented out.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state this ruling in order to include the case <b>where all</b> the cultivators in that region <b>receive</b> land in return <b>for</b> giving <b>one-quarter</b> of the yield to the owner, <b>and</b> this cultivator <b>went and received</b> the land in return <b>for</b> giving <b>one-third</b> of the yield to the owner. <b>Lest you say</b> that the cultivator can <b>say to him: This</b> concession on my part, <b>that I added to your</b> portion, was done <b>with the intention that you</b> would also <b>give me</b> a share of the fruit <b>from the trees,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us that</b> the cultivator <b>should have specified</b> this <b>to him</b> in advance.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Just as</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that the owner of the field and the one cultivating it <b>divide the produce, so</b> too the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>they divide the stubble and the straw. Rav Yosef said</b> with regard to this statement: <b>In Babylonia</b> those who enter into such arrangements <b>are accustomed not to give stubble to the sharecropper.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> resulting from the assertion that this is the practice in Babylonia? The Gemara answers: The difference is <b>that if there is a person</b> in Babylonia <b>who gives</b> the sharecropper the stubble in addition to the produce, <b>it is</b> considered merely as though he has <b>a generous disposition, but we do not learn from his</b> actions that this is the general practice.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef says: The first, second, and third</b> elements of the earthen barrier surrounding the field <b>and the poles</b> used <b>to</b> support <b>a thorn</b> fence are the responsibility <b>of the owner</b> of the land, <b>but the fashioning of the thorn</b> fence <b>itself</b> is the responsibility <b>of the sharecropper.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>The principle of the matter</b> is that the <b>main</b> part of <b>the boundary</b> of the field is the responsibility <b>of the owner</b> of the land, while any <b>additional protection</b> required is the responsibility <b>of the sharecropper. Rav Yosef says: The hoe and the shovel and the bucket and the irrigation device</b> must be provided <b>by the owner</b> of the land, while <b>the sharecropper</b> must <b>make the irrigation channels.</b>

### Part 11
The mishna teaches: <b>Just as</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that the owner of the field and the one cultivating it <b>divide the wine, so</b> too the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>they divide the branches</b> pruned from the vines <b>and the poles.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the <b>purpose</b> of the <b>poles</b> used for the vines? <b>They said</b> in <b>the school of Rabbi Yannai:</b> This is referring to long <b>poles that were divided</b> in half, <b>with which they support the vines.</b>

### Part 12
The mishna teaches: <b>And the two of them,</b> i.e., the landowner and the one cultivating the field, both <b>supply the poles.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the mishna to state this? The Gemara answers that the mishna <b>is saying what</b> the <b>reason</b> is for its ruling: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the two of them divide the poles?</b> It is <b>because the two of them supply the poles.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who receives a field from another</b> to cultivate <b>and it is an irrigated</b> field <b>or a field with trees,</b> if <b>the spring</b> that irrigated the field <b>dried up or the trees were cut down,</b> he does <b>not subtract from</b> the produce <b>he</b> owes the owner as part of <b>his tenancy,</b> despite the fact that he presumably considered these factors when agreeing to cultivate the field. But <b>if</b> the cultivator <b>said to</b> the landowner explicitly: <b>Lease me this irrigated field, or</b> he said: Lease me <b>this field with trees,</b> and <b>the spring dried up or the trees were cut down, he</b> may <b>subtract from</b> the produce <b>he</b> owes as part of <b>his tenancy.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the ruling of the mishna? <b>If we say that the large river</b> from which all the channels originate <b>dried up, why</b> does he <b>not subtract from</b> the produce <b>he</b> owes as part of <b>his tenancy? Let</b> the cultivator <b>say</b> that it <b>is</b> the result of <b>a regional disaster.</b> Consequently, he should be able to subtract from the produce he owes. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> The case in the mishna is <b>where a small river</b> that irrigates this field alone <b>dried up, as</b> the landowner can <b>say to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC