### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>From where are these matters</b> derived, that one is liable to pay for intent to misappropriate a deposit? It is <b>as the Sages taught:</b> It is written with regard to misappropriation: <b>“For every matter of [<i>devar</i>] trespass”</b> (Exodus 22:8). <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> The term <i>devar</i>, literally, word, <b>teaches</b> that <b>one is liable</b> to pay <b>for a thought</b> of misappropriation just <b>as</b> he is for <b>an action.</b> One pays for a matter of trespass even if there is no actual trespass. <b>And Beit Hillel say: He is liable</b> to pay <b>only</b> if <b>he</b> actually <b>misappropriates</b> the deposit, <b>as it is stated: “Whether he has misappropriated his neighbor’s goods”</b> (Exodus 22:7). <b>Beit Shammai said to Beit Hillel: But isn’t it already stated: “For every matter of trespass”? Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: But isn’t it already stated: “Whether he has misappropriated his neighbor’s goods”?</b>

### Part 2
<b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states “for every matter of trespass”?</b> One <b>might</b> have thought: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that one is liable to pay if <b>he</b> misappropriated the deposit himself, but if he <b>said to his slave or to his agent</b> to misappropriate the deposit in his possession, <b>from where</b> is it derived that he is liable to pay due to their actions? <b>The verse states: “For every matter of trespass,”</b> from which it is derived that one’s speech renders him liable to pay for any misappropriation.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>he tilted the</b> deposited <b>barrel,</b> he is liable to pay only for the wine that he took. <b>Rabba says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> if the barrel <b>broke. But</b> if the wine in the barrel <b>fermented</b> and spoiled, <b>he pays for the entire</b> barrel. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this ruling? He is liable because it was <b>his arrows,</b> i.e., his actions, that <b>were effective</b> in spoiling the wine. Although he took only a quarter-<i>log</i>, the wine fermented and turned rancid as a result of his opening the cask.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>one lifted</b> the barrel <b>and took from it</b> a quarter-<i>log</i> of wine, he pays the value of the entire barrel. <b>Shmuel says:</b> When the <i>tanna</i> said: And <b>took</b> from it, it is <b>not</b> that he <b>actually took</b> the wine from the barrel. <b>Rather, once he lifted it</b> in order <b>to take</b> wine from <b>it, although he did not</b> yet <b>take</b> wine from it, if it breaks, he is liable to pay.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that <b>Shmuel holds</b> that <b>misappropriation does not require loss?</b> The Sages <b>say: No,</b> do not draw that conclusion. <b>It is different here, since it is preferable for</b> the bailee <b>that</b> all the wine in <b>this barrel will</b> serve as <b>a base for that quarter</b>-<i>log</i>. Although his intent was to take a small amount of wine, since that small amount is better preserved within the full barrel of wine, it is as though he took the entire barrel.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi raises a dilemma</b> based on that explanation: If <b>one lifts a purse</b> in order <b>to take from it</b> a single <b>dinar, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Is it</b> only with regard to <b>wine, which is preserved only by means of the wine</b> in the barrel, that if one intends to take a quarter-<i>log</i>, it is as though he intended to take all of the wine in the barrel, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>a dinar, which is preserved</b> even alone, intent to take one dinar does not indicate intent to take all of the coins in the purse? <b>Or, perhaps safeguarding a purse is different from safeguarding a dinar.</b> A single coin is easily lost, whereas a purse is not, as it is more easily safeguarded. Therefore, when the bailee intends to take one dinar, he intends to take all of the coins in the purse. The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 7
end of chapter

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There is a halakhic principle that when one purchases an item, the payment of the money does not effect the transaction. The transaction is effected only by means of the buyer’s physically taking the item into his possession, e.g., by pulling the item. Payment of money by the buyer creates only a moral obligation for the seller to sell him the item. When two types of currency are exchanged for each other, one of the types will have the status of the money being paid, and the other will have the status of the item being purchased. Handing over the former will not effect the transaction, while handing over the latter will. The mishna teaches: When one purchases gold coins, paying with silver coins, the gold coins assume the status of the purchased item and the silver coins assume the status of money. Therefore, when one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins. <b>But</b> when one party takes possession of <b>the silver</b> coins, the other party <b>does not acquire the gold</b> coins.

### Part 9
In an exchange of silver coins for copper coins, when one party takes possession of <b>the copper</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins. <b>But</b> when one party takes possession of <b>the silver</b> coins, the other party <b>does not acquire the copper</b> coins. In an exchange of flawed coins for unflawed coins, when one party takes possession of <b>the flawed coins,</b> the other party <b>acquires the unflawed</b> coins. <b>But</b> when one party takes possession of <b>the unflawed</b> coins, the other party <b>does not acquire the flawed</b> coins.

### Part 10
In an exchange of an unminted coin for a minted coin, when one party takes possession of <b>an unminted coin [<i>asimon</i>],</b> the other party <b>acquires</b> a minted <b>coin.</b> But when one party takes possession of a minted <b>coin,</b> the other party <b>does not acquire an unminted coin.</b> In an exchange of a coin for movable property, when one party takes possession of the <b>movable property</b> the other party <b>acquires the coin.</b> But when one party takes possession of the <b>coin,</b> the other party <b>does not acquire the movable property.</b>

### Part 11
<b>This is the principle:</b> With regard to those who exchange <b>all</b> forms of <b>movable property, each acquires</b> the property of <b>the other,</b> i.e., the moment that one of the parties to the exchange takes possession of the item that he is acquiring, e.g., by means of pulling, the other party acquires the item from the first party. <b>How</b> so? If the buyer <b>pulled produce from</b> the seller, <b>but</b> the buyer <b>did not</b> yet <b>give</b> the seller their value in <b>money, he cannot renege</b> on the transaction, but if the buyer <b>gave</b> the seller <b>money but did not</b> yet <b>pull produce from him, he can renege</b> on the transaction, as the transaction is not yet complete.

### Part 12
<b>But</b> with regard to the latter case, the Sages <b>said: He Who exacted payment from the people of the generation of the flood, and from the generation of the dispersion,</b> i.e., that of the Tower of Babel, <b>will</b> in the future <b>exact payment from whoever does not stand by his statement.</b> Just as the people of those generations were not punished by an earthly court but were subjected to divine punishment, so too, although no earthly court can compel the person who reneged to complete the transaction, punishment will be exacted at the hand of Heaven for any damage that he caused.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Shimon says: Anyone who has the money in his possession has the advantage.</b> The Sages said it is only with regard to the seller that payment of money does not effect a transaction, so that if the buyer paid for the item and did not yet take possession of the purchase item, the seller can renege on the sale and return the money. By contrast, once the buyer paid for the item he cannot renege on his decision and demand return of his money, even if he did not yet take possession of the purchase item.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi would <b>teach Rabbi Shimon, his son:</b> When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins, consistent with the mishna. Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him: My teacher, you taught us in your youth,</b> in the first version of the mishna: When one party takes possession of <b>the silver</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the gold</b> coins, <b>and do you then teach us in your old age:</b> When one party takes possession of <b>the gold</b> coins, the other party <b>acquires the silver</b> coins?

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>In his youth, what did</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>hold, and in his maturity, what did</b> he <b>hold?</b> What is the basis for his original opinion, and what led him to change his mind? The Gemara explains: <b>In his youth he held: Gold</b> coins, <b>which are</b> more <b>valuable, are currency; silver</b> coins, <b>which are</b> relatively <b>not valuable, are a commodity,</b> i.e., the purchase item. The principle is: When one party takes possession of <b>a commodity</b> the other party <b>acquires the currency. In his old age, he held: Silver</b> coins,