
### Part 1
that <b>we say: What</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce, <b>and what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce’s <b>value,</b> meaning that we do not require the payment to be in the form of the produce stipulated, <b>we</b> therefore <b>also say: What</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce’s <b>value, and what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce, <b>and</b> therefore <b>one may set</b> a price <b>by the market rate. And</b> this is permitted <b>even though he does not have</b> produce at the present moment. Since he could purchase it if he wished it is considered as though he had the produce in his possession, and therefore one may make an agreement with another to provide him with produce at a later date in accordance with the current price.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Pappa, and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rava</b> from the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>, which explicitly teaches: With regard to <b>all of them, if he has</b> the produce in his possession, the transaction is <b>permitted,</b> and <b>if he does not have</b> it, the transaction is <b>prohibited.</b> Rava <b>said to them:</b> The <i>tanna</i> <b>there</b> is referring to a transaction for the repayment of the debt conducted after <b>a loan</b> has been given but before it has been repaid, whereas <b>here</b> Rabbi Yannai is dealing with an actual <b>sale,</b> without any loan at all, and therefore there is no interest involved.

### Part 3
<b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say: What is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages said one may set</b> a price <b>by the market rate and that</b> one may do so <b>even though he does not have</b> the produce in his possession? <b>Because</b> the buyer <b>says to</b> the seller: <b>Your favor is taken and thrown on the thorns.</b> In other words, I am deriving no benefit from my transaction with you, as <b>how have you helped me? If I had money in my hands I would buy</b> the produce myself <b>in</b> the towns of <b>Hini and Shili,</b> nearby market towns, <b>at an inexpensive</b> price. Consequently, the acquisition of produce at the current market rate is of no benefit to him.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: But if that is so,</b> according to this same logic it should be <b>permitted to lend a <i>se’a</i></b> of produce <b>for a <i>se’a</i></b> of the same produce, <b>as</b> the lender <b>can say to</b> the borrower: <b>Your favor is taken and thrown on the thorns, since he says to him:</b> I stand to gain nothing from the <i>se’a</i> you will later give me, as the price of my wheat would increase if it were to remain in my granary, and therefore the loan does not benefit me at all, for will the <b>wheat burn in my warehouse [<i>be’akalbai</i>]?</b> Rav Yosef <b>said to him:</b> The two cases are different, as <b>there</b> it is referring to <b>a loan,</b> and consequently there is a concern about interest, whereas <b>here</b> it is <b>a sale.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Adda bar Abba said to Rava: But</b> with regard to establishing the repayment of the loan upon produce valued at the market rate, the buyer does stand to gain from the agreement, as, if he would have to go to acquire produce elsewhere, <b>he would have to give a dinar to a broker,</b> and therefore he gains a dinar from the early payment. Rava <b>said to him:</b> The case is one <b>where</b> the buyer <b>also gives</b> the seller the broker’s fee. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> There is generally no need to add this fee, as <b>a person’s dinars serve as a broker for him.</b> One who has ready cash has no need for the services of a broker.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara addresses a related issue. <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say: One who gives money</b> in advance to purchase produce <b>at the advance price</b> that is in effect shortly after the harvest but before the market price is set <b>must present himself at the granary</b> when the seller is threshing his produce.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> reason is he required to be there? <b>If</b> it is in order <b>to acquire</b> the produce, <b>he does not acquire</b> it by merely being present there, as the acquisition is not completed until he pulls the actual produce. And <b>if</b> it is in order for the seller <b>to accept upon himself,</b> in the event that he reneges on the transaction, the curse of: <b>He Who exacted payment</b> from the people of the generation of the flood, and from the people of the generation of the dispersion, will in the future exact payment from whoever does not stand by his statement (see 44a), even <b>if</b> the buyer <b>does not present himself</b> there the seller <b>also accepts upon himself</b> the curse of: <b>He Who exacted payment.</b> This curse is in effect for anyone who reneges on a transaction after the money has been paid.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>Actually,</b> the reason he must go to the granary is for the seller <b>to accept upon himself</b> the curse of: <b>He Who exacted payment,</b> for the following reason: <b>One who gives money</b> in advance to purchase produce <b>at the advance price gives</b> it <b>to two</b> or <b>three</b> different sellers, in order to ensure that he will collect a profit. Consequently, <b>if he presents himself</b> to the seller when he is threshing his produce, the seller <b>relies</b> upon him, as he knows the transaction will proceed. <b>But if</b> the buyer does <b>not</b> present himself to the seller when he is threshing his produce, the seller could <b>say to him: I said</b> to myself <b>that you</b> must have <b>found better produce than mine, and you took</b> that produce. Since the seller is unsure if the transaction will be completed, he may change his mind and sell to a different buyer.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said: Now that you have said</b> that the reason is <b>due to</b> the seller’s <b>relying</b> upon him, it can be concluded that the buyer does not have to go to the seller’s granary in order to convince him that he intends to uphold the transaction. Rather, <b>even if</b> the buyer <b>finds</b> the seller <b>in the marketplace and says to him</b> that he will not retract his offer to buy the produce, the seller will likewise <b>rely</b> upon him.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Naḥman said: The principle with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>interest</b> is: <b>Any payment</b> for <b>his waiting,</b> meaning any additional sum added in consideration of the fact that the lender delays claiming his money, is <b>forbidden. And Rav Naḥman</b> also <b>said:</b> In the case of <b>this one who gives money to a wax seller</b> to purchase loaves of wax from him, <b>and</b> loaves of wax <b>go</b> at the current rate of one dinar <b>for four</b> loaves, <b>and</b> the seller <b>said to him: I will give you</b> wax in the future at the rate of <b>five</b> loaves for each dinar if you pay me now in advance, <b>if</b> the seller <b>has</b> wax <b>with him</b> at the time of the transaction, it is <b>permitted</b> to sell at a discounted rate because he is in need of cash. But if the seller <b>does not have</b> wax <b>with him,</b> it is <b>forbidden,</b> as the extra loaf given is interest.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious?</b> It is clearly interest. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for a case <b>where</b> the seller <b>has credit in the town,</b> and therefore he could receive wax from others. It is necessary <b>lest you say: Since he has credit in the town</b> and could receive wax now, this should be <b>similar</b> to a case where he said: Give me produce <b>until my son comes, or: Until I find</b> the <b>key,</b> and therefore it is permitted to give him money, as this is not considered a loan (see 75a). Rav Naḥman therefore <b>teaches us</b> that <b>since</b> the loaves of wax still <b>lack collection,</b> i.e., the seller does not actually own them, <b>they are considered as though they were not</b> in existence, which means the reduction in price is classified as interest.

### Part 12
<b>And Rav Naḥman said:</b> In the case of <b>this one who borrowed coins from another,</b> and when he later counted them <b>he found an additional</b> amount of money, above the sum they had agreed upon, <b>if</b> the addition was <b>within the</b> range <b>that</b> a person <b>can make a mistake,</b> the assumption is that the lender erred in his calculation, and therefore the borrower <b>is obligated to return</b> the extra coins <b>to him. But if not,</b> if the difference was so large that it could not have been the result of a simple mistake, it must <b>only</b> be that the lender <b>has given him a gift.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara inquires: <b>What are the circumstances</b> where the additional amount would be <b>within the</b> range <b>that</b> one <b>can make a mistake? Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Yosef, said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC