
### Part 1
<b>and according to Rabbi Tarfon too,</b> there <b>is a waiver</b> of the disparity of less than one-third and the transaction is finalized <b>immediately, why did they revert</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis? <b>In</b> that case, the ruling <b>of Rabbi Tarfon</b> would be <b>preferable for them, as that which the Rabbis deem exploitation,</b> i.e., a discrepancy of one-sixth, <b>is waived according to Rabbi Tarfon.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Do you maintain</b> that the legal status of a disparity of <b>less than one-third according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon is like</b> the legal status of a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis? No,</b> the legal status of a disparity ranging <b>from one-sixth until one-third according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon is like</b> the legal status of a disparity of <b>one-sixth itself according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and the exploited party receives the sum of the exploitation in return. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, for what</b> reason <b>did</b> the merchants of Lod <b>rejoice initially?</b> They gained nothing relative to the ruling of the Rabbis.

### Part 3
<b>Resolve,</b> based on this difficulty, the dilemma raised below, and conclude <b>that</b> in cases of <b>nullification of the transaction according to the Rabbis, one may always renege</b> on the transaction. Therefore, the reaction of the merchants of Lod is understandable, <b>as, since Rabbi Tarfon said to them</b> that a disparity between one-sixth and one-third <b>is</b> merely <b>exploitation, they rejoiced,</b> as this would mean that the buyer has only the time it takes to show the merchandise to a merchant or a relative to renege. <b>When he said to them</b> that the exploited person can renege on the transaction for <b>the entire day, they reverted</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis.

### Part 4
The Gemara explains why the dilemma is resolved: <b>As, if it enters your mind</b> to say <b>that nullification of the transaction according to the Rabbis</b> is limited to only <b>within the time that</b> it takes for the buyer <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative, for what</b> reason <b>did they rejoice</b> over the ruling of Rabbi Tarfon? His ruling did not enable them to sell the merchandise at a higher price than the ruling of the Rabbis did. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>They</b> initially <b>rejoiced over the</b> case of a disparity of <b>one-sixth itself, as according to Rabbi Tarfon</b> there is <b>a waiver</b> of the disparity, <b>and according to the Rabbis</b> it is <b>exploitation.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara cites the dilemma referenced above. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>nullification of the transaction according to the Rabbis,</b> may one <b>always renege</b> on the transaction? <b>Or perhaps</b> he can renege only <b>within the time that</b> it takes him <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative. And if you say</b> that the transaction is nullified only <b>within the time that</b> it takes him <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative, what</b> difference <b>is there between</b> a disparity of <b>one-sixth and</b> a disparity of <b>greater than one-sixth?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference, <b>as</b> in the case of a disparity of <b>one-sixth,</b> only the one <b>who was exploited can renege</b> on the transaction, <b>while</b> in the case where the disparity is <b>greater than one-sixth, both can renege</b> on the transaction.

### Part 6
The Gemara returns to discuss the dilemma: <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of the dilemma from the mishna: The merchants of Lod <b>reverted to</b> following <b>the statement of the Rabbis. Granted, if you say</b> that one can claim <b>nullification of the transaction according to the Rabbis</b> only <b>within the time that</b> it takes the buyer <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative, and according to Rabbi Tarfon</b> one can do so for <b>the entire day,</b> it is <b>due to that</b> reason that <b>they reverted</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis. <b>But if you say</b> that one can claim <b>nullification of the transaction according to the Rabbis</b> and <b>always renege</b> on the transaction, <b>why</b> did <b>they revert</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis? <b>In</b> that case, the ruling <b>of Rabbi Tarfon</b> is <b>preferable for them, as he deems</b> such a disparity <b>exploitation</b> and rules that one can claim nullification of the transaction for <b>the entire day and no more,</b> which is more beneficial to the merchant.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Nullification of the transaction is un-common,</b> and therefore the merchants of Lod did not take that into consideration when calculating which ruling was most advantageous.

### Part 8
The Gemara cites the halakhic resolutions of these dilemmas. <b>Rava said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that if the disparity is <b>less than one-sixth,</b> the <b>merchandise is acquired</b> immediately. If the disparity is <b>greater than one-sixth,</b> either party can demand <b>nullification of the transaction.</b> If the disparity is precisely <b>one-sixth,</b> the buyer has <b>acquired</b> the merchandise, <b>and</b> the one who benefited from the exploitation <b>returns</b> the sum gained by the <b>exploitation. And</b> one may claim both <b>this,</b> nullification of the transaction, <b>and that,</b> return of the sum gained, only <b>within the time that</b> it takes <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava:</b> In cases of <b>exploitation,</b> if the disparity is <b>less than one-sixth,</b> the <b>merchandise is acquired</b> immediately. If the disparity is <b>greater than one-sixth, the transaction is nullified.</b> If the disparity is precisely <b>one-sixth,</b> the buyer has <b>acquired</b> the merchandise, <b>and</b> the one who benefited from the exploitation <b>returns</b> the sum gained by the <b>exploitation.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Natan. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says:</b> In a case where the seller was exploited, the <b>seller is at an advantage.</b> If he <b>wishes,</b> he reneges on the transaction and <b>says to</b> the buyer: <b>Give me my merchandise, or</b> he can say: <b>Give me</b> the sum <b>that you</b> gained by <b>exploiting me. And</b> one may claim both <b>this,</b> nullification of the transaction, <b>and that,</b> return of the sum gained, only <b>within the time that</b> it takes <b>to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to his relative.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Until when</b> is it <b>permitted</b> for the buyer <b>to return</b> the item? He may return it only until a period of time has passed that would allow him to show the merchandise to a merchant or to his relative. <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard to <b>a buyer, but a seller may always renege</b> on the transaction. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>supports his</b> opinion, as the merchants of Lod <b>reverted to</b> following <b>the statement of the Rabbis. Granted, if you say</b> that <b>a seller may always renege</b> on a transaction,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC