
### Part 1
<b>or that thresh <i>teruma</i> and tithe,</b> which one may not allow his cows to eat, if he muzzles them <b>he does not violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle, but due to the appearance of</b> prohibition, as observers are unaware that he is acting in a permitted manner, he should <b>bring a piece of that species</b> of produce <b>and hang it in the basket [<i>bateraskalin</i>] that is by</b> the animal’s <b>mouth. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says:</b> He does not have to use the same food that the animal is threshing, as he <b>may bring vetches and hang</b> them for <b>it, as vetches are better for it than anything.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> against this from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>cows that tread on produce, one does not violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle, but</b> with regard to <b>those which thresh <i>teruma</i> and tithes, he does violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle. And</b> in the case of <b>a gentile who threshes with the cow of a Jew, he does not violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle, but a Jew who threshes with the cow of a gentile does violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle,</b> as it depends on the person who performs the action, not the identity of the animal’s owner. This presents <b>a difficulty</b> with regard to the ruling concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> in one <i>baraita</i> <b>and</b> the ruling concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> in the other <i>baraita</i>, and there is similarly <b>a difficulty</b> with regard to the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in one <i>baraita</i> <b>and</b> the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in the other <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted,</b> the contradiction between the ruling concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> in one <i>baraita</i> <b>and</b> the ruling concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> in the other <i>baraita</i> is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> the ruling in this <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to</b> actual <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> which may not be fed to a cow, and <b>there,</b> the ruling in that <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to growths of <i>teruma</i>,</b> which have the status of <i>teruma</i> by rabbinic law, and therefore it is permitted to feed them to one’s animal so as not to violate the prohibition against muzzling. <b>But</b> as for the contradiction between the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in one <i>baraita</i> <b>and</b> the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in the other <i>baraita</i>, this is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And if you would say</b> that the contradiction between the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in one <i>baraita</i> <b>and</b> the ruling concerning <b>tithe</b> in the other <i>baraita</i> is <b>also not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> the ruling in this <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to</b> actual <b>tithe,</b> which may not be fed to a cow, and <b>there,</b> the ruling in that <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to growths of tithe,</b> which have the status of tithe by rabbinic law, and therefore it is permitted to feed them to one’s animal in order not to violate the prohibition against muzzling, this answer cannot be accepted. The reason is that <b>granted,</b> the <b>growths of <i>teruma</i></b> are considered like <b><i>teruma</i></b> by rabbinic law, <b>but</b> the <b>growths of tithe are non-sacred</b> foods. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 9:4): The <b>growths of untithed produce and</b> the <b>growths of second tithe</b> are <b>non-sacred.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests a different answer: <b>Rather,</b> this is <b>not difficult.</b> The ruling of <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to first tithe,</b> which is considered the owner’s property, whereas the ruling of <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to second tithe,</b> which is property of the Temple treasury. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that both <b>this</b> ruling <b>and that</b> ruling are stated <b>with regard to second tithe, and</b> it is <b>not difficult,</b> as the ruling of <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>, according to which it is prohibited to feed it to the animal, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> while the ruling of <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which says that one may feed it to the animal, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says that</b> second <b>tithe is property</b> belonging to the <b>Most High,</b> i.e., the owner has only the right to eat the food, and therefore he may not let his cow consume it, whereas <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says that second tithe is non-sacred property.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of a cow that threshes tithes? Tithes are usually separated only after the produce has been threshed and collected into a pile. The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where</b> the separation of tithes performed by the owner <b>preceded</b> the separation of <i>teruma</i> at the stage <b>when</b> the produce was still <b>on the stalks.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara further asks: <b>And according to</b> the explanation that the <i>baraita</i> that permits feeding this produce to one’s animal is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> i.e., that this is referring to second tithe, how is the consumption of this tithe permitted before it enters Jerusalem? <b>But</b> one is <b>required</b> to bring second tithe within the city <b>wall.</b> The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where he threshed inside the wall of Beit Pagei,</b> the outer wall of Jerusalem, which enclosed a semi-rural suburb.

### Part 9
<b>If you wish, say</b> a different answer to the original contradiction between the <i>baraitot</i>: This is <b>not difficult; here,</b> the ruling in this <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to definite tithe,</b> which may not be fed to a cow, whereas <b>there,</b> the ruling in that <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to doubtfully tithed produce [<i>demai</i>],</b> from which one is required to separate tithes by rabbinic law. The Gemara comments: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> answer, i.e., that this <i>baraita</i> is referring to <i>demai</i>, the contradiction between the ruling of this <i>baraita</i> concerning <b><i>teruma</i> and</b> the ruling of that <i>baraita</i> concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> is <b>also not difficult,</b> as one can likewise say that <b>here,</b> the ruling in this <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to definite <i>teruma</i>,</b> and <b>there,</b> the ruling in that <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i> of <i>demai</i>.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to <b><i>demai</i> of tithe, there is</b> such a concept, as the Sages decreed that one must separate tithe from doubtfully tithed produce. <b>But</b> with regard to <b><i>demai</i> of <i>teruma</i>, is there</b> <i>teruma</i> of this kind? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>He,</b> Yoḥanan the High Priest, <b>also annulled the declaration</b> of tithes (Deuteronomy 26:12–19), due to fear that the agricultural <i>halakhot</i> were not being properly observed and the declaration that one has separated his tithe in accordance with Torah law would therefore be false, <b>and he decreed that</b> one must separate <b><i>demai</i></b> of tithe from the produce of one who is unreliable with regard to tithes. He issued this decree <b>because he sent</b> messengers <b>throughout all the borders of Eretz Yisrael and saw that they would separate only the great <i>teruma</i> alone,</b> not tithes. It is clear from here that Jews were not suspected of neglecting the mitzva of <i>teruma</i>, and therefore was no need to separate <i>teruma</i> from <i>demai</i>.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara offers a slightly different answer: It is <b>not difficult; here,</b> the ruling in this <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to definite <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> separated by a Levite from his tithe and given to a priest; <b>there,</b> the ruling in that <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe from <i>demai</i>.</b>

### Part 12
§ The Sages <b>raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> If the animal <b>was eating</b> from the produce it was threshing, <b>and</b> it <b>was excreting diarrhea [<i>matrezet</i>], what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains the sides of the dilemma: Is the reason that one must let the animal eat <b>because</b> the food <b>is good for it, and this</b> produce <b>is</b> evidently <b>not good for it,</b> and therefore the animal should be muzzled to prevent it from harm? <b>Or perhaps</b> the reason for the prohibition against muzzling is <b>that it sees</b> food <b>and suffers</b> when it cannot eat, <b>and this one</b> also <b>sees</b> food <b>and suffers</b> when it cannot eat.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Sheshet said to them: You learned</b> a <i>baraita</i> that provides the answer to your question. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says:</b> One can <b>bring vetches and hang</b> them for <b>it, as vetches are better for it than anything.</b> One can <b>learn from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that the reason is <b>because</b> the food <b>is good for it.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that it is so.

### Part 14
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the possibility <b>that a person can say to a gentile: Muzzle my cow and thresh with it? Do we say</b> that <b>when we state</b> the principle that <b>speaking to a gentile</b> and requesting of him to perform for oneself a task forbidden to a Jew is prohibited by <b>a rabbinic decree, this matter</b> applies <b>only to Shabbat, when</b> the performance of labor is <b>a prohibition</b> that entails <b>stoning, but</b> with regard to <b>muzzling, which</b> is merely a regular <b>prohibition,</b> giving an instruction of this kind to a gentile is <b>not</b> prohibited; <b>or perhaps</b> there <b>is no difference</b> between the prohibitions of Shabbat and other prohibitions in this regard?

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>. <b>A gentile who threshes with the cow of a Jew does not violate</b> the prohibition of: <b>Do not muzzle.</b> One can infer as follows: <b>It is a transgression</b> by Torah law <b>that he does not transgress, but there is a prohibition</b> here by rabbinic law. The Gemara refutes this argument: This is no proof, as <b>by right</b> the <i>baraita</i> should have stated <b>that there is no prohibition</b> here <b>either, but since</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> in <b>the latter clause that a Jew who threshes with the cow of a gentile does violate</b> the prohibition, <b>he taught the first clause</b> in a similar style, with the phrase: <b>He does not violate</b> the prohibition. If so, one cannot reach any conclusions from the wording of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 16
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear, as they sent to Shmuel’s father</b> a halakhic inquiry with regard to <b>these oxen</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC