
### Part 1
it is <b>due to this</b> reason that <b>they reverted</b> to following the statement of the Rabbis, as the sellers were in any event able to renege at any point, while Rabbi Tarfon extended the period during which the buyers could renege on the transaction.

### Part 2
<b>But if you say</b> that the legal status of <b>a seller is also</b> limited <b>like</b> that of <b>a buyer</b> in terms of the period of time during which he may renege, <b>what difference is</b> there <b>to</b> the merchants? <b>Just as the Sages instituted an ordinance on behalf of a buyer</b> enabling him to renege on the transaction, <b>so too, the Sages instituted an ordinance on behalf of a seller.</b> If the time afforded to the seller is equal to the time afforded to the buyer, the fact that Rabbi Tarfon extended this time would not be a reason for the merchants to revert to following the opinion of the Rabbis, as there is a benefit and a loss for the merchants according to both opinions.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>the merchants of Lod, it is rare for them to err,</b> and therefore they preferred limiting the period during which the buyer could renege over extending the period during which they themselves could renege.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>The landlord of Rami bar Ḥama sold a donkey and erred</b> in fixing its price. Rami bar Ḥama <b>encountered him</b> and noticed <b>that he was sad.</b> Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him: Why are you sad?</b> The landlord <b>said to him: I sold a donkey and I erred</b> in fixing its price. Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him: Go</b> and <b>renege</b> on the transaction. The landlord <b>said to him: I have waited more than the period</b> of time <b>that</b> it takes for <b>me to show</b> the merchandise <b>to a merchant or to my relative.</b> Rami bar Ḥama <b>sent</b> the landlord <b>before Rav Naḥman</b> for a ruling and Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard to <b>a buyer, but a seller may always renege</b> on a transaction.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? The Gemara explains: <b>A buyer</b> has <b>his merchandise in his possession;</b> therefore, <b>anywhere that he goes he shows it</b> to those familiar with the market price <b>and they tell him whether he erred</b> or <b>whether he did not err. A seller, who does not have his merchandise in his possession,</b> can ascertain the market price <b>only</b> when <b>merchandise like his merchandise happens to</b> come before <b>him, and</b> only then <b>will he know whether he erred or whether he did not err.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who had silk strips [<i>varshekhei</i>] to sell. He announced</b> that he was selling them for <b>six</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>and</b> they were <b>worth five</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>and if they would give him five and a half</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>he would take</b> it and sell the silk. <b>This man,</b> i.e., a potential buyer, <b>came and said</b> to himself: <b>If I give him five and a half</b> <i>ma’a</i>, it <b>is</b> a case of <b>a waiver,</b> and I will not be entitled to recover the difference. <b>I will give him six</b> <i>ma’a</i> <b>and claim</b> from <b>him by law</b> the return of the sum gained by the exploitation. He did so. The case <b>came before Rava,</b> who <b>said to him:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> of exploitation <b>only with regard to one who buys</b> merchandise <b>from a merchant, but one who buys</b> merchandise <b>from</b> a regular <b>homeowner does not have</b> a claim of <b>exploitation against him.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara relates a similar incident: There was <b>a certain man who was holding jewelry to sell. He announced</b> that he was selling it for <b>sixty</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>and</b> it was <b>worth fifty</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>and if they would give him fifty-five</b> <i>ma’a</i>, <b>he would take</b> it and sell the jewels. <b>This man,</b> i.e., a potential buyer, <b>came and said</b> to himself: <b>If I give him fifty-five</b> <i>ma’a</i>, it <b>is</b> a case of <b>a waiver,</b> and I will not be entitled to recover the difference. <b>I will give him sixty</b> <i>ma’a</i> <b>and claim</b> from <b>him by law</b> the return of the sum gained by the exploitation. He did so. The case <b>came before Rav Ḥisda,</b> who <b>said to him:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> of exploitation <b>only with regard to one who buys</b> merchandise <b>from a merchant, but one who buys</b> merchandise <b>from</b> a regular <b>homeowner does not have</b> a claim of <b>exploitation against him.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Dimi said to</b> Rav Ḥisda: The ruling is <b>correct. And likewise, Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The ruling is <b>correct.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that follows: <b>Just as</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> apply <b>to a layman [<i>lahedyot</i>], so</b> do the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> apply <b>to a merchant? Who is</b> the <b>layman</b> to whom the mishna is referring? Is he <b>not a</b> regular <b>homeowner</b> as opposed to a merchant? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> That mishna is referring <b>to simple linen garments [<i>tzadriyyata</i>],</b> which the homeowner crafts expressly for sale. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>vessels</b> and garments designed for the personal <b>use</b> of a homeowner, <b>which are important to him, he sells them only to</b> receive <b>extra money,</b> as people are generally hesitant to part with their belongings. Therefore, when purchasing an item from a homeowner, a buyer must consider the likelihood that his asking price is greater than the item’s actual worth.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Both the buyer and the seller are</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation. Just as</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> apply <b>to a layman, so</b> do the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> apply <b>to a merchant. Rabbi Yehuda says: There is no exploitation for a merchant,</b> as he is an expert in the market price of merchandise. <b>The one upon whom</b> the exploitation <b>was imposed has the advantage.</b> If he <b>wishes,</b> he can <b>say to</b> the other: <b>Give me</b> back <b>my money</b> and nullify the transaction, <b>or</b> he can say: <b>Give me</b> back the sum <b>that you</b> gained by <b>exploiting me.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived, that both the buyer and the seller are subject to the <i>halakha</i> of exploitation? <b>As the Sages taught</b> concerning the verse: <b>“And if you sell to your colleague an item that is sold,</b> or acquire from your colleague’s hand, <b>you shall not exploit</b> his brother” (Leviticus 25:14). <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> a case <b>where a buyer was exploited. From where</b> do I derive that the <i>halakha</i> is the same in a case where the <b>seller was exploited? The</b> same <b>verse states:</b> “Or acquire from your colleague’s hand, <b>you shall not exploit</b> his brother.”

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: <b>And it was necessary to write</b> the prohibition against exploitation with regard to <b>a buyer, and it was necessary to write</b> the prohibition against exploitation with regard to <b>a seller. As, had the Merciful One written</b> this prohibition only with regard to <b>a seller,</b> one would conclude that it is prohibited for him <b>because he is certain of</b> the value of <b>his merchandise, but</b> with regard to <b>a buyer, who is not certain of</b> the value of the seller’s <b>merchandise, say</b> that <b>the Merciful One did not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> for <b>him</b> to engage in exploitation <b>with</b> the verse <b>“You shall not exploit.”</b>

### Part 12
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> this prohibition only with regard to <b>a buyer,</b> one would conclude that it is prohibited for him <b>because he acquires</b> the item and he benefits from his purchase, <b>as people say:</b> If <b>you purchased</b> an item, <b>you acquired</b> a durable item for yourself. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a seller, who loses</b> from the sale, <b>as people say:</b> One who <b>sells</b> an item <b>loses, say</b> that <b>the Merciful One did not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> for <b>him</b> to engage in exploitation <b>with</b> the verse <b>“You shall not exploit.”</b> Therefore, it was <b>necessary</b> for the Torah to write this prohibition with regard to both parties to the transaction.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: There is no exploitation for a merchant.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise at this statement: <b>Due to</b> the fact <b>that he is a merchant, he is not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation?</b> Anyone could arrive at a mistaken assessment of the value of merchandise.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It is <b>with regard to a merchant</b> who is <b>a trader,</b> who buys and sells merchandise, that <b>they taught</b> the <i>halakha</i>. <b>What is the reason</b> that he is not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation according to Rabbi Yehuda? <b>He knows how much his merchandise is worth, and he waives</b> the sum of the disparity between the value and the price <b>for</b> the buyer. <b>And</b> the reason why <b>he sells</b> the merchandise in <b>that</b> manner, knowing that he is selling it for less than its value, is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that other merchandise happens to</b> become available <b>to him</b> and he needs the money to purchase that item.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But now, in any event, he retracts</b> from the transaction, indicating that he did not waive the sum of the disparity. <b>Rav Ashi said: What</b> is the meaning of: <b>There is no exploitation for a merchant? He is not subject to the principles of exploitation</b> at all, <b>as even</b> if the disparity is <b>less than the measure of exploitation,</b> i.e., less than one-sixth, <b>he may renege</b> on the transaction. Since his entire livelihood is based on the slight profit margin that he earns from each transaction, he does not waive even that sum. The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Naḥman: Rabbi Yehuda says: There is no exploitation for a merchant, because he is expert</b> in these matters.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The one upon whom</b> the exploitation <b>was imposed has the advantage.</b> If he wishes, he can say to the other: Give me back my money and nullify the transaction, or he can say: Give me back the sum that you gained by exploiting me. The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>neither</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan nor</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara explains: <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan,</b> in <b>the mishna</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches:</b> If he <b>wishes,</b> he can say: Give me back my money and nullify the transaction, or he can say: Give me back the sum that you gained by exploiting me. <b>And</b> in <b>the <i>baraita</i></b> (50b) Rabbi Natan <b>does not teach:</b> If he <b>wishes,</b> indicating that the transaction takes effect regardless of his wishes. And <b>if</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi,</b> in <b>the mishna</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>buyer,</b> and in <b>the <i>baraita</i></b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>teaches:</b> In a case where the seller was exploited, the <b>seller</b> is at an advantage, apparently to the exclusion of the buyer.

### Part 18
The Gemara presents <b>a mnemonic</b> device for the Sages who discussed this difficulty: <b><i>Zayin</i>,</b> referring to Rabbi Elazar; <b><i>beit</i>,</b> referring to Rabba; <b><i>reish</i>,</b> referring to Rava; <b><i>shin</i>,</b> referring to Rav Ashi.

### Part 19
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> Concerning <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> of <b>exploitation</b> in the mishna, <b>I do not know who taught it,</b> as it does not correspond to the opinion of any of the Sages. <b>Rabba said: Actually,</b> the mishna <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan,</b> and emend <b>and teach</b> that Rabbi Natan stated <b>in the <i>baraita</i> as well:</b> If he <b>wishes. Rava said: Actually,</b> the mishna <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, and</b> the ruling <b>that</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>omits in the mishna</b> he <b>explicates in the <i>baraita</i>.</b> The mishna and the <i>baraita</i> are complementary. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The language of the mishna <b>is also precise, as</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches: Both the buyer and the seller, and</b> then he proceeds to <b>elucidate</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of the buyer. Learn from it</b> that the <i>tanna</i> indeed <b>omitted</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of the seller,</b> but he did not exclude the seller from the <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the case.

### Part 20
§ <b>It was stated</b> that there is a dispute among <i>amora’im</i>. With regard to <b>one who says to another:</b> I will be party to this sale <b>on the condition that you have no</b> claim of <b>exploitation against me,</b> even if you are exploited, <b>Rav says:</b> The exploited party <b>has</b> a claim of <b>exploitation against him, and Shmuel says: He does not have</b> a claim of <b>exploitation against him.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>Rav stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, and Shmuel stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 21
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who says to a woman: You are hereby betrothed to me on the condition that you do not have</b> a claim <b>against me</b> for <b>food, clothing, and conjugal rights</b> that a husband is obligated to provide his wife by Torah law, <b>she is betrothed</b> to him <b>and his condition is void;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir,</b> who maintains that a person cannot stipulate a condition that negates obligations by Torah law. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda says: In monetary matters,</b> as opposed to personal obligations, one’s <b>condition is in effect.</b>

### Part 22
The Gemara refutes this parallel. <b>Rav</b> could have <b>said to you: I stated</b> my opinion <b>even in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as <b>Rabbi Yehuda states</b> his opinion that a stipulation is valid in monetary matters <b>only there, where</b> a woman <b>knows</b> that she is entitled to food and clothing <b>but waives</b> her rights to them.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC