
### Part 1
<b>Lend me a <i>kor</i> of wheat, and</b> the lender may <b>set a price for him,</b> stating that the borrower must repay the wheat in the future according to the value of wheat at the time of the loan. If, by the time the borrower must repay the loan, the wheat <b>depreciates</b> in value, he <b>gives</b> the lender a quantity of <b>wheat</b> equivalent to what he borrowed, and if it <b>appreciates,</b> he <b>gives</b> the <b>value of</b> the wheat he borrowed as per the market rate when he borrowed it, as agreed, but no more.

### Part 2
The Gemara questions this ruling: If the price of wheat depreciates, why should it be permitted for the borrower to pay him with wheat worth less than the value of the amount he borrowed? <b>But he fixed</b> a price at the time of the loan, and therefore the borrower owes him this amount of money. <b>Rav Sheshet said: This</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: If</b> the lender <b>did not set</b> a price but merely lent him wheat, and it <b>depreciates</b> in value, the lender <b>takes his wheat,</b> as they did not agree that the borrower must repay the wheat according to its value at the time that the loan was taken out. But if it <b>appreciates</b> in value, the borrower <b>gives</b> the <b>value of</b> the wheat he borrowed as per the market rate when he borrowed it, in order to avoid the payment of interest.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may not say to another: Lend me a <i>kor</i> of wheat and I will give</b> it back <b>to you at</b> the time the wheat is brought to <b>the granary,</b> as the wheat may increase in value, which would mean that when he gives him back a <i>kor</i> of wheat at the time the wheat is brought to the granary it is worth more than the value of the loan, and he therefore will have paid interest. <b>But he may say to him: Lend me</b> a <i>kor</i> of wheat for a short period of time, e.g., <b>until my son comes or until I find</b> the <b>key,</b> as there is no concern about a change in price during such a short interval of time. <b>And Hillel prohibits</b> the practice even in this case. <b>And Hillel would similarly say: A woman may not lend a loaf</b> of bread <b>to another unless she establishes its monetary</b> value, <b>lest the wheat appreciate</b> in value before she returns it, <b>and they will</b> therefore <b>have come to</b> transgress the prohibition of <b>interest.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Huna said:</b> One who <b>has a <i>se’a</i></b> of an item in his house <b>may borrow a <i>se’a</i></b> of that item. Since he has available a <i>se’a</i> that he could give back right away, he may borrow one <i>se’a</i>, and similarly, if he has <b>two <i>se’a</i></b> available he <b>may borrow two <i>se’a</i>. Rabbi Yitzḥak says: Even if he has</b> only one <b><i>se’a</i>,</b> he <b>may borrow several <i>kor</i></b> in reliance <b>upon it.</b> Since he can repay part of the loan immediately, and as the market value has yet to change there is only a concern about future interest, this concern is mitigated when it does not apply to the entire loan.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>in support of Rabbi Yitzḥak’s</b> ruling: If one <b>does not have a drop of wine</b> or if <b>he does not have a drop of oil,</b> he may not borrow wine or oil. <b>Consequently,</b> by inference it can be derived: If <b>he does have</b> a drop of wine or oil, he <b>may borrow many drops</b> in reliance <b>upon it,</b> as the <i>tanna</i> is certainly not referring to a case where he borrows just a few meager drops.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And Hillel prohibits</b> this practice. <b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with the statement of Hillel.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>But the <i>halakha</i> is not,</b> in fact, <b>in accordance with</b> the ruling of Shmuel.

### Part 7
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>And Hillel would similarly say: A woman may not lend</b> even a loaf of bread due to concern that she will violate the prohibition of interest. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: This</b> is <b>the statement of Hillel, but the Rabbis say</b> that <b>one may borrow</b> various types of foods <b>without specification and repay</b> them <b>without specification.</b> If neighbors are not particular with one another about these items, there is no concern about interest, in contrast to Hillel’s opinon.

### Part 8
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> With regard to the <b>members of a group</b> of people that eat together <b>who are particular with each other</b> and insist that each pay for precisely what he ate, if they dine together on Shabbat, <b>they transgress</b> a prohibition <b>with regard to</b> the strictures of <b>measure, and with regard to</b> the strictures of <b>weight, and with regard to</b> the strictures <b>of counting,</b> all of which are calculations that are forbidden on Shabbat. <b>And they transgress</b> a prohibition <b>with regard to lending and repaying on a Festival, and according to the statement of Hillel,</b> they <b>also</b> transgress the prohibition <b>with regard to interest.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It is <b>permitted</b> for <b>Torah scholars to borrow from one another with interest.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? It is because <b>they are</b> fully <b>aware that interest is prohibited,</b> and therefore they do not intend the loan to be a formal business transaction. They willingly forgo the additional payments to each other at the outset, <b>and</b> the extra payment <b>is a gift that they give one another.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Shmuel said to Avuh bar Ihi: Lend me one hundred peppers</b> in exchange <b>for 120 peppers</b> that I will give you at a later date. <b>And</b> you should know that this matter is <b>fitting</b> and appropriate, as I intend that the additional twenty peppers be a gift.

### Part 10
Similarly, <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: It is permitted for a person to lend to his sons and the members of his household with interest, in order to have them taste the taste of interest</b> so that they will understand how interest increases and how hard it is to repay it, which will discourage them from ever borrowing with interest again. The Gemara comments: <b>But</b> this <b>is not correct, because</b> the members of his household <b>may become corrupted</b> by doing so and act similarly with others in cases when there is no justification for such behavior.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may say to another: Weed</b> the wild growths from my field <b>with me</b> now, <b>and I will weed</b> your field <b>with you</b> at a later stage, or: <b>Till</b> my field <b>with me</b> today <b>and I will till with you</b> on a different day. <b>But he may not say to him: Weed with me</b> today <b>and I will till with you</b> a different day, or: <b>Till with me</b> today <b>and I will weed with you,</b> as due to the different nature of the tasks it is possible that one of them will have to work harder than the other did, which is a type of interest, since he repaid him with additional labor.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC