
### Part 1
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>actually</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. Is it taught</b> in the mishna that the items <b>are his? It is taught</b> that <b>he is not obligated to proclaim</b> his find. He may not keep them, <b>but he shall place</b> the items in his possession <b>and a Jew will come and provide a distinguishing mark</b> to describe the items <b>and take</b> them.

### Part 2
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that <b>which Rav Asi says:</b> If <b>one found a barrel of wine in a city whose</b> population has <b>a majority of gentiles,</b> keeping the barrel <b>is permitted in terms of</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>finding</b> lost items because it presumably belonged to a gentile, <b>and</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from the wine <b>is prohibited,</b> as it is presumed to be wine of a gentile. If <b>a Jew came and provided a distinguishing mark</b> to describe <b>it, drinking</b> the wine <b>is permitted for its finder,</b> as it proved to be the wine of a Jew. Nevertheless, it belongs to the finder, because the owner despaired of recovering a barrel misplaced in a public area.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains the proof: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this statement of Rav Asi? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar. Conclude from it that when Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar stated</b> his opinion, it was only with regard to a place <b>where there is a majority of gentiles; but</b> in a place <b>where there is a majority of Jews,</b> the owner does <b>not</b> despair of recovering his lost item. The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>Actually, I will say to you</b> that <b>even</b> with regard to a place <b>where there is a majority of Jews, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar also stated</b> his opinion, <b>and Rav Asi holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar <b>in one</b> case, that of a place where there is a majority of gentiles, <b>and disagrees with him in one</b> case, that of a place where there is a majority of Jews.

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And once</b> it was established <b>that</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from the wine <b>is prohibited,</b> then with regard to the fact that it <b>is permitted in terms of</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>finding</b> lost items, <b>for what</b> matter is that <b><i>halakha</i></b> relevant? <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> It is relevant with regard <b>to</b> deriving benefit from <b>its container,</b> which is permitted.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who found four dinars that were bound in a cloth and cast into the Biran River. He came before Rav Yehuda</b> and asked how to proceed. Rav Yehuda <b>said: Go proclaim</b> your finding. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it</b> a case of an item lost <b>in the tide of the sea</b> that should therefore belong to the finder? The Gemara answers: <b>The Biran River is different. Since it contains obstacles,</b> the owner <b>does not despair</b> of recovering the lost item. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it</b> a place where the <b>majority</b> of the population <b>is gentiles? Conclude from it that</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar even in</b> a place where there is <b>a majority of gentiles.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The Biran River is different, as Jews dammed it and Jews dredge it. Since Jews dammed it, say that</b> the coins <b>fell from a Jew, and since Jews dredge it,</b> the owner of the coins <b>does not despair</b> of recovering them.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yehuda was moving along behind Mar Shmuel in the market</b> where <b>pounded grain</b> was sold. Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> Shmuel: If <b>one found a purse [<i>arnakei</i>] here, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Shmuel <b>said to him</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is as the mishna states: <b>These</b> belong <b>to him.</b> Rav Yehuda asked him: If <b>a Jew came and provided a distinguishing mark</b> to describe it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Shmuel <b>said to him:</b> The finder is <b>obligated to return</b> it. Rav Yehuda asked: These are <b>two</b> contradictory rulings. Shmuel <b>said to him:</b> By law, it belongs to him. When I said the finder is obligated to return it if he learns the identity of the owner, that was <b>beyond the letter of the law.</b> This is <b>like that</b> incident <b>where Shmuel’s father found these donkeys in the desert and returned them to their owner after</b> the passage of <b>twelve months of the year,</b> as he acted <b>beyond the letter of the law.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: <b>Rava was moving along behind Rav Naḥman in the tanner’s market, and some say in the marketplace</b> frequented by <b>the Sages.</b> Rava <b>said to</b> Rav Naḥman: If <b>one found a purse here, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Rav Naḥman <b>said to him</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is as the mishna states: <b>These</b> belong <b>to him.</b> Rava asked him: If <b>a Jew came and provided a distinguishing mark</b> to describe it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Rav Naḥman <b>said to him</b> that in this case as well, the <i>halakha</i> is as the mishna states: <b>These</b> belong <b>to him.</b> Rava asked: <b>But isn’t</b> the owner justifiably <b>standing and screaming</b> that the purse belongs to him? Rav Naḥman said to him: <b>He becomes as</b> one who <b>screams</b> to no avail <b>about his house that collapsed or about his ship that sank in the sea.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain kite that took meat in the marketplace and cast it among the palm trees of the house of bar Maryon.</b> The one who found the meat <b>came before Abaye</b> to ask how to proceed. Abaye <b>said to him: Go take</b> it <b>for yourself.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t</b> the marketplace of kosher meat a place where there is <b>a majority of Jews? Conclude from it that</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar even in</b> a place where there is <b>a majority of Jews.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>A kite is different, as</b> an item taken by a kite is <b>similar</b> to a lost item swept away <b>in the tide of the sea.</b> The Gemara raises another issue: <b>But doesn’t Rav say: Meat that was obscured from sight</b> and unsupervised for a period of time is <b>forbidden,</b> as its source is unknown? The Gemara answers: This is a case where the finder <b>stands and sees</b> the meat from the moment that it was taken by the kite until it was cast among the trees.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina found a slaughtered young goat between Tiberias and Tzippori and</b> the Sages <b>permitted it to him. Rabbi Ami said:</b> The Sages <b>permitted it to him in terms of</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>finding</b> lost items <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar,</b> and they permitted it to him <b>in terms of</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>slaughter</b> of kosher animals, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥananya, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case <b>where one’s young goats and roosters were lost,</b> and the owner <b>went and found them slaughtered, Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> the meat <b>forbidden, and Rabbi Ḥananya, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, deems</b> it <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: The statement of Rabbi Yehuda appears</b> to be correct in a case <b>where he found</b> the slaughtered animals <b>in a garbage dump,</b> as the concern is that they were thrown away because the slaughter was unfit. <b>And the statement of Rabbi Ḥananya, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, appears correct</b> in a case <b>where he found them in the house.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that</b> the Sages <b>permitted</b> the meat <b>to him in terms of</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>slaughter,</b> apparently, this place is one where there is <b>a majority of Jews. Conclude from it that</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar even in</b> a place where there is <b>a majority of Jews. Rava said:</b> It is a place where there is <b>a majority of gentiles but</b> the <b>majority of slaughterers are Jews.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ami found slaughtered fledglings between Tiberias and Tzippori. He came before Rabbi Asi</b> to ask how to proceed, <b>and some say</b> he came <b>before Rabbi Yoḥanan, and some say</b> he came to <b>the study hall. And they said to him: Go take</b> it <b>for yourself. Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa found a skein</b> of thread <b>from which a net was woven. He came before Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> to ask how to proceed, <b>and some say</b> he came to <b>the study hall. And they said to him: Go take</b> it <b>for yourself,</b> because he found it in a place frequented by the multitudes.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And</b> for <b>these</b> found items, one is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find: If <b>one found produce inside a vessel, or a vessel by itself; coins inside a pouch, or a pouch by itself; piles of produce; piles of coins,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC