
### Part 1
The early commentaries ask why this chapter, which discusses details of the <i>halakhot</i> of found items, precedes the second chapter, which discusses the fundamental <i>halakhot</i> of found items.<br><i>Tosafot</i> explain that as tractate <i>Bava Metzia</i> follows tractate <i>Bava Kamma</i>, the <i>halakhot</i> of found items are elucidated in this chapter as a continuation of the topics discussed in the last chapter of <i>Bava Kamma</i>, which discussed the division of items between litigants by means of an oath, which is also the ruling in the mishna here (see <i>Shita Mekubbetzet</i>). The Rosh explains that because there is a suspicion of theft in this case, these matters are juxtaposed with the <i>halakhot</i> of theft, which are described at length in <i>Bava Kamma</i>.<br><br><strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>two</b> people came to court <b>holding a garment,</b> and <b>this</b> one, the first litigant, <b>says: I found it, and that</b> one, the second litigant, <b>says: I found it; this</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine;</b> how does the court adjudicate this case? <b>This</b> one <b>takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than half of it, and that</b> one <b>takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than half of it, and they divide</b> it.

### Part 2
If <b>this</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: Half of it is mine,</b> since they both agree that half of the cloak belongs to one of them, the conflict between them is only about the other half. Therefore, <b>the one who says: All of it is mine, takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than three parts,</b> i.e., three-fourths, <b>of it, and the one who says: Half of it is mine, takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than one-quarter of it. This</b> one <b>takes three parts, and that</b> one <b>takes one-quarter.</b>

### Part 3
If <b>two</b> people <b>were sitting</b> in a riding position <b>on</b> the back of <b>an animal,</b> e.g., a donkey or camel, <b>or one was sitting</b> in a riding position on the animal <b>and one was leading</b> it by its halter, and <b>this</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine,</b> how does the court adjudicate this case? <b>This</b> one <b>takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than half of it, and that</b> one <b>takes an oath that he does not have</b> ownership of <b>less than half of it, and they divide</b> it.

### Part 4
<b>When they admit</b> to the validity of each other’s claims <b>or when they</b> each <b>have witnesses</b> attesting to their claims, <b>they divide</b> the disputed item <b>without</b> taking <b>an oath,</b> as an oath is administered only in a case where the parties have no other way to prove their claims.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the <i>tanna</i> <b>to teach</b> two separate claims made by each party? Why does the <i>tanna</i> say both: <b>This</b> one <b>says: I found it, and that</b> one <b>says: I found it;</b> and in addition: <b>This</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine? Let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach one</b> case. The Gemara answers: The correct understanding of the mishna is that <b>it teaches one</b> claim of each party, as their claims were as follows: <b>This</b> one <b>says: I found it and all of it is mine, and that</b> one <b>says: I found it and all of it is mine.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> a case where each one merely claims: <b>I found it, and I would know that</b> the intention of each litigant is to claim: <b>All of it is mine.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>would teach</b> only that each one claimed: <b>I found it, I would say</b> that <b>what</b> is the meaning of the claim: I <b>found it?</b> It means: I <b>saw it.</b> In other words, he is claiming that he saw the item first, and he believes that <b>even though it did not reach his possession, he acquired</b> it <b>through mere sight.</b> Since it would have been possible to think that this is an effective claim, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that the litigant states definitively: <b>All of it is mine,</b> to teach <b>that</b> one <b>does not acquire</b> a lost item <b>through sight</b> alone.

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges this explanation: <b>But how can you say</b> that <b>what</b> the term: I <b>found it,</b> means is actually: I <b>saw it? But didn’t Rabbenai say</b> in interpreting the verse: “And so shall you do with every lost item of your brother’s, which he has lost, and you have found it” (Deuteronomy 22:3), that <b>“and you have found it” indicates that it came into his possession?</b> The term find in the Torah refers exclusively to a situation where the item is in the possession of the finder.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>Indeed,</b> the phrase <b>“and you have found it” in the verse</b> certainly <b>indicates that it came into his possession. But</b> one might say that the <b><i>tanna</i> employed colloquial language</b> in the mishna. And in colloquial language, <b>once</b> a person <b>sees</b> an item, <b>he says: I found it, even if it did not</b> yet <b>come into his possession,</b> because he believes that <b>he acquired</b> the item <b>through mere sight.</b> Since it would have been possible to understand the claim of: I found it, in this manner, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that the litigant states definitively: <b>All of it is mine,</b> to teach <b>that</b> one <b>does not acquire</b> a lost item <b>through sight</b> alone.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if that was the objective of the <i>tanna</i>, <b>let him teach</b> that each party need only state: <b>All of it is mine, and</b> the litigant would <b>not need</b> to say: <b>I found it.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> the <i>tanna</i> had <b>taught</b> that it is sufficient for each party to claim only: <b>All of it is mine, I would say</b> that <b>in general, when</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that one claims: I <b>found it,</b> he means that the finder <b>acquires</b> the item <b>through mere sight.</b> Therefore, he <b>taught</b> that the litigants claimed: I <b>found it, and</b> he <b>then taught</b> that the litigants claimed: <b>All of it is mine,</b> to teach that only when the litigants each make both of these claims does the court divide the item, <b>as</b> from <b>the superfluous</b> expression in the <b>mishna he teaches us that one does not acquire</b> the item through <b>sight</b> alone.

### Part 10
After explaining the viability of this interpretation, the Gemara asks: <b>But how can you say</b> that the mishna <b>is teaching one</b> claim of each party? <b>But doesn’t</b> the mishna <b>teach: This</b> one says, <b>and</b> again: <b>This</b> one says? In other words, the mishna writes: <b>This</b> one <b>says: I found it, and that</b> one <b>says: I found it;</b> and it states additionally: <b>This</b> one <b>says: All of it is mine,</b> and that one says: All of it is mine. From the fact that the <i>tanna</i> introduced each of the claims with the phrase: This one says, it is apparent that they are two separate claims, not one compound claim.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa said, and some say</b> it was said by <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi, and some say</b> it was <b>an unattributed [<i>kedi</i>]</b> statement: <b>The first clause,</b> where each party says: I found it, is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>a found item,</b> where two people found one item. <b>And the latter clause,</b> where each party says: All of it is mine, is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>buying and selling,</b> where each party claims that he is the one who bought the item from its seller.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to teach its ruling both with regard to a found item and with regard to a purchase.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC