
### Part 1
<b>and a town scribe</b> who drafts documents on behalf on the local residents, <b>all of these are considered forewarned.</b> Therefore, any loss incurred due to them is deducted from their wages, and they are fined without the need for prior warning. <b>The principle of</b> this <b>matter</b> is: With regard to <b>any loss that is not recoverable they are considered forewarned.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain planter who said to</b> the owner of the field: <b>Give me</b> the value of <b>my enhancement because I wish to ascend to Eretz Yisrael.</b> The owner <b>came</b> for a ruling <b>before Rav Pappa bar Shmuel,</b> who <b>said to him: Give</b> the planter <b>the value of his enhancement. Rava said to</b> Rav Pappa bar Shmuel: Did <b>he</b> alone <b>enhance</b> the field, while <b>the land did not enhance it?</b> He cannot be credited with all the improvement. Rav Pappa bar Shmuel <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>I am telling you</b> that he is entitled to <b>half</b> the value of <b>the enhancement.</b> Rava <b>said to him: Until now the owner of the land would take half and the planter</b> would take <b>half,</b> while the planter would work the field. <b>Now</b> the owner <b>also needs to give a portion to the sharecropper,</b> so that the sharecropper will continue working the field. Rav Pappa bar Shmuel <b>said to him: I am telling you</b> to give him <b>one-quarter of</b> the value of <b>the enhancement,</b> half of the sum to which he is entitled.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi thought to say</b> that when he referred to one-quarter he meant <b>one-quarter that is one-sixth,</b> i.e., one-quarter of the sum due to the owner, as the sum due to the owner is two-thirds of the entire yield. This payment would therefore amount to one-sixth of the total. <b>As Rav Minyumi, son of Rav Naḥumi, said: In a location where the planter takes half</b> the fruit <b>and the sharecropper</b> takes <b>one-third, with regard to a planter who wants to leave, we give him</b> his share of the value of <b>the enhancement and remove him</b> in such a manner <b>so that the homeowner should suffer no loss.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Granted, if you say</b> that he meant <b>one-quarter that is one-sixth,</b> this is <b>well</b> and the calculations are in order, <b>but if you say</b> he referred to <b>an actual quarter, the homeowner suffers the loss of half of one-sixth.</b> This is because if the owner had paid the planter initially he would have given him only one-half, whereas now he must give the planter one-quarter and the sharecropper one-third. He thereby pays an extra twelfth.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Yosef, said to Rav Ashi: Let</b> the planter <b>say to</b> the owner: <b>You give your portion to the sharecropper, and I will do what I wish with my portion.</b> I performed my half of the work properly, so why should I suffer a loss because you want to pay the sharecropper? Rav Ashi <b>said</b> to him: <b>When you reach</b> the tractate of: <b>The slaughter of sacrificial</b> animals, i.e., tractate <i>Zevaḥim</i>, <b>come and ask</b> this difficulty <b>to me.</b> In other words, your question is a good one, worthy of a difficult tractate full of complex reasoning such as <i>Zevaḥim</i>.

### Part 6
With regard to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself, Rav Minyumi, son of Rav Naḥumi, said: In a location where the planter takes half</b> the fruit <b>and the sharecropper one-third,</b> with regard to <b>a planter who wants to leave, we give him</b> his share of the value of <b>the enhancement and remove him</b> in such a manner <b>so that the homeowner should suffer no loss. Rav Minyumi, son of Rav Naḥumi,</b> further <b>said:</b> With regard to <b>an old vine</b> in a vineyard, the planter receives <b>half.</b> Although he did not plant the vine, since he was placed in charge of the entire vineyard, he receives a portion of that which was there before. If <b>a river flooded</b> the vineyard and the owner and the planter come to divide the trees that fell down, the planter receives <b>one-quarter.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who mortgaged an orchard to another,</b> i.e., the creditor, <b>for ten years</b> in order that the latter should use the profits gained from the orchard as repayment of the debt. <b>But</b> the orchard <b>aged after five years</b> and no longer produced quality fruit. Consequently, the only way to proceed was to cut down its trees and sell them as wood. <b>Abaye said:</b> This wood <b>is</b> considered as <b>produce</b> of the orchard, and therefore the creditor is entitled to cut them down and sell them. <b>Rava said:</b> The wood <b>is</b> classified as <b>principal</b> and is therefore viewed as part of the orchard itself. Consequently, the creditor has no rights to the wood itself, <b>but</b> other <b>land</b> is <b>purchased with</b> the profits from the sale of the wood <b>and</b> the creditor <b>consumes the produce</b> of that land until the debt is repaid.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> against this from a <i>baraita</i> that discusses the <i>halakhot</i> of a mortgage: If <b>the tree dried up or was chopped down,</b> it is <b>forbidden</b> for <b>both</b> the creditor and the debtor to take <b>it</b> for themselves. <b>How</b> should <b>they proceed?</b> It <b>is sold for wood, and land should be purchased with</b> the proceeds, <b>and he,</b> i.e., the creditor, <b>consumes the produce</b> from that land. The Gemara clarifies: <b>What, is it not</b> referring to <b>a dry</b> tree that is <b>similar</b> to one <b>that was chopped down,</b> in that <b>just as</b> the tree <b>was chopped down at its</b> proper <b>time, so too,</b> the tree <b>dried at its</b> proper <b>time? And</b> yet the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>land should be purchased with</b> the money <b>and</b> the creditor <b>consumes the produce. Apparently,</b> the wood <b>is</b> considered part of the <b>principal,</b> not the profits. This supports Rava’s opinion and presents a difficulty to Abaye.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>No,</b> the <b>chopped-down</b> tree mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> is <b>similar to</b> the <b>dry</b> one: <b>Just as</b> that tree <b>dried up before its time, so too,</b> this one <b>was chopped down before its time.</b> Since this did not occur naturally, the wood is classified as produce; had the orchard dried up at the expected time, its trees would be considered as part of the land.

### Part 10
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof to Rava’s opinion from a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 79b): If a woman after her marriage had <b>old vines and olive</b> trees that were <b>bequeathed to her</b> by means of inheritance,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC