
### Part 1
<b>shall be called a wise [<i>ḥakim</i>]</b> physician, <b>but he shall not be called rabbi, and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s <b>convalescence shall be through him.</b> I also saw written there: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and Rabbi Natan</b> are <b>the end of the Mishna,</b> i.e., the last of the <i>tanna’im</i>, the redactors of the Mishna. <b>Rav Ashi and Ravina</b> are <b>the end of instruction,</b> i.e., the end of the period of the <i>amora’im</i>, the redacting of the Talmud, which occurred after the period of the <i>tanna’im</i>.

### Part 2
<b>And your mnemonic</b> to remember that Rav Ashi and Ravina redacted the Talmud is the verse: <b>“Until I entered into the sanctuary [<i>mikdashei</i>] of God, and considered [<i>avina</i>] their end”</b> (Psalms 73:17). The sanctuary, <i>mikdashei</i>, alludes to Rav Ashi, while the term <i>avina</i> alludes to Ravina, which is a contraction of Rav Avina. The phrase: Their end, is interpreted as a reference to the redacting of the Talmud.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara relates another story discussing the greatness of the Sages. <b>Rav Kahana said: Rav Ḥama, son of the daughter of Ḥasa, told me</b> that <b>Rabba bar Naḥmani died due to</b> the fear of a decree of religious <b>persecution.</b> The Gemara explains: His enemies <b>accused him [<i>akhalu beih kurtza</i>]</b> of disloyalty <b>in the king’s palace,</b> as they <b>said: There is one man from</b> among <b>the Jews who exempts twelve thousand Jewish men from the king’s head tax</b> two months a year, <b>one month in the summer and one month in the winter.</b> Since many people would study in Rabba’s study hall during the months of Adar and Elul, he was being blamed for preventing those people from working during those months.

### Part 4
<b>They sent a messenger [<i>peristaka</i>] of the king after him, but he</b> was <b>not</b> able to <b>find him.</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>fled and went from Pumbedita to Akra, from Akra to Agma, from Agma to Shiḥin, from Shiḥin to Tzerifa, from Tzerifa to Eina Demayim, and from Eina Demayim</b> back <b>to Pumbedita.</b> Ultimately, <b>he was found in Pumbedita,</b> as <b>the king’s messenger arrived</b> by chance <b>at that same inn where Rabba</b> bar Naḥmani was hiding. The inn attendants <b>placed a tray before</b> the messenger <b>and gave him two cups to drink. They</b> then <b>removed the tray from before him and his face was</b> miraculously <b>turned backward.</b>

### Part 5
The attendants <b>said to</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani: <b>What should we do with him? He is the king’s man,</b> and we cannot leave him like this. Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>said to them: Place a tray before him and give him one cup to drink, and</b> then <b>remove the tray from before him and he will be healed. They did this, and he was healed.</b> The messenger <b>said: I am certain that the man I seek is here,</b> as this unnatural event must have befallen me on his account. <b>He searched for</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>and found</b> out where he was. The messenger <b>said</b> that they should tell Rabba bar Naḥmani: <b>I will leave this</b> inn and will not disclose your location. Even <b>if they will kill that man,</b> i.e., me, <b>I will not disclose</b> your location. <b>But if they will beat him,</b> me, <b>I will disclose</b> your whereabouts, as I cannot bear being tortured.

### Part 6
With that guarantee, <b>they brought</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>before</b> the messenger. <b>They took him into</b> a small <b>vestibule [<i>le’idrona</i>] and closed the door before him.</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>prayed for mercy,</b> and <b>the wall crumbled. He fled and went to</b> hide in <b>a swamp. He was sitting on the stump of a palm</b> tree <b>and studying</b> Torah alone. At that moment, the Sages <b>in the heavenly academy were disagreeing</b> with regard to a <i>halakha</i> of leprosy. In general, a leprous spot includes two signs of impurity, a bright white spot and a white hair. The basic <i>halakha</i> is that <b>if</b> the <b>snow-white leprous sore [<i>baheret</i>] preceded the white hair</b> then the afflicted person is <b>ritually impure, but if the white hair preceded the <i>baheret</i>,</b> he is <b>pure.</b>

### Part 7
The heavenly debate concerned a case of <b>uncertainty</b> as to which came first, the spot or the hair. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, says:</b> The individual is <b>pure, but every</b> other member of <b>the heavenly academy says:</b> He is <b>impure. And they said: Who can arbitrate</b> in this dispute? They agreed that <b>Rabba bar Naḥmani</b> should <b>arbitrate, as Rabba bar Naḥmani</b> once <b>said: I am preeminent in</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>leprosy</b> and <b>I am preeminent in</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity imparted by <b>tents.</b>

### Part 8
<b>They sent a messenger</b> from heaven <b>after him</b> to take his soul up to the heavenly academy, but <b>the Angel of Death was unable to approach</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani, <b>as his mouth did not cease from his</b> Torah <b>study. In the meantime, a wind blew and howled between the branches.</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>thought</b> that the noise was due to <b>an infantry battalion [<i>gunda</i>]</b> about to capture him. <b>He said: Let that man,</b> i.e., me, <b>die and not be given over to the hands of the government.</b> The Angel of Death was therefore able to take his soul.

### Part 9
<b>As he was dying, he said</b> in response to the dispute in heaven: It is <b>pure;</b> it is <b>pure. A Divine Voice emerged</b> from heaven <b>and said: Happy are you, Rabba bar Naḥmani, as your body is pure and your soul left</b> you <b>with</b> the word: <b>Pure. A note [<i>pitka</i>] fell from heaven</b> and landed <b>in</b> the academy of <b>Pumbedita.</b> The note read: <b>Rabba bar Naḥmani was summoned to the heavenly academy,</b> i.e., he has died. <b>Abaye and Rava and all of the</b> other <b>Rabbis went out to tend to his</b> burial; however, <b>they did not know the location of his</b> body. <b>They went to the swamp</b> and <b>saw birds forming a shade and hovering</b> over a certain spot. The Rabbis <b>said:</b> We can <b>conclude from this</b> that <b>he is there.</b>

### Part 10
The Rabbis <b>lamented him for three days and three nights. A note fell</b> from heaven, upon which was written: <b>Anyone who removes himself</b> from the lamentations <b>shall be ostracized.</b> Accordingly, <b>they lamented him</b> for <b>seven days.</b> Another <b>note fell</b> from heaven, stating: <b>Go to your homes in peace.</b>

### Part 11
On <b>that day when</b> Rabba bar Naḥmani <b>died, a hurricane lifted a certain Arab [<i>taya’a</i>]</b> merchant <b>while he was riding</b> his <b>camel.</b> The hurricane carried him <b>from one side of the Pappa River and threw him onto the other side. He said: What is this?</b> Those present <b>said to him: Rabba bar Naḥmani has died. He said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe! The entire world is Yours and Rabba bar Naḥmani is</b> also <b>Yours. You are to Rabba and Rabba is to You,</b> i.e., you are beloved to each other. If so, <b>why are You destroying the world</b> on his account? <b>The storm subsided.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara concludes its earlier discussion of obese Sages (84a). <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Ḥalafta was obese. One day he was</b> particularly <b>hot</b> and <b>went and sat on a mountain boulder</b> to cool himself off. <b>He said to his daughter: My daughter, fan me with a fan, and</b> as a gift <b>I will give you packages of spikenard. In the meantime,</b> a strong <b>wind blew. He said: How many packages of spikenard</b> do I owe <b>to the overseers of this</b> wind?

### Part 13
§ The Gemara returns to its discussion of the mishna (83a), which teaches that an employer must provide his laborers with sustenance, <b>all in accordance with the regional custom.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is added</b> by the inclusive term: <b>All?</b> The Gemara answers: This serves <b>to include a place where it is customary</b> for the laborers to <b>eat bread and drink a quarter-</b><i>log</i> <b>[<i>anpaka</i>] of wine. As, if</b> in such a case the employer were to <b>say to them: Arise early</b> in the morning <b>and I will bring you</b> this sustenance, so as not to waste work time, <b>they may say to him: It is not in your power</b> to compel us to do so.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that there was <b>an incident involving Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Matya, who said to his son: Go out and hire</b> laborers for us. His son hired the laborers and stipulated that he would provide sustenance for them. The Gemara asks: After the mishna has stated that all practices are in accordance with the regional custom, how can it cite this <b>incident,</b> which seems <b>to contradict</b> the previous ruling, as Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Matya and his son did not follow the regional custom? The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what it <b>is teaching:</b> All practices are in accordance with the regional custom, <b>but if</b> the employer pledged to provide sustenance for them,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC