
### Part 1
<b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If the surrounding fields were planted with <b>a different</b> type of <b>seed, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Likewise, is <b>wheat, in relation to barley,</b> considered <b>like a different</b> type of <b>seed or not?</b> Furthermore, if <b>the entire world,</b> i.e., all the surrounding fields, were blighted <b>by windblasts and his</b> was affected <b>by mildew;</b> or <b>alternatively,</b> if the fields of <b>the entire world</b> were struck <b>by mildew, and his</b> were blighted <b>with windblasts, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara responds: No resolution is found to any of these dilemmas, and the dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
The Gemara poses another question: If the owner <b>said to</b> the tenant farmer: <b>Plant</b> the field with <b>wheat, and he went and planted it</b> with <b>barley, and most of the valley was wind blasted, and these</b> fields with <b>barley of his were also wind blasted, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Do we say that</b> the tenant farmer can <b>say to him:</b> Even <b>if I had planted it</b> with <b>wheat</b> it <b>would likewise have been wind blasted,</b> as all the surrounding fields suffered the same fate, <b>or perhaps</b> the owner <b>can say to him: Had you planted it</b> with <b>wheat,</b> the following verse <b>would have been fulfilled for me: “And you shall decree a matter and it will be established for you,</b> and the light shall shine upon your ways” (Job 22:28), since you might have merited greater success by following my wishes.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: It <b>stands to reason that</b> the owner can <b>say to him: Had you planted it</b> with <b>wheat</b> it <b>would have fulfilled for me: “And you shall decree a matter and it will be established for you, and the light shall shine upon your ways.”</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara presents another question: If <b>all the fields of the owner of the land were wind blasted and this</b> one <b>was also wind blasted with them, but the majority of the valley was not wind blasted, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since the majority of the valley was not wind blasted</b> the tenant farmer does <b>not subtract for the owner</b> the amount owed for his tenancy, as this is not a regional disaster, <b>or perhaps</b> could one claim that <b>since all the lands</b> of the owner <b>were wind blasted</b> the tenant <b>can say to</b> the owner: <b>This</b> happened <b>due to your</b> bad <b>fortune, as all your fields were wind blasted?</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: It <b>stands to reason that</b> the owner can <b>say to</b> the tenant: <b>If</b> it was <b>due to my</b> bad <b>fortune, a little would have been left for me, as it is written: “For we are left but a few from many”</b> (Jeremiah 42:2), which indicates that even one suffering from misfortune does not lose all he has.

### Part 6
The Gemara discusses a similar case: If <b>all the fields of the tenant farmer were wind blasted and most of the valley was wind blasted and this</b> field <b>was also wind blasted with them, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since most of the valley was wind blasted</b> the tenant farmer <b>subtracts for the owner</b> the amount owed for his tenancy and does not pay, <b>or perhaps, since all</b> the tenant’s <b>lands were wind blasted,</b> the owner <b>can say to the</b> tenant: The damage is <b>due to your</b> bad <b>fortune, as all your fields were wind blasted.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>It stands to reason that</b> the owner <b>can say to him:</b> It occurred <b>due to your</b> bad <b>fortune.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> should this be so? <b>Here too, let us say to</b> the owner: <b>If</b> it was <b>due to my</b> bad <b>fortune, a little would have been left for me, as</b> the following verse <b>would have been fulfilled for me: “For we are left but a few from many.”</b> The Gemara answers: This is not a valid claim <b>because</b> the owner can <b>say to</b> the tenant: <b>Had you been worthy of something being left for you,</b> it <b>would have been left from your own</b> private land, not the field you paid to cultivate.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna to the ruling that if there is a regional disaster the cultivator subtracts from the produce he owes as part of his tenancy. The <i>halakha</i> is that if one sells his field in Eretz Yisrael in a time when the <i>halakhot</i> of the Jubilee Year are in effect, he does not have the right to purchase it from the buyer until two years have passed. The mishna teaches (<i>Arakhin</i> 29b): If it <b>was a year of wind-blasted</b> crops <b>or mildew or</b> it was the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>or</b> if those <b>years were like the years of Elijah</b> in which no rain fell (see I Kings 17:1, 18:1–2), they <b>do not count</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of years before he may repurchase his land.

### Part 9
The Gemara analyzes the mishna: This <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that the cases of <b>windblasts and mildew</b> are <b>similar to</b> the case where <b>the years</b> were <b>like the years of Elijah. Just as the years of Elijah</b> is referring to a time <b>when there was no produce at all, so too, here,</b> windblasts and mildew are referring to cases <b>when there was no produce at all. But</b> by inference, one can learn that if <b>there was</b> some <b>produce,</b> it <b>counts</b> toward <b>his</b> tally of years before he may repurchase his land, <b>and we do not say that it is a regional disaster.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: There,</b> the case with regard to the sold field <b>is different, as the verse states</b> with regard to the sale and leasing of fields: <b>“According to the numbers of years of the crops he shall sell to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:15), which is referring to <b>years in which there is produce</b> harvested <b>in the world.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ashi said to Rav Kahana: If that is so,</b> the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>should count for him</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of years, <b>as</b> at least <b>there is produce outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael. Rav Kahana <b>said to him:</b> The <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>is an abrogation of the King,</b> i.e., God. Therefore, it should not be included in the number of the years before land is repurchased.

### Part 12
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, said to Ravina: If that is so,</b> that the Sabbatical Year is entirely disregarded, then in the case of one who consecrates his field and wants to redeem it, the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>should not count for him for the deduction</b> of the price of the field when it is redeemed. <b>Why did we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Arakhin</i> 25a) that the one who consecrated his field <b>gives a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i></b> coin, which is worth 16 <i>perutot</i>, to the Temple treasury <b>for</b> each <b>year</b> remaining until the Jubilee Year, including the Sabbatical Year, in accordance with the payment prescribed by the Torah (see Leviticus 27:16–19)? The amount to be paid per year, which is fifty shekels divided by the years remaining until the Jubilee Year, should not take the upcoming Sabbatical Years into account. Ravina <b>said to him: There it is different, as it is suitable for laying out produce on it.</b> Although one may not plant the field during the Sabbatical Year, one may use it for other purposes.

### Part 13
<b>Shmuel said: They taught</b> the <i>halakha</i> that if there is a regional disaster the cultivator subtracts from the produce he owes as part of his tenancy <b>only if</b> the tenant <b>planted</b> the field <b>and</b> it <b>sprouted and</b> then <b>grasshoppers consumed it,</b> or if he planted it with a different seed, <b>but</b> if <b>he did not plant it at all,</b> the tenant is <b>not</b> entitled to subtract from the amount he owes even if there was a regional disaster. This is <b>because</b> the owner can <b>say to him: Had you planted it,</b> perhaps my merit would have prevented the field from being affected by the epidemic, and the following verse <b>would have been fulfilled for me: “They will not be shamed in the time of evil, and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied”</b> (Psalms 37:19).

### Part 14
<b>Rav Sheshet raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a shepherd who was herding</b> the animals of others, <b>and he left his flock and came to the town, and</b> in the meantime <b>a wolf came and tore</b> an animal to pieces, <b>or a lion came and trampled</b> one of the flock, <b>we do not say</b> definitively that <b>had he been there he would have rescued</b> them and therefore he is liable due to his absence. <b>Rather,</b> the court <b>estimates</b> with regard to <b>him: If he could</b> have <b>rescued</b> his animal by chasing a beast of this kind away, he is <b>liable,</b> as his departure from the scene was certainly a contributing factor to the damage. <b>If not,</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from liability. According to Shmuel’s opinion, <b>why</b> is the shepherd exempt from liability? <b>Let</b> the owner <b>say to him: Had you been there,</b> the following verse <b>would have been fulfilled for me: “Your servant smote both the lion and the bear”</b> (I Samuel 17:36).

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: This is <b>because</b> the shepherd could <b>say to</b> the owner: <b>If you were worthy of a miracle occurring to you, a miracle would have</b> indeed <b>occurred to you as</b> it did to <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, when</b> his <b>goats brought bears</b> impaled <b>on their horns</b> without any assistance on the part of a shepherd (see <i>Ta’anit</i> 25a). The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the owner <b>say to him: Granted that I was not worthy of a great miracle,</b> but <b>of a small miracle</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC