
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei</b> as he stated in the mishna: <b>Due to the loss of the fraud?</b> It is not due to the fact that the vessel will not remain intact. Consequently, there is no reason to believe that Rabbi Yosei would concede to the Rabbis in the instance where money was deposited. <b>Rather, both of</b> the cases <b>are necessary</b> according <b>to the Rabbis. And</b> although the first case could have been inferred from the second case, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the mishna employing the style of: <b>Not</b> only <b>this</b> but <b>also that,</b> i.e., the mishna began with an obvious example and continued with a more novel one.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who deposits produce with another, even if it is lost</b> due to spoilage or vermin, the bailee <b>may not touch it,</b> as it is not his. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: He sells it before</b> the <b>court, as</b> by doing so <b>he is like</b> one <b>returning a lost item to the owner,</b> since through its sale he prevents the owner from losing the value of his produce.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What is the reason</b> that the first <i>tanna</i> said that the bailee should not touch the produce? <b>Rav Kahana says</b> that it is based on the principle: <b>A person prefers a <i>kav</i></b> of <b>his</b> own produce <b>to nine <i>kav</i> of another’s</b> produce. Consequently, despite the spoilage, the owner prefers that the bailee not touch the produce. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: We are concerned</b> that <b>perhaps the one who deposited</b> the produce <b>rendered it <i>teruma</i> and tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place,</b> resulting in the buyer consuming produce that is <i>teruma</i> and tithe inappropriately.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who deposits produce with another,</b> the bailee <b>may not touch it,</b> and <b>therefore the owner may render it <i>teruma</i> or tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place. Granted, according to Rav Kahana, this</b> is the reason <b>that the</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches:</b> And <b>therefore</b> the owner renders them <i>teruma</i>. The concern that the owner may render the produce <i>teruma</i> and tithe is not the reason why the bailee may not sell it, and the <i>halakha</i> that the owner may render the produce <i>teruma</i> and tithe results from the <i>halakha</i> that the bailee may not sell it.

### Part 5
<b>But according to Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak, what is</b> the meaning of the term <b>therefore?</b> According to his explanation, the fact that the owner may render the produce <i>teruma</i> and tithe is the very reason why the bailee may not sell the produce. The Gemara explains: <b>This</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: Now that the Sages said</b> that the bailee <b>may not sell</b> the produce due to the fact <b>that we are concerned</b> that perhaps the owner had rendered it <i>teruma</i>, the owner can be confident that the produce is still in the possession of the bailee. <b>Therefore, the owner</b> may <b>render it <i>teruma</i> and tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place</b> even <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The dispute</b> in the mishna is in a case <b>where</b> the produce deteriorates <b>at its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration. But</b> if the produce deteriorates at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration, everyone agrees that</b> the bailee <b>sells it before the court.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>certainly disagrees with the opinion of Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak,</b> as the concern that the owner might have rendered the produce <i>teruma</i> or tithe applies regardless of the rate of deterioration. The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagrees with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Kahana?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When Rav Kahana says</b> that one prefers his own produce, it was in a case <b>where</b> the produce deteriorates <b>at its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration</b> that <b>he says</b> it. When the rate of deterioration is accelerated, he would agree that the bailee sells the produce.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> didn’t Rav Kahana say: A person <b>prefers a <i>kav</i></b> of <b>his</b> own produce <b>to nine <i>kav</i> of another’s</b> produce? This indicates that even if the rate of deterioration was accelerated, one prefers his own produce, as in the case he describes eight-ninths of the produce is lost. The Gemara answers: This expression is <b>merely an exaggeration,</b> and actually one prefers his own produce only when its rate of deterioration is standard.

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Therefore, the owner renders it <i>teruma</i> or tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place. And let</b> the owner <b>be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps</b> the produce deteriorated at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration, and</b> the bailee <b>sold it,</b> in which case the owner would be <b>eating untithed produce.</b> The Gemara answers: Deterioration at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration</b> is <b>uncommon,</b> and the Sages do not issue decrees for uncommon cases.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And if it is found</b> that more of the produce is missing than would be lost according to the standard rate of deterioration, <b>what</b> should be done? According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, do <b>we sell it? But let us be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps the owner</b> already <b>rendered</b> this produce <b><i>teruma</i> and tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Even when we sell</b> the produce, it is <b>to priests at the price of <i>teruma</i></b> that <b>we sell it.</b> Consequently, even if the owner rendered it <i>teruma</i>, it is consumed by priests and therefore there is no concern.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak as well,</b> since the concern is that perhaps the owner rendered the produce <i>teruma</i>, <b>let</b> the bailee <b>sell</b> the produce <b>to priests at the price of <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara answers: It is with regard to <b>this that they disagree, as Rabba bar bar Ḥana holds:</b> Deterioration at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration</b> is <b>not common at all. And when it occurs</b> that the produce deteriorates at the greater rate, <b>it is</b> only <b>from now</b> on that it is assumed <b>that it became</b> deteriorated at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration.</b> Therefore, <b>if the owner</b> had <b>rendered</b> the produce <b><i>teruma</i> and tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place,</b> it is assumed that <b>it was before it</b> deteriorated at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration</b> that <b>he did it. Therefore, when</b> the produce deteriorated at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration,</b> the bailee <b>should sell</b> the produce <b>to priests at the price of <i>teruma</i>,</b> as it may be <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 12
<b>And Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak holds:</b> Deterioration at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration is common. And when</b> the produce <b>became</b> deteriorated at a rate greater than its standard rate of deterioration, it may be <b>immediately that it became</b> deteriorated to that extent. <b>And if you say: Let us sell it,</b> the concern is that <b>at times</b> the bailee <b>will sell it early. And when the owner renders</b> the produce <b><i>teruma</i> and tithe for</b> produce in <b>another place, he does not know that</b> the bailee already <b>sold</b> the produce, and the owner <b>eats untithed produce.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who deposits produce with another and it rotted, wine and it fermented, oil and it putrefied, honey and it spoiled,</b> the bailee <b>may not touch them;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: He effects a remedy for</b> these items <b>and sells them in court.</b> The <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And when he sells them, he sells them to others and does not sell them to himself,</b> even for the same price, so no one will suspect that he bought it at a discount.

### Part 14
<b>On a similar</b> note, with regard to <b>charity collectors, when they do not have poor people</b> to whom <b>to distribute</b> charity, <b>they change</b> copper <i>perutot</i> that they collected for more valuable silver coins only <b>for other</b> people, <b>but they do not change</b> the coins <b>for themselves,</b> to avoid suspicion. If <b>collectors for the charity plate</b> collected ready-made food for the poor, <b>at a time where there are no poor people</b> to whom <b>to distribute</b> the food, <b>they sell</b> the food only <b>to others but do not sell</b> the food <b>to themselves.</b>

### Part 15
<b>In any event, it is taught: Produce and it rotted. What, is it not</b> referring <b>even</b> to a case where they all rotted at a rate <b>greater than its</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>No;</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> they deteriorated <b>at their</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But aren’t</b> the cases of <b>wine and it fermented, oil and it putrefied,</b> and <b>honey and it spoiled</b> cases <b>where</b> these items deteriorated at a rate <b>greater than their</b> standard <b>rate of deterioration,</b> as there is a significant difference in the price of wine before and after fermentation, and in the price of oil before and after putrefaction? The Gemara rejects that proof: <b>Those</b> cases <b>are different. Once they become</b> spoiled, <b>they remain</b> spoiled but do not continue to deteriorate. Therefore, although their deterioration was significant, there is nothing gained by selling it.

### Part 16
On a related note, the Gemara asks: Concerning the cases of <b>oil and it putrefied, honey and it spoiled,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC