
### Part 1
<b>It is preferable for a person to engage in intercourse with a woman</b> whose <b>married</b> status is <b>uncertain and not humiliate another in public.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? The Gemara answers: It is <b>from that which Rava interpreted, as Rava interpreted: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And when I limped they rejoiced and gathered…they tore and did not cease [<i>damu</i>]”</b> (Psalms 35:15)? The term “<i>damu</i>” can also be understood as a reference to blood. Concerning the fasting he undertook to atone for his sin with Bathsheba (see II Samuel, chapters 11–12), <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, it is revealed and known before You that if</b> my tormenters <b>were to tear my flesh, my blood [<i>dami</i>] would not flow to the ground,</b> due to excessive fasting.

### Part 2
<b>And moreover,</b> they torment me to the extent that <b>even at the time</b> when <b>they are engaged</b> in the public study of the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of leprous sores and tents</b> in which there is a corpse, i.e., halakhic matters that have no connection to my sin, <b>they say to me: David, one who engages in intercourse with a married woman, his death</b> is effected <b>with what</b> form of execution? <b>And I say to them: One who engages in intercourse with a married woman</b> before witnesses and with forewarning, <b>his death is by strangulation, but he</b> still <b>has a share in the World-to-Come. But one who humiliates another in public has no share in the World-to-Come.</b> The transgression of you, who humiliate me, is more severe than my transgression.

### Part 3
<b>And Mar Zutra bar Toviyya says</b> that <b>Rav says; and some say Rav Ḥana bar Bizna says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon Ḥasida says; and some say Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: It is more comfortable for a person to cast himself into a fiery furnace,</b> than to <b>humiliate another in public</b> to avoid being cast into the furnace. <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>From Tamar,</b> daughter-in-law of Judah. When she was taken out to be burned, she did not reveal that she was pregnant with Judah’s child. Rather, she left the decision to him, to avoid humiliating him in public, <b>as it is written:</b> “And Judah said: Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. <b>When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law,</b> saying: I am pregnant by the man to whom these belong. And she said: Examine these, whose are these, the signet, and the cords, and the staff?” (Genesis 38:24–25).

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Ḥinnana, son of Rav Idi, says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And you shall not mistreat each man his colleague [<i>amito</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 25:17)? The word <i>amito</i> is interpreted as a contraction of <i>im ito</i>, meaning: One who is with him. <b>With</b> one who is <b>with you in</b> observance of <b>Torah and mitzvot, you shall not mistreat</b> him. <b>Rav says: A person must always be careful about mistreatment of his wife. Since her tear is easily</b> elicited, punishment for <b>her mistreatment is immediate.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Elazar says: Since the day the Temple was destroyed the gates of prayer were locked,</b> and prayer is not accepted as it once was, <b>as it is stated</b> in lament of the Temple’s destruction: <b>“Though I plead and call out, He shuts out my prayer”</b> (Lamentations 3:8). Yet, <b>despite</b> the fact <b>that the gates of prayer were locked</b> with the destruction of the Temple, <b>the gates of tears were not locked,</b> and one who cries before God may rest assured that his prayers will be answered, <b>as it is stated: “Hear my prayer, Lord, and give ear to my pleading, keep not silence at my tears”</b> (Psalms 39:13).

### Part 6
<b>And Rav says:</b> Nevertheless, <b>anyone who follows the counsel of his wife descends into Gehenna, as it is stated: “But there was none like Ahab,</b> who did give himself over to do that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife incited” (I Kings 21:25). <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: But don’t people say</b> a popular proverb: If <b>your wife is short, stoop and whisper to her</b> and consult with her? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this</b> statement of Rav instructs that one not follow her counsel <b>in general matters; and that</b> proverb instructs that one follow her counsel <b>in household matters.</b> The Gemara presents <b>another version</b> of this distinction: <b>This</b> statement of Rav maintains that one should not follow her counsel <b>in divine matters; and that</b> proverb maintains that one should follow her counsel <b>in general matters.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Ḥisda says: All the gates</b> of Heaven are apt to be <b>locked, except for the gates</b> of prayer for victims <b>of</b> verbal <b>mistreatment, as it is stated: “And behold, the Lord stood upon a wall built with a plumb line, and a plumb line in His hand”</b> (Amos 7:7). God stands with the scales of justice in His hand to determine if one has been subjected to injustice. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> In response to <b>all</b> transgressions, God <b>punishes</b> the perpetrator <b>by means of an agent, except for mistreatment [<i>ona’a</i>], as it is stated: “And a plumb line [<i>anakh</i>] in His hand.”</b> The term for mistreatment and the term for plumb line are spelled in a similar manner, indicating that God Himself inflicts retribution.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Abbahu says:</b> There are <b>three</b> sins <b>before</b> whose transgressors <b>the curtain [<i>hapargod</i>]</b> between the world and the Divine Presence <b>is not locked;</b> their sins reach the Divine Presence. They are: Verbal <b>mistreatment, robbery, and idol worship. Mistreatment, as it is stated: “And a plumb line in His hand”; robbery, as it is stated: “Violence and robbery are heard in her, they are before Me continually”</b> (Jeremiah 6:7); <b>idol worship, as it is stated: “A people that angers Me before Me continually;</b> that sacrifice in gardens, and burn incense upon bricks” (Isaiah 65:3).

### Part 9
Apropos the topic of how man should approach his household, <b>Rav Yehuda says: A person must always be careful about</b> ensuring that there is <b>grain inside his house, as discord is found in a person’s house only over matters of grain, as it is stated: “He makes your borders peace; He gives you plenty with the finest wheat”</b> (Psalms 147:14). If there is the finest wheat in your house, there will be peace there. <b>Rav Pappa said: This</b> is in accordance with the adage <b>that people say: When the barley is emptied from the jug, quarrel knocks and enters the house.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And Rav Ḥinnana bar Pappa says: A person must always be careful about</b> ensuring that there is <b>grain inside his house, as the Jewish people were characterized as poor only over matters of grain, as it is stated: “And it was, if Israel sowed,</b> and Midian and the children of the east ascended” (Judges 6:3); <b>and it is written: “And they encamped against them</b> and they destroyed the crops of the land” (Judges 6:4); <b>and it is</b> further <b>written: “And Israel was greatly impoverished due to Midian”</b> (Judges 6:6).

### Part 11
<b>And Rabbi Ḥelbo says: A person must always be careful about</b> sustaining <b>the honor of his wife, as blessing is found in a person’s house only because of his wife, as it is stated</b> in allusion to this: <b>“And he dealt well with Abram for her sake,</b> and he had sheep and oxen” (Genesis 12:16). <b>And that is what Rava said to the residents of Meḥoza,</b> where he lived: <b>Honor your wives, so that you will become rich.</b>

### Part 12
§ Apropos the topic of verbal mistreatment, <b>we learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Kelim</i> 5:10): If <b>one cut</b> an earthenware oven widthwise <b>into segments, and placed sand between each and every segment, Rabbi Eliezer deems it ritually pure.</b> Because of the sand, its legal status is not that of a complete vessel, and therefore it is not susceptible to ritual impurity. <b>And the Rabbis deem it ritually impure,</b> as it is functionally a complete oven.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC