
### Part 1
<b>and then he says:</b> This second-tithe produce that now belongs to you <b>is hereby desacralized on coins that I have at home.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that it is necessary to employ this artifice is <b>that he does not have coins in his hand. But if he has coins in his hand let him transfer ownership</b> of the coins <b>to the other</b> person <b>by means of</b> the transaction of <b>pulling, and</b> then that other person will <b>desacralize</b> the second-tithe produce. The reason for this is <b>that this</b> procedure <b>is preferable, as</b> the one who desacralizes the produce <b>is a stranger,</b> not the owner of the produce. Therefore, it appears less like artifice designed to circumvent paying the additional one-fifth.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues to state its objection to the opinion of Rav Pappa. <b>And if you say a coin is acquired by</b> means of a transaction of <b>exchange,</b> then even if the owner of produce has no money in his hand, <b>let</b> the owner <b>transfer ownership</b> of the coins, wherever they are, <b>to the other</b> person <b>by means of a cloth,</b> as he can perform a transaction of symbolic exchange with a cloth; <b>and</b> then <b>let</b> the other person <b>desacralize</b> the produce. The Gemara answers: The case in the <i>baraita</i> is one in <b>which he does not have a cloth.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>And let</b> the owner <b>transfer ownership</b> of the coins <b>to the other</b> person <b>by means of land,</b> i.e., perform an act of transaction concerning the land and include the coins in the transaction. The Gemara answers: The case in the <i>baraita</i> is one in <b>which he does not have land.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that he is <b>standing on the threshing floor?</b> The Gemara answers: He is standing <b>on a threshing floor that is not his.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And did the <i>tanna</i> go to all that trouble just to teach us</b> the case <b>of a naked man,</b> i.e., one <b>who has nothing at all?</b> It is unlikely that a <i>baraita</i> would be devoted to so remote a case. <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from it</b> that <b>money is not acquired by means of</b> a transaction of <b>exchange?</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>And even Rav Pappa retracted his</b> previous statement that coins are acquired by means of a transaction of exchange, <b>as</b> in <b>this</b> incident in <b>which Rav Pappa had twelve thousand dinars</b> that he lent to another in <b>Bei Ḥozai. He transferred ownership of</b> the dinars <b>to</b> his agent, <b>Rav Shmuel bar Aḥa, by means of</b> granting acquisition of <b>the threshold of his house</b> to him, to enable the agent to demand repayment of the loan on his own behalf. This obviated the need for him to consult Rav Pappa in the case of every contingency, which would complicate matters. It is apparent from the fact that the transaction was effected by means of granting acquisition of the threshold that Rav Pappa concedes that coins are not acquired by means of a transaction of exchange. <b>When</b> Rav Shmuel bar Aḥa <b>came</b> after repayment of the loan, Rav Pappa was so pleased that he <b>went out as far as Tevakh to</b> meet <b>him.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara adds: <b>And likewise, Ulla says: Money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange. And likewise, Rav Asi says: Money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange. And likewise, Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Abba raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Ulla</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one whose donkey drivers or laborers were demanding</b> payment of their wages <b>from him in the marketplace, and he said to the money changer: Give me coins</b> worth <b>a dinar and I will provide for them, and</b> later <b>I will give you</b> coins <b>worth a dinar and a <i>tereisit</i>,</b> a coin of lesser value, <b>from money that I have at home,</b> then <b>if he has money</b> at home at that time it is <b>permitted,</b> as it is not considered a loan and therefore the additional payment is not interest. <b>But if</b> he does <b>not</b> have money at home at that time, it is a loan and the additional payment is <b>forbidden</b> as interest. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that <b>money cannot be</b> the item used to effect a transaction by means of <b>exchange,</b> then even in the case where the employer had money at home, since the money changer does not acquire the employer’s money at home by means of exchange, <b>it is a loan and</b> the additional payment is <b>forbidden</b> as interest. Ulla <b>was silent.</b>

### Part 7
Rabbi Abba then <b>said</b> the following suggestion <b>to</b> Ulla: <b>Perhaps</b> the Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in</b> a case where both <b>these</b> coins that are in his house <b>and those</b> coins that he took from the money changer are <b><i>perotetot</i>,</b> small <i>perutot</i> <b>that are unminted, and</b> the legal status of both <b>these</b> coins <b>and those</b> coins <b>is</b> that of <b>a commodity; and due to that</b> status <b>they are acquired by means of</b> a transaction of <b>exchange.</b> Ulla <b>said to him: Yes,</b> that is the case in the <i>baraita</i>, and the language of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise, as it teaches:</b> I will give you coins <b>worth a dinar and a <i>tereisit</i>, and it does not teach:</b> I will give you <b>an unflawed dinar and a <i>tereisit</i>.</b> Evidently, the <i>baraita</i> is not referring to his giving an actual dinar coin but to other coins of lesser value that equal that value. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the case.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ashi said: Actually,</b> it can be explained that there is no transaction by means of exchange in this case. Rather, it is a purchase <b>with money and</b> the <i>tanna</i> is referring <b>to <i>perotetot</i>,</b> and nevertheless there is no violation of the prohibition against interest. <b>Since he has</b> money at home, <b>it is tantamount to saying: Lend me</b> money <b>until my son comes or until I find</b> the <b>key.</b> That is not a loan, and the <i>halakhot</i> of interest do not apply.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 28a): With regard to <b>all</b> items <b>used as monetary</b> value <b>for another</b> item, i.e., instead of a buyer paying money to the seller, they exchange items of value with each other, <b>once one</b> party in the transaction <b>acquires</b> the item he is receiving, <b>this</b> party <b>is obligated</b> with regard to the item being <b>exchanged for it.</b> The Gemara analyzes this mishna: With regard to <b>all</b> items <b>used as monetary</b> value <b>for another</b> item, <b>what does</b> the mishna mean in <b>this</b> phrase? It means <b>a coin, and learn from</b> the mishna that <b>a coin can be</b> an item used to effect <b>exchange.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yehuda said: This</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC