
### Part 1
The reason one must employ this procedure is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the Sages <b>said: One desacralizes</b> second-tithe <b>silver</b> coins <b>upon copper</b> coins <b>under duress.</b> And it is <b>not that he will maintain</b> them in <b>that</b> form; <b>rather,</b> it is <b>that he again desacralizes them upon silver</b> coins. <b>In any event,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>one desacralizes</b> second-tithe coins in this manner <b>under duress,</b> from which it may be inferred: <b>Under duress, yes; not under duress, no.</b> This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to redemption of second-tithe coins by Torah law. By contrast, in the case of <i>demai</i>, which is by rabbinic law, Rabbi Meir permits desacralizing it in this manner <i>ab initio</i>. Apparently, Rabbi Meir is more lenient with regard to matters of rabbinic law than he is with regard to matters of Torah law.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yosef said: Although Rabbi Meir is lenient with regard to redemption</b> of second-tithe <i>demai</i>, <b>he is stringent with regard to its consumption.</b> This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Sages <b>permitted only a wholesaler to sell <i>demai</i>.</b> Since a wholesaler acquires grain from numerous sources and sells large quantities, he would suffer significant loss if he were required to separate tithes each time. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a proprietor</b> who purchased produce from an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, <b>whether</b> he purchased large quantities to sell in bulk <b>or whether</b> he purchased small quantities to sell little by little, he <b>must tithe</b> the produce; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And the Rabbis say: Both a wholesaler and a proprietor</b> who sells in bulk <b>may sell</b> <i>demai</i>, <b>or send</b> it <b>to another, or give</b> it <b>to him as a gift, and</b> they need <b>not be concerned.</b> The one who receives the produce separates the tithes and consumes the remaining produce. In this <i>baraita</i>, Rabbi Meir was stringent with regard to the concern that someone will consume <i>demai</i> without the tithes being separated.

### Part 4
<b>Ravina raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 5:3): <b>One who purchases</b> bread <b>from a baker</b> who is unreliable with regard to tithes [<i>am ha’aretz</i>] <b>may tithe from warm</b> bread <b>for,</b> i.e., to exempt, <b>cold</b> bread, <b>and from cold</b> bread <b>for warm</b> bread, <b>and</b> one may do so <b>even</b> if the bread is in different shapes <b>from many molds;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Granted,</b> one may tithe <b>from cold</b> bread <b>for warm</b> bread, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elai, as Rabbi Elai says: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to one who separates <i>teruma</i> from poor-quality</b> produce <b>for superior-quality</b> produce <b>that his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>?</b> It is <b>as it is stated: “And you shall bear no sin by reason of it, seeing that you have set apart from it the best thereof”</b> (Numbers 18:32). The Torah warns the Levites not to separate <i>teruma</i> from low-quality produce. The question arises: <b>If</b> when one separates lower-quality produce, that produce <b>is not sacred, why</b> would one think that <b>he bears sin?</b> He did nothing. <b>From here</b> it is derived <b>that</b> although the Levite acted improperly, in the case of <b>one who separates <i>teruma</i> from poor-quality</b> produce <b>for superior-quality</b> produce, <b>his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> that one may tithe <b>even</b> if the bread is in different shapes <b>from many molds, let</b> Rabbi Meir <b>be concerned lest</b> the buyer <b>come to tithe from the</b> loaves that one is <b>obligated</b> to tithe <b>for the</b> loaves that one is <b>exempt</b> from tithing, <b>or from the exempt for the obligated.</b> Since these loaves are all <i>demai</i>, it is possible that the loaves shaped in one mold were baked from produce that was tithed and the loaves shaped in another mold were baked from produce that was not tithed. Apparently, Rabbi Meir rules leniently in cases of rabbinic law, e.g., <i>demai</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara returns to discuss the difficulties raised above. <b>Abaye said:</b> The problem raised by <b>Rabbi Elazar was legitimately difficult for him, and Shmuel did not legitimately respond to his</b> difficulty by stating that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir. The reason the response is insufficient is <b>that</b> it was the case in the mishna of <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, which is punishable with <b>death at the hand of Heaven,</b> that <b>was difficult for Rabbi Elazar,</b> who was questioning whether the Sages reinforced their pronouncements concerning such a prohibition and rendered them parallel to Torah law; <b>and Shmuel responded to him</b> by citing Rabbi Meir’s opinion concerning a bill of divorce, which involves <b>court</b>-imposed <b>capital punishment. Perhaps</b> the case involving <b>court</b>-imposed <b>capital punishment is different, as</b> it is more <b>stringent,</b> and Rabbi Meir renders rabbinic law parallel to Torah law only in such a case.

### Part 8
Abaye continued: <b>And Rav Sheshet does not legitimately raise an objection, as</b> Rabbi Elazar and Shmuel <b>are speaking</b> about cases punishable by <b>death, and Rav Sheshet raised</b> his <b>objection</b> from a case involving a mere <b>prohibition, as it is written</b> with regard to second tithe: <b>“You may not eat within your gates</b> the tithe of your grain, or of your wine, or of your oil” (Deuteronomy 12:17). <b>And to</b> that <b>which Rav Sheshet raised</b> as <b>an objection, Rav Yosef legitimately respond to his</b> difficulty.

### Part 9
<b>But</b> as for <b>Ravina,</b> the question arises: <b>Rather than raising an objection from</b> this case of <b>a baker,</b> from which proof is cited that Rabbi Meir does not draw a parallel between rabbinic law and Torah law, <b>let him</b> cite <b>support for</b> the assessment of the opinion of Rabbi Meir <b>from</b> the case of a bread <b>merchant [<i>mipalter</i>], as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 5:4): <b>One who purchases</b> bread <b>from a merchant tithes</b> separately <b>from</b> the bread of <b>each and every mold;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b> In this case, Rabbi Meir is stringent with regard to <i>demai</i>.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, what have you to say</b> in explaining why Ravina did not cite a proof from this mishna? It is because <b>a merchant purchases</b> his supply <b>from two</b> or <b>three people.</b> Therefore, Rabbi Meir holds that one must be concerned that perhaps one of the suppliers separated tithes and another did not, so the customer must separate tithes from the bread of each and every mold. But if that is the case, Ravina should not cite a proof from the case of the <b>baker, as well;</b> as the baker discussed in the mishna typically <b>purchases</b> his stock of grain <b>from</b> only <b>one person.</b> Therefore, in that case there is no concern that perhaps the customer will tithe from the loaves that he is exempt from tithing for the loaves that he is obligated to tithe.

### Part 11
<b>Rava said: Shmuel responds well to</b> that which was difficult to Rabbi Elazar, as <b>the category of death in the world</b> is one. Therefore, it is appropriate to cite proof from the case of court-imposed capital punishment to the case of death at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>These are matters that are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation</b> even if the disparity between the value and the payment is one-sixth or greater: <b>Slaves, and documents, and land, and consecrated</b> property. In addition, if they are stolen, these items are subject <b>neither</b> to <b>payment of double</b> the principal for theft <b>nor</b> to <b>payment of four or five</b> times the principal, if the thief slaughtered or sold a stolen sheep or cow, respectively. <b>An unpaid bailee does not take an oath and a paid bailee does not pay</b> if these items were stolen or lost. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC