
### Part 1
the produce <b>is not</b> in the category of: “But <b>when</b> water <b>is placed [<i>khi yuttan</i>]</b> upon the seed,” and the produce is not susceptible to contracting ritual impurity.

### Part 2
<b>What is the reason</b> that if the produce dried, the fact that the owner is glad does not render it susceptible to ritual impurity? Is it <b>not due to</b> the fact <b>that we do not say: Since the matter was revealed that he is amenable</b> to the moisture <b>now, he was also amenable from the outset?</b> The same should be true with regard to despair that is not conscious. The fact that when he becomes aware of his loss he despairs of its recovery does not indicate that he despaired from the outset, contrary to the opinion of Rava. The Gemara rejects the proof: It <b>is different there, as</b> although the phrase is vocalized to mean: “When it is placed,” <b>it is written: When one places [<i>ki yitten</i>],</b> from which it is derived that the produce is rendered susceptible to ritual impurity <b>only</b> if the owner <b>places</b> the liquid on the produce.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>too,</b> the produce should not be rendered susceptible to contracting impurity, because the dew fell on the produce and was not placed there by the owner. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> the explanation is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Pappa, as Rav Pappa raised a contradiction:</b> The verse states: “But when water is placed [<i>vekhi yuttan</i>] upon the seed, and any part of a carcass falls thereon, it is ritually impure unto you” (Leviticus 11:38). The word “<i>yuttan</i>” <b>is written</b> in the defective form, as if it says <b>“<i>ki yitten</i>.”</b> Accordingly, this would mean that one must actively place the water on the produce. Yet, <b>we read</b> it, based on the tradition as to its correct pronunciation, as if it is written <b>“<i>ki yuttan</i>,”</b> which includes any situation where the produce becomes wet. <b>How so?</b> How can the way the verse is written and the way it is read be reconciled?

### Part 4
Rav Pappa explains that <b>we require</b> that the situation described by the words <b>“when water is placed [<i>ki yuttan</i>]”</b> be <b>similar to</b> the situation described by the words: <b>When one places [<i>dekhi yitten</i>]: Just as</b> the term <b>places [<i>yitten</i>]</b> indicates <b>that</b> it is <b>with the knowledge of</b> the owner that the produce becomes wet, as he himself is placing the water, <b>so too,</b> the term <b>“is placed [<i>yuttan</i>]”</b> means <b>that</b> it is <b>with his knowledge</b> that the produce becomes wet, despite the fact that he did not place the water himself. Therefore, no proof may be cited with regard to the matter of despair, where there is no Torah derivation requiring awareness from the outset.

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that <b>which Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Yishmael ben Yehotzadak: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a lost item that the river swept away that it is permitted</b> for its finder to keep it? It is derived from this verse, <b>as it is written: “And so shall you do with his donkey; and so shall you do with his garment; and so shall you do with every lost item of your brother, which shall be lost from him, and you have found it”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:3). The verse states that one must return <b>that which is lost from him,</b> the owner, <b>but is</b> available to be <b>found by any person. Excluded</b> from that obligation is <b>that which is lost from him and is not</b> available to be <b>found by any person;</b> it is ownerless property and anyone who finds it may keep it.

### Part 6
<b>And the prohibition</b> written in the verse against keeping an item that is lost only to its owner is <b>similar to the allowance</b> to keep an item lost to all people that is inferred from the verse; <b>just as</b> in the case of <b>the allowance, whether there is a distinguishing mark and whether there is no distinguishing mark,</b> it is permitted for the finder to keep it, <b>so too</b> in the case of <b>the prohibition, whether there is a distinguishing mark and whether there is no distinguishing mark,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> for the finder to keep it, until there is proof that the owner despaired of its recovery. The Gemara concludes: <b>The refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rava is</b> indeed a conclusive <b>refutation.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And</b> although in disputes between Abaye and Rava, the <i>halakha</i> is typically ruled in accordance with the opinion of Rava, the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye in</b> the disputes represented by the mnemonic: <b><i>Yod</i>, <i>ayin</i>, <i>lamed</i>; <i>kuf</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>mem</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: And now that</b> the opinion of <b>Rava was conclusively refuted,</b> and the <i>halakha</i> is that despair that is not conscious is not considered despair, if <b>those dates</b> are blown off the tree <b>by the wind, how do we eat them?</b> Perhaps their owner did not despair of their recovery. Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Since there are repugnant creatures and creeping animals that eat</b> the dates after they fall, the owner <b>despairs of their</b> recovery <b>from the outset.</b> Therefore, one who finds the dates may keep them.

### Part 9
Rav Aḥa asked: Perhaps the tree belonged to <b>minor</b> orphans <b>who,</b> because <b>they are not capable of relinquishing</b> property, cannot despair of recovering the dates from the outset. Accordingly, <b>what</b> is the justification for eating found dates? Rav Ashi <b>said to him: We do not presume a valley to</b> be <b>land</b> belonging <b>to orphans,</b> and therefore that is not a concern.

### Part 10
Rav Aḥa asked: If the <b>presumptive status</b> of the trees was <b>previously</b> established as belonging to orphans, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If the trees are surrounded by <b>fences</b> that prevent repugnant creatures and creeping animals from gaining access, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rav Ashi <b>said to him:</b> The dates <b>are forbidden</b> in those cases.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that if one found <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, these</b> belong <b>to him. Rabba says</b> with regard to this ruling: <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even with regard to an item on which there is a distinguishing mark.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently, Rabba holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b> Since the owner of the lost item knows that the mark is prone to be trampled, he does not rely on it and he despairs of recovering the item. <b>Rava said:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only with regard to an item on which there is no distinguishing mark, but with regard to an item on which there is a distinguishing mark,</b> the one who finds it is <b>obligated to proclaim</b> his find. The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently, Rava holds</b> that the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is</b> that of <b>a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who teach</b> the dispute with regard to <b>this <i>halakha</i> independent</b> of the mishna. With regard to the legal status of <b>a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled, Rabba says: It is not a distinguishing mark. And Rava says: It is a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara cites proof from that which <b>we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one finds <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, these</b> belong <b>to him;</b> if he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is a case <b>where there is no distinguishing mark</b> on the bundles, when one finds them <b>in a secluded area, what does he proclaim? Rather, is it not</b> a case <b>where there is a distinguishing mark</b> on the bundles, and there is then a reason for him to proclaim his find. <b>And</b> yet, <b>it is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that if he finds the bundles <b>in a public area those</b> bundles belong <b>to him. Apparently, a distinguishing mark that is prone to be trampled is not a distinguishing mark.</b> This is <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rava.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rava</b> could have <b>said to you: Actually,</b> it is a case <b>where there is no distinguishing mark on</b> the bundles. <b>And</b> with regard to that <b>which you said:</b> When one finds them <b>in a secluded area, what does he proclaim? He proclaims</b> that the owner should provide the <b>location</b> where he lost the bundles and thereby recover his bundles. <b>And Rabba said:</b> The <b>location,</b> provided by the owner, <b>is not a distinguishing mark</b> that would enable the return of an item to its owner. <b>As it was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disputed this matter: With regard to <b>location, Rabba says: It is not a distinguishing mark, and Rava says: It is a distinguishing mark.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: If one finds <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, these</b> belong <b>to him;</b> if he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the sheaves,</b> i.e., large bundles, <b>whether</b> he finds them <b>in a public area</b> or <b>whether</b> he finds them <b>in a secluded area,</b> the finder <b>takes</b> them <b>and proclaims</b> his find. <b>How does Rabba explain</b> the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and how does Rava explain</b> the <i>baraita</i>? <b>Rabba explains, according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to bundles <b>with a distinguishing mark. And Rava explains, according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to bundles <b>whose location</b> is their distinguishing mark.

### Part 16
The Gemara elaborates. <b>Rabba explains, according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to bundles <b>with a distinguishing mark:</b> If one finds <b>bundles</b> of grain <b>in a public area, these</b> belong <b>to him due to</b> the fact

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC