
### Part 1
<b>And the men of pitch [<i>benei kufera</i>],</b> i.e., sailors, <b>are accustomed to</b> paying <b>rent at the time of pulling</b> and paying for <b>damage at the time of breakage.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>this matter depends on custom?</b> Is there no <i>halakha</i> with regard to this issue? The Gemara answers: <b>Because the <i>baraita</i> taught this,</b> it is an acceptable <b>custom</b> and therefore permitted.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Anan says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It is <b>permitted to lend with interest money</b> belonging <b>to orphans.</b> Since the orphans are minors and exempt from mitzvot, the prohibition against taking interest does not apply to them. <b>Rav Naḥman said to him: Because they are orphans we may feed them prohibited</b> items? In harsher language, he added: <b>Orphans that consume that which is not theirs will follow their deceased</b> parent to the graveyard. It cannot be that this was Shmuel’s intention. Therefore, Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> Rav Anan: <b>Say to me now, what was the actual incident?</b> What exactly did you hear Shmuel say?

### Part 3
Rav Anan <b>said to him:</b> There was <b>a certain kettle that</b> belonged to <b>the children of Mar Ukva,</b> who were minor orphans, and this kettle <b>was in the house of Mar Shmuel,</b> who would rent it out on behalf of the orphans. Mar Shmuel <b>would weigh it and</b> then <b>give it out,</b> and when the renter returned it Mar Shmuel would <b>weigh it and take it back,</b> and <b>he would take a rental fee</b> for use of the kettle <b>and would</b> also <b>take</b> payment <b>for depreciation</b> of the kettle due to the reduction in the weight of the metal. In general, the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>if</b> he takes <b>a rental</b> fee, he <b>should not</b> take payment for <b>depreciation, and if he takes</b> payment <b>for depreciation,</b> this means the kettle was a loan, and therefore he <b>should not</b> take <b>a rental</b> fee, as by taking both, it is interest. Nevertheless, Mar Shmuel did so with the kettle belonging to Mar Ukva’s children, which means he rendered it permitted for the orphans to take interest.

### Part 4
Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b> There is no proof from a case <b>like this, as even for bearded ones,</b> i.e., adults, it is <b>permitted to act in this</b> manner, <b>as</b> the owners <b>accept upon themselves the depreciation of the copper, as the more the copper is burned, the more the value of the pot is diminished.</b> Since this is so, the renters pay for the visible depreciation as measured by the reduction in the weight of the vessel, and therefore this arrangement is certainly permitted.

### Part 5
<b>Rabba bar Sheila says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says, and some say</b> that <b>Rabba bar Yosef bar Ḥama says</b> that <b>Rav Sheshet says:</b> It is <b>permitted to lend the money of orphans</b> to be invested in a business venture <b>that is close to profit and far from loss.</b> Since this is only a hint of interest (see 64b), the relevant prohibition is a matter of rabbinic law, and the Sages rendered it permitted in the case of minor orphans, in order that their inheritance be preserved for them.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If there is a joint venture in which the conditions for the investor are <b>close to profit and far from loss,</b> then the investor is <b>a wicked person,</b> as this is similar to a loan with interest. If the conditions for the investor are <b>close to loss and far from profit,</b> then he is <b>a pious person,</b> as he accepts additional restrictions upon himself in order to be absolutely sure he is not taking interest. If it is <b>close to this and to that</b> or <b>far from this and from that, this is</b> the <b>quality of every person</b> who acts in accordance with <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Rabba said to Rav Yosef:</b> When we are entrusted with <b>this money</b> belonging <b>to orphans, what do we do with it?</b> What is the halakhically appropriate way to manage these funds on behalf of the orphans so that they do not squander or lose their inheritance? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: We set up</b> a special <b>court</b> that holds the money <b>for them, and we</b> instruct the court to <b>give</b> it to <b>them dinar by dinar,</b> according to their needs. Rabba <b>said to him: But</b> if the estate is managed in that manner, <b>the principal,</b> meaning the estate itself, <b>will be depleted,</b> and therefore the court will not be acting as suitable guardians for the orphans, as they will not be properly administering their estate.

### Part 8
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What does the Master do</b> in such a case? Rabba <b>said to him: We look</b> for <b>a man who has scraps of gold, and we purchase the gold from him and</b> then <b>we give</b> it back <b>to him</b> in a joint business venture with terms that are <b>close to profit and far from loss.</b> The Gemara explains what Rabba says: We specifically buy scraps of gold, <b>but</b> we do <b>not</b> buy <b>a specific item,</b> meaning a finished gold item, as <b>perhaps it is a deposit</b> in the possession of the one holding it <b>and the owner will come and provide distinguishing marks and take it,</b> and then the orphans will suffer a loss.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said:</b> This <b>works out well if a man is found who has scraps of gold.</b> But <b>if no man is found who has scraps of gold,</b> shall <b>the money of the orphans be depleted?</b> There is a possibility that the extra precaution taken to avoid the appearance of interest may lead to a loss for the orphans. <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said: We look for a man whose properties are quiet,</b> meaning that there is no claim disputing his ownership of them, <b>and</b> who is a <b>trustworthy</b> individual <b>who listens</b> to and obeys <b>the laws of the Torah and is not subject to excommunication by the Sages,</b> meaning that he is known as one who obeys the court’s instructions willingly without having to be coerced, <b>and we give him</b> this money <b>in court</b> as a joint business venture with terms that are close to profit and far from loss, and in this way the orphans’ money can be invested in a safe and profitable manner.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC