
### Part 1
The verse states: “You shall not oppress a hired laborer who is poor and needy, whether he be from your brothers or from your stranger that is in your land within your gates” (Deuteronomy 24:14), which is interpreted as follows: The term <b>“from your brothers”</b> serves <b>to exclude others,</b> i.e., gentiles, who are not your brothers. As for the term <b>“your stranger,” this</b> is referring to <b>a righteous convert.</b> As for the term <b>“within your gates,” this</b> is referring to a <i>ger toshav</i> who lives in Eretz Yisrael and <b>eats unslaughtered animal carcasses</b> because he has not accepted Judaism upon himself.

### Part 2
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that the prohibitions of delaying wages apply to <b>the hire of people. From where</b> do I know <b>to include</b> payment for the rental of <b>animals and utensils</b> in the prohibition of delaying wages? <b>The verse states: “In your land,”</b> which includes <b>all that is in your land. And</b> in <b>all of</b> the above cases of delaying payment they <b>transgress all of these prohibitions</b> which apply to delaying payment.

### Part 3
<b>From here</b> the Sages <b>stated: Whether</b> referring to <b>the hire of a person or the rental of an animal or the rental of utensils,</b> all are <b>subject to</b> the prohibition <b>of: “On the same day you shall give him his wages”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:15), <b>and they are</b> likewise <b>subject to the prohibition of delaying</b> the payment of wages of a <b>hired laborer</b> (Leviticus 19:13). <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> One who hires <b>a <i>ger toshav</i> is subject to</b> the prohibition <b>of: “On the same day you shall give him his wages,” but is not subject to the prohibition of delaying</b> payment of wages, and the payment of rent of <b>an animal or vessels is included only in</b> the prohibition <b>of: “Do not oppress” alone.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara returns to its initial question: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is the mishna? <b>If</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i> of</b> the <i>baraita</i>, who interprets the verse: <b>“From your brothers,”</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a <i>ger toshav</i></b> is <b>difficult,</b> as he equates a <i>ger toshav</i> with a Jew, unlike the mishna. <b>If</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> son of Rabbi Yehuda, the <i>halakha</i> of the rental payment of <b>animals and vessels</b> is <b>difficult,</b> as Rabbi Yosei maintains they are not included in any of the prohibitions except for: Do not oppress.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said: This <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>is a <i>tanna</i> from the school of Rabbi Yishmael, as the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Whether</b> in the case of <b>the hire of a person, the rental of an animal, or the rental of vessels,</b> all of these payments are <b>subject to</b> the mitzva <b>of: “On the same day you shall give him his wages,” and the prohibition of delaying</b> payment of wages. <b>A <i>ger toshav</i></b> is <b>subject to</b> the mitzva <b>of: “On the same day you shall give him his wages,” but</b> he <b>is not subject to the prohibition of delaying</b> payment of wages.

### Part 6
Until this point, the Gemara has discussed the source of the ruling of the first <i>tanna</i>. It now analyzes the reasons behind the different opinions. <b>What is the reason of the first <i>tanna</i> of</b> the <i>baraita</i>, who interprets the verse: <b>“From your brothers”?</b> He <b>derives</b> it by verbal analogy comparing the words: “You shall not oppress <b>a hired laborer,”</b> and the verse: “The wages of a <b>hired laborer</b> shall not remain with you all night until the morning.” Just as the former verse includes a Jew, a <i>ger toshav</i>, the rental of an animal, and the rental of utensils, so too, the latter verse includes all of the above. <b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, does not derive</b> this verbal analogy of: <b>“Hired laborer”</b> and <b>“hired laborer.”</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges: <b>Although</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, does <b>not derive</b> the verbal analogy of the words: <b>“Hired laborer”</b> and <b>“hired laborer,”</b> one <b>should</b> still <b>also be liable</b> in the case of <b>animals or vessels due to</b> the injunction <b>of: “On the same day you shall give him his wages.”</b> From where does he derive that such items are not included in this prohibition? <b>Rabbi Ḥananya teaches</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>the verse states:</b> “On his day you shall give him his wages, <b>and the sun shall not set upon him, for he is poor”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:15). This verse clearly is referring to <b>one who</b> can <b>enter into</b> a state of <b>poverty and wealth,</b> which <b>excludes animals and vessels, which cannot enter into</b> a state of <b>poverty and wealth.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> who does not address <b>this</b> verse of: <b>“For he is poor,” what</b> does he <b>do with it?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse is <b>necessary to give precedence to a poor person over a wealthy person</b> if the employer does not have enough money to pay all his workers. <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> derive that <i>halakha</i>? In his opinion <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is derived from: “You shall not oppress a hired laborer who is poor and needy”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:14).

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, why does <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> require another verse? The Gemara explains: He maintains that <b>one</b> verse serves <b>to give a poor person precedence over a wealthy person,</b> while the other <b>one</b> serves <b>to give a poor person precedence over a destitute person,</b> i.e., a complete pauper who owns nothing.

### Part 10
The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> both verses are <b>necessary, as had</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> only that a poor person comes before one who is <b>destitute</b> one could have said that this is <b>because</b> a destitute person is <b>not ashamed to demand</b> his money; he is so needy he is not embarrassed to ask for money. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a wealthy person, who is ashamed to demand</b> his wages, one might <b>say</b> that a poor person does <b>not</b> receive precedence over him. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>had</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> only that this <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>a wealthy person</b> one could have said that it is <b>because</b> he <b>does not need</b> his wages right away, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>a destitute person, who does need it</b> immediately, <b>say</b> that it does <b>not</b> apply. It was therefore <b>necessary</b> for both verses to be stated.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with the regard to the ruling of <b>the <i>tanna</i> of our</b> mishna, <b>whichever way you</b> look at it, it requires clarification. <b>If he derives</b> the verbal analogy of the words: <b>“Hired laborer”</b> and <b>“hired laborer,”</b> then <b>even a <i>ger toshav</i></b> should be included. <b>If</b> he does <b>not derive</b> the verbal analogy of the words: <b>“Hired laborer”</b> and <b>“hired laborer,” from where does he</b> derive that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>to animals and vessels?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> he does <b>not derive</b> the analogy of: <b>“Hired laborer”</b> and <b>“hired laborer,” and there it is different, as the verse states: “The wages of [<i>pe’ulat</i>] a hired laborer shall not remain with you all night until the morning”</b> (Leviticus 19:13). This verse is referring to <b>any</b> case <b>where its work [<i>pe’ulato</i>] is with you,</b> which includes animals and vessels. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then <b>even a <i>ger toshav</i></b> should be included, as he too performs work for you. The Gemara responds: The initial section of <b>the verse states: “Your neighbor,”</b> which refers to <b>your neighbor</b> who is Jewish, <b>and not a <i>ger toshav</i>,</b> who is not called a neighbor.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then <b>even animals and utensils</b> should not be included, as they too are not called: Your neighbor. The Gemara replies: It is <b>written: “With you,”</b> which includes all items that work with you. The Gemara asks: <b>What did you see</b> to decide <b>to include animals and utensils, and to exclude a <i>ger toshav</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>he should include animals and utensils, as they are</b> at least <b>included in</b> the category of <b>your neighbor’s money,</b> whereas <b>a <i>ger toshav</i> is not included in your neighbor’s money.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And the first <i>tanna</i> of</b> the <i>baraita</i>, who interprets: <b>“From your brothers,” what does he do with this</b> verse: <b>“Your neighbor”?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>That</b> verse <b>is necessary for him for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“Your neighbor,” and not a gentile.</b> The Gemara challenges: The exclusion of <b>a gentile</b> is <b>derived from: “Your brothers,”</b> and no additional verses are necessary for this purpose.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> verse serves <b>to permit</b> one who <b>oppresses him, and</b> the other <b>one</b> serves <b>to permit stealing from him, and</b> both are <b>necessary. Because had</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>stealing from him,</b> one could have said that this is <b>because</b> the gentile <b>did not toil for him, but</b> one who <b>oppresses him, where he</b> has <b>toiled for him,</b> you might <b>say</b> that he is <b>not</b> permitted to oppress him. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>had</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> only that the practice of he who <b>oppresses him</b> is permitted, it might have been said that this is <b>because</b> the money has <b>not</b> yet <b>reached his hand, but</b> with regard to <b>stealing from him,</b> when he takes money <b>that</b> has already <b>reached his hand, say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> does <b>not</b> apply. Therefore, both cases are <b>necessary.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> does <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, do with this</b> verse: <b>“The wages of a hired laborer shall not remain with you all night until the morning”?</b> The Gemara answers: It <b>is necessary for him for that which Rav Asi</b> teaches, <b>as Rav Asi says: Even</b> if one <b>hired</b> the laborer <b>to harvest only one cluster of grapes for him,</b> one <b>violates the prohibition of delaying</b> payment of wages.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> from where does <b>the other</b> Sage, i.e., the first <i>tanna</i>, derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: He <b>derives</b> it <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“For he sets his soul upon it”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:15). This indicates that one is liable for delaying the payment of wages due for any work; as a laborer obligates himself to perform the work, it is <b>something for which he gives his soul.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC