
### Part 1
The Gemara summarizes the rulings in a number of the cases discussed above: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ḥama,</b> that his type of tacit interest agreement is permitted. <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> that fixed interest can be reclaimed in court. <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yannai, who says: What</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce, <b>and what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if he referred to the produce’s <b>value?</b> In other words, if one gave an item or money to another as payment of his loan, this is considered a sale without interest.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one <b>sold</b> another <b>a field and</b> the buyer <b>gave him some of</b> the <b>money, and</b> the seller <b>said to him: Whenever you wish, bring</b> the outstanding <b>money and take your</b> field at that point, this is <b>prohibited.</b> If one <b>lent</b> money <b>to</b> another <b>on</b> the basis of the borrower’s <b>field</b> serving as a guarantee, <b>and said to him: If you do not give me</b> the money now and instead delay your payment <b>from now until three years</b> have passed, the field <b>is mine,</b> then after three years, the field <b>is his.</b> This is permitted even if the field is worth more than the amount of the loan. <b>And this is what Baitos ben Zunin would do, with the consent of the Sages,</b> when he lent money.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The ruling of the mishna is unclear, as it requires clarification: In a sale such as this, when the buyer has made only a partial payment, <b>who enjoys the profits</b> of this field in the interim period, until the entire transaction is complete? <b>Rav Huna says:</b> The <b>seller enjoys the profits</b> until he receives the full payment, while <b>Rav Anan says:</b> In the meantime <b>they deposit the profits</b> in escrow <b>with a third party</b> until the transaction is finalized. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> Rav Huna and Rav Anan <b>do not disagree. This one</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the seller <b>says: When you bring</b> all the money you will <b>acquire</b> the field, whereas <b>that one</b> is referring to a case <b>where he says</b> at the time of the transaction: <b>When you bring</b> all the money you will <b>acquire</b> it <b>from now.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Safra taught</b> the following <i>halakhot</i> of <b>interest</b> as a <i>baraita</i> <b>of the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya: Sometimes they are both permitted</b> to enjoy the profits of the field, as this does not constitute interest at all; <b>sometimes they are both prohibited</b> from doing so. <b>And sometimes</b> it is <b>permitted for the seller</b> to enjoy the profits of the field <b>but</b> it is <b>prohibited for the buyer</b> to do so; <b>and sometimes</b> it is <b>permitted for the buyer</b> to enjoy the profits of the field <b>and</b> it is <b>prohibited for the seller</b> to do so.

### Part 5
When Rav Safra taught this <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rava answered after him,</b> in explanation: <b>Sometimes they are both permitted</b> to benefit from the field. For example, <b>if</b> the seller <b>said to him: Acquire</b> the field for yourself <b>in accordance with the measure of your money,</b> he effectively acquires the field incrementally in small portions, which is certainly permitted. <b>Sometimes they are both prohibited</b> from benefiting from the field. For example, <b>if</b> the seller <b>said to him: When you bring</b> the money you will <b>acquire</b> it all <b>from now,</b> if the seller enjoys the profits until the remainder of the money is paid, he has clearly taken interest. If the buyer does not make the final payment, the field will remain the property of the seller and his partial payment will be returned, and the field will be considered a loan given to the seller. If the buyer enjoys the profits of the field in the interim, he will have taken interest.

### Part 6
Rava continues: <b>Sometimes the seller is permitted</b> to benefit from the field <b>and the buyer</b> is <b>prohibited</b> from benefiting from it, i.e., the transaction is considered interest from the perspective of the buyer but not the seller. For example, <b>if</b> the seller <b>said to him: When you bring</b> the money you will <b>acquire</b> the field. <b>And sometimes the buyer is permitted</b> to benefit from the field <b>and the seller</b> is <b>prohibited</b> from benefiting from it. For example, <b>if</b> the seller <b>said to him: Acquire</b> it <b>from now,</b> and the money you still owe me <b>will be</b> considered <b>a loan</b> in <b>your</b> possession. In this case, if the seller enjoys the profits he benefits from the extended payment of the loan.

### Part 7
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that <b>they are both prohibited</b> from benefiting from the field if he says: When you bring the money you will acquire it from now? <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, says</b> that the opinion of this <i>tanna</i> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. As, if</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, doesn’t</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>say</b> that <b>uncertain interest is permitted?</b> In this case as well, it is uncertain whether the arrangement will result in the payment of interest, as it depends on whether or not the rest of the payment is given.

### Part 8
§ It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: If a borrower <b>pledged a house to</b> the lender or <b>pledged a field to him</b> as a guarantee for the loan, <b>and</b> the lender <b>said to</b> the borrower: <b>When you want to sell</b> the house or the field, you must <b>sell them only to me for this</b> specified <b>monetary</b> value, it is <b>prohibited,</b> as the selling of the field for a low price is considered interest paid in exchange for the granting of the loan. But if he said: You must sell them to me <b>according to their value</b> at the time of the sale, this is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that if he said: You must sell them only to me <b>for this</b> specified <b>monetary</b> value, it is <b>prohibited? Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said</b> that it is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. As, if</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, doesn’t</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>say</b> that <b>uncertain interest is permitted?</b> The interest in this case is uncertain, as there is no guarantee that the sale will ever be implemented.

### Part 10
If one <b>sold</b> another <b>a house</b> or <b>sold him a field, and said to</b> the buyer: <b>When I have money, give</b> the property <b>back to me</b> in exchange for the return of the money that you paid for it, it is <b>prohibited,</b> as this transaction is essentially a loan, with the buyer enjoying the profits of the field in the interim. But if the buyer said to him of his own accord: <b>When you have money I will return</b> the property <b>to you,</b> this is <b>permitted.</b> The Gemara again asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> this ruling? <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said</b> that it is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. As, if</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, doesn’t</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>say</b> that <b>uncertain interest is permitted?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> in <b>the first clause and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause?</b> Why does it matter who stated the condition? <b>Rava says: The first clause</b> is referring to a situation <b>where</b> the seller <b>did not tell</b> the buyer that the decision to return the field will be <b>of</b> the buyer’s <b>own accord,</b> but made it a condition of the sale. Consequently, the seller always retains the option to return the money and recover his field, which means it was essentially a loan with the temporary use of the field serving as a substitute for interest. Conversely, in <b>the latter clause,</b> it is referring to a situation <b>where</b> the buyer <b>said</b> he would return the field <b>of his own accord.</b> Since the buyer can choose to keep the field, it is a proper sale.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who sold land to another without a guarantee</b> that if the field is repossessed, the seller will compensate the buyer for his loss. <b>He observed that</b> the buyer <b>was distressed,</b> as he was concerned that the field might have been designated as a pledge to a creditor and would be taken from him, which would cause him to lose his investment. The seller <b>said to</b> the buyer: <b>Why are you distressed? If</b> the creditor <b>seizes</b> the field <b>from you, I will pay you</b> from my <b>best-quality</b> land, and I will also provide compensation for your investment in the <b>improvement</b> of the field, <b>and</b> in addition, I will give you the value of any <b>produce</b> taken from you.

### Part 13
Later, the legal status of this promise was called into question. <b>Ameimar said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC