
### Part 1
are all <b>prohibited</b> when they are found <b>with</b> only <b>one seal; <i>ḥiltit</i>, fish stew [<i>morayes</i>], bread [<i>pat</i>],</b> and <b>cheese [<i>gevina</i>]</b> are all <b>permitted</b> when they are found <b>with one seal.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara explains why only one seal is necessary for bread. <b>With regard to what</b> need we <b>be concerned</b> in the case of <b>bread,</b> that one might have thought it requires two seals? <b>If it is due to</b> the concern for the gentile <b>exchanging</b> the fresh bread of the Jew with his own bread that is less fresh, the difference between <b>cold</b> bread <b>and warm</b> bread is <b>known,</b> and the Jew will realize that there has been an exchange. Likewise, if there is a concern that a gentile might exchange the more valuable <b>wheat</b> bread of the Jew <b>with</b> his own less valuable <b>barley</b> bread, the Jew will <b>also know</b> about it in this case. And <b>if</b> it is due to the concern that a gentile might exchange <b>similar</b> kinds of bread with each other, it can be assumed that <b>since there is one seal</b> the gentile will <b>not trouble</b> himself <b>and forge</b> another seal just to exchange bread of equal value.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rav, what is different</b> about <b>cheese</b> that it requires only one seal whereas milk requires two? If the reason is <b>that</b> a gentile will <b>not trouble</b> himself <b>and forge</b> a different seal, as cheese is generally inexpensive and the small profit he might make is not worth such an effort, this reasoning should apply to <b>milk also,</b> as he will <b>not trouble</b> himself <b>and forge</b> a new seal in this case either. <b>Rav Kahana said: Remove</b> the term: <b>Milk,</b> from Rav’s statement, <b>and enter</b> instead: <b>A piece of fish that has no sign</b> of kashrut.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises an objection: Rav could not have been teaching that a piece of fish with no signs of kashrut requires two seals, as fish <b>is</b> the same as <b>meat,</b> which is already included in the list of items that require two seals. The Gemara explains that there are <b>two categories</b> of <b>meat:</b> Animal meat and fish meat. Since one might have thought that they are subject to different <i>halakhot</i>, Rav therefore teaches that both require two seals.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites a different set of lists than that presented by Rav. <b>And Shmuel says:</b> The substances represented by the acronym <b><i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>tav</i></b> are <b>prohibited</b> when sealed <b>with one seal;</b> those represented by the acronym <b><i>mem</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>gimmel</i>,</b> are <b>permitted</b> when sealed <b>with one seal.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Meat [<i>basar</i>], wine [<i>yayin</i>],</b> and <b>sky-blue dye [<i>tekhelet</i>] are prohibited</b> when sealed <b>with a single seal; fish stew [<i>morayes</i>], <i>ḥiltit</i>,</b> and <b>cheese [<i>gevina</i>],</b> are <b>permitted</b> when sealed <b>with a single seal.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>According to Shmuel, a piece of fish that has no sign</b> of kashrut <b>is</b> the same as <b>meat,</b> and <b>we do not say</b> that there is a difference between <b>two categories</b> of <b>meat.</b> Consequently, he does not include in his list a piece of fish that has no sign of kashrut.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught: One may not purchase</b> foods represented by the acronym <b><i>yod</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>ḥet</i>; <i>mem</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>gimmel</i> in Syria,</b> not even from Jews. The Gemara elaborates: One may <b>not</b> purchase <b>wine [<i>yayin</i>], nor fish stew [<i>morayes</i>], nor milk [<i>ḥalav</i>], nor <i>salkondarit</i> salt [<i>melaḥ salkondarit</i>], nor <i>ḥiltit</i>, nor cheese [<i>gevina</i>], except</b> when purchased <b>from an expert</b> with a reputation for knowing and upholding the <i>halakhot</i> of kashrut. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>all of them, if one is a guest in</b> the home of his <b>host,</b> they are <b>permitted,</b> as a Jew is assumed to keep the <i>halakhot</i> of kashrut in his own home.

### Part 7
The Gemara adds: This <b>supports</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> If <b>a homeowner sent</b> someone a package of food <b>to his house,</b> the food is <b>permitted. What is the reason?</b> It is because <b>a homeowner does not leave aside permitted</b> foods <b>and eat prohibited</b> foods, <b>and when he sends</b> food <b>to</b> another, <b>he sends</b> it <b>from that which he eats</b> himself, even though one may not be allowed to purchase food from that individual.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that <b><i>salkondarit</i> salt</b> is prohibited. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b><i>salkondarit</i> salt? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It is the <b>salt that all Roman bakers [<i>salkondarei</i>] eat. The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b><i>salkondarit</i> salt, black</b> salt is <b>prohibited,</b> whereas <b>white</b> salt is <b>permitted;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: White</b> salt is <b>prohibited; black</b> salt is <b>permitted.</b> The Gemara cites a third opinion: <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Gamliel says in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel: This and that,</b> i.e., both white and black <i>salkondarit</i> salt, are <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara cites an explanation of this dispute. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: According to the statement of the one who says</b> that <b>white</b> <i>salkondarit</i> salt is <b>prohibited,</b> it is suspected that <b>the intestines of white non-kosher fish are mixed in it,</b> and this is the reason for the prohibition. <b>According to the statement of the one who says</b> that <b>black</b> salt is <b>prohibited,</b> it is suspected that <b>the intestines of black non-kosher fish are mixed in it.</b>

### Part 10
<b>According to the statement of the one who said this and that</b> are <b>prohibited,</b> he is concerned that <b>this and that,</b> i.e., the intestines of both white and black fish, <b>are mixed in</b> white and black salt, respectively. The Gemara mentions an additional problem with <i>salkondarit</i> salt: <b>Rabbi Abbahu says in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel: There was a certain elder in our neighborhood who would smooth its surface with pig fat.</b>

### Part 11
§ The mishna further teaches that the list of items it mentioned <b>are</b> all <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara asks: Since the mishna began by stating that the items it lists are prohibited for consumption, <b>what</b> does this apparently redundant conclusion serve <b>to exclude?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Ḥizkiyya</b> cited on 38b, it serves <b>to exclude</b> cases <b>where it is known</b> that wine of gentiles’ was added to the foods, as one may not even derive benefit from such foods. <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> it serves <b>to exclude fish stew and cheese of Beit Unyaki,</b> as it is prohibited to derive benefit from these, <b>and</b> accordingly, the <b>unattributed</b> statement in this mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> cited in the previous mishna (29b).

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are permitted for consumption: Milk that was milked by a gentile and a Jew watched him</b> doing so; <b>and honey; and grape clusters [<i>davdevaniyyot</i>]</b> which, <b>despite the fact that they are dripping</b> juice, <b>are not subject to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>susceptibility</b> to ritual impurity caused by contact with that <b>liquid; and pickled</b> vegetables <b>whose</b> usual <b>manner</b> of preparation <b>does not</b> involve <b>adding wine and vinegar to them; and <i>tarit</i></b> fish <b>that is not minced; and brine that has fish in it; and the leaf of a <i>ḥiltit</i></b> plant; <b>and rolled olive cakes [<i>geluskaot</i>].</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: Overripe</b> olives <b>are prohibited. Locusts that come from</b> a salesman’s <b>basket are prohibited,</b> whereas those that come <b>from the storeroom [<i>heftek</i>] are permitted; and likewise with regard to the portion of the produce designated for the priest [<i>teruma</i>],</b> as will be explained in the Gemara.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learn</b> from the mishna <b>that which the Sages taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A Jew may sit beside a gentile’s flock and</b> wait while <b>the gentile milks</b> his animals <b>and brings</b> the milk <b>to</b> the Jew, <b>and he not</b> need <b>be concerned,</b> even if he cannot see the milking process from his seated position. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this case? <b>If</b> it is known <b>that there is no non-kosher</b> animal <b>in</b> the gentile’s <b>flock,</b> isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that the milk is permitted? Why would the <i>baraita</i> teach an obvious <i>halakha</i>? <b>And if there is a non-kosher</b> animal <b>in his flock,</b> then <b>why</b> is the milk permitted, considering the fact that the Jew could not see the gentile from where he sat?

### Part 15
The Gemara explains: <b>Actually,</b> this is referring to a case <b>where there is a non-kosher</b> animal in the flock, <b>and when</b> the Jew <b>is standing he can see</b> the gentile, <b>but when he is sitting he cannot see</b> the gentile. <b>Lest you say: Since</b> when the Jew <b>is sitting, he cannot see</b> the gentile, <b>we should be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps</b> the gentile <b>will bring</b> non-kosher milk <b>and mix it</b> with the kosher milk, the <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that <b>since when</b> the Jew <b>is standing, he can see him,</b> the gentile <b>is fearful</b> of being caught <b>and does not mix</b> anything <b>into</b> the milk.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the honey</b> of gentiles is permitted. The Gemara explains: <b>For what</b> need we <b>be concerned with regard to honey? If</b> it is <b>due to</b> the concern that a gentile might <b>mix</b> wine with it, honey <b>spoils</b> when it is mixed with wine, and therefore a gentile would not do so. <b>If</b> it is <b>due to the cooking of gentiles,</b> this too does not apply, because <b>it is eaten as it is,</b> i.e., <b>raw. If</b> it is <b>due to</b> the concern that the honey might have absorbed prohibited taste from vessels of <b>gentiles</b> that require <b>purging,</b> this does not apply either, as it <b>is</b> a prohibited substance that <b>imparts flavor to</b> the <b>detriment</b> of the mixture, <b>and</b> such a case <b>is permitted.</b> Since none of these concerns are relevant, the honey is permitted.

### Part 17
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>And grape clusters</b> which, <b>despite the fact that they are dripping</b> juice, <b>are not subject</b> to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>susceptibility to</b> ritual impurity caused by contact with that <b>liquid. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who harvests</b> grapes in order to take them <b>to the press</b> and crush them, there is a dispute as to whether or not the liquid that seeps from the grapes renders them susceptible to ritual impurity. <b>Shammai says: It has become susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, and <b>Hillel says: It has not become susceptible. And</b> eventually <b>Hillel conceded to</b> the opinion of <b>Shammai.</b> This shows that the juice that seeps out of grapes does render them susceptible to ritual impurity, which apparently contradicts the ruling of the mishna.

### Part 18
The Gemara explains: <b>There,</b> in the case of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>he wants</b> the juice <b>as a beverage,</b> and one’s intention influences the capability of certain liquids to render substances susceptible to ritual impurity. Therefore, the liquid that seeps from the grapes renders them susceptible to ritual impurity. <b>Here,</b> in the case of the mishna, <b>he does not want</b> the juice <b>as a beverage,</b> and therefore the grapes are not rendered susceptible to impurity.

### Part 19
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>And <i>tarit</i></b> fish <b>that is not minced</b> and brine that has fish in it are permitted. <b>The Sages taught: What is</b> considered <b><i>tarit</i> that has not been minced? Any</b> fish whose <b>head and spine are recognizable. And what is</b> considered <b>brine that has fish in it? Any</b> brine <b>that</b> has <b>one <i>kilbit</i> or two <i>kilbiyot</i></b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC