
### Part 1
a date that had <b>six additional years</b> relative to the correct scribal date, which takes for its starting point the beginning of Greek rule. <b>The Sages</b> who studied <b>before Rabba thought to say: This is a postdated</b> promissory <b>note,</b> which can be used only from the date it specifies. Therefore, <b>let us hold it until its time arrives</b> so that the creditor <b>will not repossess</b> property that the debtor sold prior to the date that appears in the note. <b>Rav Naḥman</b> disagreed and <b>said: This</b> promissory note <b>was written by an exacting scribe, and those six years</b> are referring to the years <b>when</b> the Greeks <b>ruled</b> only <b>in Elam. We do not count them,</b> as Greek rule had not yet spread throughout the world, but <b>he does count them. And</b> therefore <b>he wrote in</b> the promissory note the correct <b>time,</b> as the date does in fact match the year in which the promissory note was written.

### Part 2
Rav Naḥman cites a proof for his resolution: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The Greeks <b>ruled for six years in Elam</b> alone, <b>and afterward their dominion spread throughout the entire world.</b> It is the later event that serves as the basis for the dating system used by most scribes.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov objects to</b> Rav Naḥman’s answer: <b>From where</b> is it known <b>that we count</b> years according <b>to</b> the <b>Greek rule,</b> and that this promissory note was dated according to a system that uses the Greek rule as a starting point and was written by an exacting scribe? <b>Perhaps we count</b> the years using <b>the exodus from Egypt</b> as the starting point, which occurred one thousand years before the start of the Greek rule, <b>and</b> in this case the scribe <b>left</b> out <b>the first thousand years</b> from the time of the exodus <b>and held on</b> only <b>to the last thousand years,</b> omitting the thousands digit and writing merely the hundreds, tens, and single digits. <b>And</b> if so, <b>this</b> promissory note <b>is postdated. Rav Naḥman said</b> in response: The practice is that <b>in the exile we count</b> years <b>only</b> according <b>to the Greek kings.</b>

### Part 4
Upon hearing this reply, Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov <b>thought:</b> Rav Naḥman <b>is</b> merely <b>deflecting</b> my legitimate questions with this answer. Afterward, <b>he went out, examined</b> the matter, <b>and discovered</b> that it was as Rav Naḥman said. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>In the exile we count</b> years <b>only</b> according <b>to the Greek kings.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Ravina said: The mishna is also precisely</b> formulated, as it teaches that we calculate years according to the Greek kings. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Rosh HaShana</i> 2a): <b>On the first of Nisan is the New Year for kings and for the Festivals. And we say</b> about this: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is it stated that the first of Nisan is the New Year <b>for kings? Rav Ḥisda said:</b> It is said <b>with regard to</b> dating <b>documents</b> and determining their validity.

### Part 6
<b>And we learned</b> in the same mishna: <b>On the first of Tishrei is the New Year for</b> counting <b>years and for</b> calculating <b>Sabbatical</b> cycles. <b>And we say: With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is it stated that the first of Tishrei is the New Year <b>for</b> counting <b>years? And Rav Ḥisda said:</b> It is said <b>with regard to</b> dating <b>documents.</b> These two statements with regard to the dating of <b>documents</b> are <b>difficult</b> in light of <b>each other,</b> as according to one statement the dating system is based on Nisan as the first month, whereas according to the other the year begins in Tishrei.

### Part 7
<b>And we resolved</b> the contradiction by explaining that <b>here</b> the dating is according <b>to kings of Israel,</b> and <b>there</b> the dating is according <b>to the kings of the</b> gentile <b>nations of the world.</b> That is, when we date years according <b>to the kings of the nations of the world, we count from</b> the month of <b>Tishrei,</b> whereas when we date years according <b>to the kings of Israel, we count from</b> the month of <b>Nisan.</b>

### Part 8
Ravina explains his proof: <b>And now</b> that <b>we count from</b> the month of <b>Tishrei</b> when dating documents, one can claim as follows: <b>If it enters your mind</b> that <b>we count</b> and date years using <b>the exodus from Egypt</b> as the starting point, while leaving off the first thousand years, then <b>we should count from</b> the month of <b>Nisan,</b> when the exodus occurred. <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from</b> the mishna that <b>we count</b> years according <b>to the Greek kings?</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from it</b> that the scribal years are in fact calculated according to the Greek kings. Therefore, one should explain as did Rav Naḥman: A promissory note that appears to be postdated by six years may not actually be a postdated promissory note; rather, it is assumed to have been written by an exacting scribe.

### Part 9
§ One of the gentile festivals listed in the mishna is <b>the day of the festival [<i>geinuseya</i>] of their kings.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> meant by: <b>The day of <i>geinuseya</i> of their kings? Rav Yehuda says:</b> This is referring to the <b>day on which the gentiles appoint</b> and crown <b>their king.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Two gentile festivals are <b>the day of <i>geinuseya</i> and</b> the <b>day on which the gentiles appoint their king?</b> This indicates that these are two separate occasions. The Gemara answers that it is <b>not difficult: This,</b> the day of <i>geinuseya</i>, is referring to the coronation of the king <b>himself,</b> whereas <b>that,</b> the day on which the gentiles appoint and crown their king, is referring to the coronation <b>of his son,</b> when a son is crowned during his father’s lifetime.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And do</b> the Romans actually <b>appoint</b> as <b>king the son of the king? But didn’t Rav Yosef teach:</b> The verse relating a prophesy about Edom, associated with the Roman Empire: <b>“Behold, I made you small among the nations”</b> (Obadiah 1:2), is a reference to the fact <b>that</b> the Romans <b>do not place</b> on the throne as <b>king the son of the king.</b> The continuation of the verse: <b>“You are greatly despised,”</b> is a reference to the fact <b>that</b> the Romans <b>have neither</b> their own <b>script nor</b> their own <b>language,</b> but use those of other nations. The Gemara therefore rejects the explanation of the <i>baraita</i> that distinguishes between coronation of a king and coronation of the king’s son: <b>Rather, what is the day of <i>geinuseya</i>?</b> It is <b>the</b> king’s <b>birthday.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Two gentile festivals are <b>the day of <i>geinuseya</i> and the birthday.</b> Once again, these two events cannot be the same. The Gemara answers: It is <b>not difficult: This,</b> the day of <i>geinuseya</i>, is referring to the birthday of the king <b>himself,</b> whereas <b>that,</b> the birthday mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>, is referring to the birthday <b>of his son.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara further asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The day of <i>geinuseya</i> of</b> the king, <b>the day of <i>geinuseya</i> of his son, and</b> the king’s <b>birthday and the birthday of his son?</b> If so, the <i>geinuseya</i> cannot be either his or his son’s birthday. <b>Rather, what</b> is meant by the <b>day of <i>geinuseya</i>?</b> In fact it is referring to the <b>day on which</b> the gentiles <b>appoint</b> and crown <b>their king. And</b> the fact that a <i>baraita</i> mentions both the day of <i>geinuseya</i> and the day on which the gentiles appoint and crown their king is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this,</b> the day of <i>geinuseya</i>, is referring to <b>his</b> own coronation, whereas <b>that,</b> the day on which the gentiles appoint and crown their king, is referring to the coronation <b>of his son.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And if</b> it is <b>difficult for you that</b> which was stated earlier, <b>that</b> the Romans <b>do not appoint</b> as <b>king the son of the king,</b> in fact <b>they do appoint</b> a son of the king as king <b>through the request</b> of the king. <b>For example,</b> there was <b>Asveirus, son of Antoninus, who ruled</b> at the request of Antoninus.

### Part 14
The Gemara provides the background for this assertion. It is related that <b>Antoninus said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>I wish for Asveirus my son to rule instead of me, and that</b> the city <b>Tiberias be released</b> [<b><i>kelaneya</i></b>] from paying taxes. <b>And if I tell</b> the Roman senate <b>one</b> of my wishes, <b>they will do</b> as I wish, but if I ask for <b>two</b> of them <b>they will not do</b> as I wish. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi conveyed his answer in the following manner: <b>He brought a man, placed him on</b> the shoulders of <b>another</b> man, <b>and put a dove in the hands of the one on top. And he said to the one on the bottom: Tell the one on top that he should cause the dove to fly from his hands.</b> Antoninus <b>said</b> to himself: <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>this</b> is what Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>is saying to me: You</b> should <b>ask</b> the Senate: <b>Let Asveirus my son rule instead of me, and say to Asveirus that he should release Tiberias</b> from paying taxes.

### Part 15
Antoninus also <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: <b>Important Romans are upsetting me;</b> what can I do about them? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>brought him to</b> his <b>garden,</b> and <b>every day he uprooted a radish from the garden bed before him.</b> Antoninus <b>said</b> to himself: <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>this</b> is what Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>is saying to me: You</b> should <b>kill them one</b> by <b>one, and do not incite all of them</b> at once.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC