
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of a gentile <b>who hires</b> a Jewish <b>laborer to work with wine</b> used for an idolatrous <b>libation with him, his wage</b> is <b>forbidden,</b> i.e., it is prohibited for the Jew to derive benefit from his wage. If the gentile <b>hired him to do other work with him, even if he said to him</b> while he was working with him: <b>Transport the barrel of wine</b> used for <b>a libation for me from</b> this <b>place to</b> that <b>place, his wage</b> is <b>permitted,</b> i.e., the Jew is permitted to derive benefit from the money. With regard to a gentile <b>who rents</b> a Jew’s <b>donkey to carry wine</b> used for <b>a libation on it, its</b> rental <b>fee</b> is <b>forbidden.</b> If <b>he rented it to sit on it, even if a gentile placed his jug</b> of wine used for a libation <b>on it, its</b> rental <b>fee</b> is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> In the first case of the mishna, where a gentile hires a Jew to produce wine used for a libation with him, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>his wage</b> is <b>forbidden? If we say</b> that <b>since</b> it is <b>prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation, his wage</b> is <b>also prohibited,</b> that is difficult: <b>There are</b> the cases of <b><i>orla</i></b> produce, i.e., produce grown during a tree’s first three years, <b>and diverse kinds</b> planted <b>in a vineyard,</b> from <b>which</b> it is also <b>prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit, and</b> yet <b>we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 56b) that if a man <b>sold</b> this produce <b>and betrothed</b> a woman <b>with the money</b> received <b>for it,</b> she is <b>betrothed.</b> Evidently, money gained from a forbidden item is not itself forbidden, as otherwise the betrothal would not take effect.

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the reason that the wage is forbidden is <b>since</b> the wine used for a libation <b>transfers to the money</b> its status <b>as</b> an object of <b>idol worship.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>But there is</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>Sabbatical-</b>Year produce, <b>which transfers</b> its sanctity to the <b>money</b> with which <b>it</b> is redeemed, <b>and</b> yet <b>we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 8:4): With regard to <b>one who says to</b> his <b>laborer</b> during the Sabbatical Year: <b>Here is this dinar</b> I give <b>to you; gather for me vegetables for its</b> value <b>today, his wage</b> is <b>forbidden,</b> i.e., the sanctity of the Sabbatical-Year produce is transferred to the wage, since it is as though he has purchased Sabbatical-Year produce in exchange for the dinar. But if the employer says to him: <b>Gather for me vegetables today,</b> without mentioning that it is for the value of the dinar, <b>his wage</b> is <b>permitted,</b> as he merely paid him for his labor. This should apply as well to the case of the wine used for a libation.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Abbahu says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> This <b>is a penalty that the Sages imposed upon donkey drivers and with regard to wine</b> used for <b>a libation.</b> The Gemara explains: With regard to <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation,</b> the penalty is <b>as we said,</b> that the wage of one who is hired to work in the production of wine used for libation is forbidden. With regard to <b>donkey drivers, what is</b> this penalty? The penalty is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the donkey drivers who were working in</b> the transportation of <b>Sabbatical</b>-Year <b>produce, their wage</b> is <b>Sabbatical</b>-Year produce.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does it mean when it says that <b>their wage</b> is <b>Sabbatical</b>-Year produce? <b>If we say that we give them</b> their <b>wage</b> for their work <b>from Sabbatical</b>-Year <b>produce,</b> the employer <b>consequently is paying his debt from Sabbatical</b>-Year <b>produce, and</b> this violates that which <b>the Torah states:</b> “And the Sabbatical produce of the land shall be <b>for food</b> for you” (Leviticus 25:6), indicating that this produce is designated for food, <b>but not for commerce.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> if it means <b>that their wage is sacred with the sanctity of Sabbatical-</b>Year produce, <b>is</b> that wage in fact <b>sacred? But isn’t it taught</b> in a mishna that with regard to <b>one who says to a laborer: Here is this dinar</b> I give <b>to you and gather for me vegetables today, his wage</b> is <b>permitted,</b> but if he says to him: <b>Gather for me vegetables today for its</b> value, <b>his wage</b> is <b>forbidden?</b> The case of the donkey drivers is clearly similar to the former case, where the value of the dinar was not mentioned.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said: Actually,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement should be interpreted as saying that <b>we give him</b> his <b>wage from Sabbatical</b>-Year <b>produce. And</b> as for <b>that which</b> appears to <b>pose a difficulty for you,</b> that the verse designates such produce <b>“for food” but not for commerce,</b> that can be resolved by explaining <b>that one gives him</b> his wage <b>in a permitted manner,</b> i.e., as a gift rather than as a wage. This is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 3:1) that <b>a person should not say to another:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC