
### Part 1
the concern that a gentile may secretly <b>exchange</b> his wine with the wine of a Jew, <b>since there is one seal,</b> the gentile will <b>not exert</b> himself <b>and forge</b> a different seal in order to facilitate the exchange.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara discusses the <i>halakha</i> with regard to various types of wine. <b>The Sages taught: Cooked wine and <i>aluntit</i> of gentiles are prohibited;</b> but already <b>prepared <i>aluntit</i></b> that was made by a Jew before it entered the gentile’s possession is <b>permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what is <i>aluntit</i>?</b> It is <b>as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to Shabbat: One may prepare <i>anomlin</i>, but one may not prepare <i>aluntit</i>.</b> The <i>baraita</i> clarifies: <b>And what is <i>anomlin</i> and what is <i>aluntit</i>? <i>Anomlin</i></b> is a drink that is a mixture of <b>wine, honey, and pepper. <i>Aluntit</i></b> is a mixture of <b>aged wine and clear water and balsam, which they prepare for</b> drinking after bathing in <b>a bathhouse</b> to cool down from the heat of the bathhouse. It is prohibited to prepare <i>aluntit</i> on Shabbat because it is a type of remedy.

### Part 3
<b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say: Diluted wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure,</b> according to which the consumption of a liquid is prohibited if it is left uncovered; and <b>cooked wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>libation,</b> which prohibits deriving benefit from wine that has been in a gentile’s possession. <b>A dilemma was raised before them:</b> With regard to <b>cooked wine, is it subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, or is it not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure?</b> The Gemara resolves the dilemma: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear: Rabbi Ya’akov bar Idi testified about cooked wine</b> and stated <b>that it is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara cites another proof that cooked wine is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of exposure. When <b>Rabbi Yannai bar Yishmael became ill, Rabbi Yishmael ben Zeirud and</b> other <b>Sages went to him to inquire</b> about <b>his</b> health. <b>They were seated, and</b> this very <b>dilemma was raised before them:</b> With regard to <b>cooked wine, is it subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, or is it not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure? Rabbi Yishmael ben Zeirud said to them: This is what Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says in the name of a great man.</b> Parenthetically, the Gemara asks: <b>And who is</b> this great man? He is <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya.</b> He said: <b>Cooked wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure.</b> The Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yishmael ben Zeirud: <b>Shall we rely</b> on this claim? <b>Rabbi Yannai bar Yishmael motioned to them: Upon me and upon my neck,</b> i.e., you can certainly rely on this claim.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>Shmuel and Ablet,</b> a gentile scholar, <b>were sitting</b> together, <b>and</b> others <b>brought cooked wine before them.</b> Ablet <b>withdrew his hand</b> to avoid rendering the wine prohibited to Shmuel. Seeing this, <b>Shmuel said to</b> Ablet that the Sages <b>said: Cooked wine is not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation,</b> and therefore you need not withdraw your hand on my account.

### Part 6
The Gemara cites yet another incident: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya’s maidservant</b> noticed that <b>a certain</b> container of <b>cooked wine had become exposed. She came before Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> who <b>said to her</b> that the Sages <b>said: Cooked wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure.</b> Similarly, <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava’s attendant</b> noticed that <b>a certain</b> container of <b>diluted wine had become exposed.</b> Rav Adda bar Ahava <b>said to him</b> that the Sages <b>said: Diluted wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Pappa said: We said</b> that wine is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of exposure <b>only</b> in a case <b>where it was well diluted, but</b> where it was only <b>partially diluted</b> a snake might still <b>drink</b> from it, and therefore it is prohibited. The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>And</b> is it correct that a snake <b>drinks partially diluted</b> wine? <b>But wasn’t Rabba bar Rav Huna</b> once <b>traveling on a ship while carrying</b> a jug of <b>wine with him, and he saw a certain snake that slithered and approached</b> the wine. <b>He said to his attendant: Remove the eyes of this</b> serpent, i.e., do something that will cause the snake to leave. His attendant <b>took a bit of water and threw it in</b> the wine, <b>and</b> the snake <b>turned away.</b> This indicates that snakes do not drink partially diluted wine.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this conclusion: <b>For undiluted</b> wine, a snake <b>will risk its life</b> by exposing itself to humans, but <b>for diluted</b> wine, a snake <b>will not risk its life.</b> But in either case, if the wine is left unguarded, a snake will drink from it.

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>And</b> is it true that <b>for diluted wine</b> a snake <b>will not risk its life? But wasn’t Rabbi Yannai</b> once in <b>Bei Akhborei, and some say</b> that it was <b>bar Hadaya</b> who <b>was</b> in <b>Bei Akhborei,</b> and others <b>were sitting</b> with him <b>and drinking diluted wine.</b> When they finished, <b>they had some wine left in the container [<i>bekhuva</i>], and they covered it with a cloth. And</b> then <b>they saw a certain snake take water</b> in its mouth <b>and pour it</b> through the cloth <b>into the container until</b> the liquid <b>filled the container and the wine flowed over</b> the <b>cloth, and</b> the snake <b>drank</b> the overflowing wine. This shows that a snake will risk its life to drink diluted wine.

### Part 10
The Sages <b>say</b> in response: Wine <b>that</b> the snake <b>itself diluted, it does drink.</b> Wine <b>that another diluted, it does not drink.</b> In other words, a snake does not drink diluted wine unless it was diluted by the snake itself. Accordingly, even partially diluted wine is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of exposure.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ashi says, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rav Mesharshiyya</b> who says: Are you providing <b>a resolution for</b> a situation involving <b>danger?</b> In other words, one may not endanger lives by subscribing to such reasoning. <b>Rava said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>diluted wine is subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure and is</b> also <b>subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>wine</b> used as <b>a libation</b> for idolatry; <b>cooked wine is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure and is not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation</b> either.

### Part 12
§ After discussing exposed wine, the Gemara addresses the matter of exposed water. <b>The attendant of Rav Ḥilkiya bar Tovi</b> noticed that <b>a certain jug of water had become exposed, and he had been sleeping near it. He went to Rav Ḥilkiya bar Tovi</b> to determine the halakhic status of the exposed water. Rav Ḥilkiya <b>said to him</b> that the Sages <b>said: Fear of a sleeping person is upon them,</b> i.e., snakes will not attempt to drink from a container that is near a person, even if he is asleep. <b>And this matter</b> applies only <b>during the day, but not at night.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>But</b> that <b>is not so.</b> Rather, there is <b>no difference</b> between one who sleeps <b>during the day and</b> one who sleeps <b>during the night.</b> In both cases, <b>we do not say</b> that the <b>fear of a sleeping person is upon</b> the snakes.

### Part 13
The Gemara presents the opinions of Rav and Shmuel with regard to various sources of water. <b>Rav would not drink</b> water <b>from the house of an Aramean,</b> as <b>he said: They are not careful with</b> regard to <b>exposure.</b> But <b>he would drink</b> water <b>from the house of a widow,</b> as <b>he said: She upholds her</b> late <b>husband’s conventions</b> and ensures that liquids are not left uncovered.

### Part 14
By contrast, <b>Shmuel would not drink water from the house of a widow,</b> as <b>he said: She no</b> longer <b>has the fear of a man upon her, and</b> therefore <b>she does not</b> necessarily <b>cover the water. But he would drink</b> water <b>from the house of an Aramean,</b> as he said: <b>Granted that they are not particular about</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure,</b> but <b>in any event they are particular about cleanliness,</b> and will cover it for hygienic reasons, if not halakhic ones. The Gemara cites a different version: <b>Some say</b> that <b>Rav would not drink water from the house of an Aramean, but he would drink</b> water <b>from the house of a widow. Shmuel would not drink water either from the house of an Aramean or from the house of a widow.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: There are three</b> kinds of <b>wines that are not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, and they are: Sharp, bitter,</b> and <b>sweet</b> wines. <b>Sharp</b> is referring to <b>acrid wine [<i>tila</i>] that cracks the jug,</b> due to its acidity. <b>Bitter</b> is referring to <b><i>yarneka</i>. Sweet</b> is referring to <b>sweetened wine.</b> These three wines that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says are not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of exposure are all of low quality. <b>Rav Ḥama teaches</b> that the three wines are <b>of high quality: Sharp</b> is referring to <b>wine</b> mixed with <b>peppers. Bitter</b> is referring to wine mixed with <b>wormwood [<i>apsintin</i>]. Sweet</b> is referring to <b><i>mei barg</i>,</b> a choice beverage.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says: <i>Karina</i> is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b><i>karina</i>? Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> It is <b>sweet wine that comes from Asia [<i>Asya</i>]</b> Minor. <b>Rava says: But in its place</b> of origin <b>it is subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure. What is the reason?</b> The reason is that there, <b>it is the wine of the province</b> and snakes do not hesitate to drink from it. <b>Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>this wine that has soured [<i>de’akrim</i>], until three days</b> have passed from when it began to sour, <b>it is subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure and is subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC