
### Part 1
The verse states: “Any man…that slaughters an ox…outside the camp, and to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting he did not bring it, to sacrifice an offering to the Lord” (Leviticus:17:3–4). <b>Until this point,</b> the verse is <b>speaking about sacrificial</b> animals <b>that one consecrated during a period when the prohibition of</b> sacrificing offerings on private <b>altars</b> was in effect, after the Tabernacle was erected, <b>and</b> then <b>he</b> also <b>sacrificed them during a period when the prohibition of</b> sacrificing on private <b>altars</b> was in effect.

### Part 2
This is apparent <b>as</b> the <b>punishment</b> for sacrificing <b>them is stated</b> in this verse, <b>as it is stated: “And to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting he did not bring it,</b> to sacrifice an offering to the Lord, before the Tabernacle of the Lord…that man shall be cut off from among his people” (Leviticus:17:4). <b>We have heard</b> from that verse the <b>punishment,</b> but with regard to the <b>prohibition</b> against sacrificing on a private altar, <b>from where</b> is it derived? <b>The verse states:</b> “Take heed to yourself <b>lest you offer up your burnt-offerings</b> in every place that you see” (Deuteronomy 12:13).

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the principle <b>that Rabbi Avin</b> says that <b>Rabbi Ile’a says, as Rabbi Avin says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ile’a says: Wherever it is stated: “Beware,” “lest,” or “do not,”</b> this is <b>nothing other than a prohibition.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>From that</b> point <b>onward,</b> the verse is <b>speaking about sacrificial</b> animals <b>that one consecrated during a period when</b> there was <b>permission</b> to sacrifice offerings on private <b>altars,</b> before the Tabernacle was erected, <b>and</b> then <b>one sacrificed them</b> outside the Tabernacle <b>during a period when the prohibition of</b> sacrificing on private <b>altars</b> was in effect.

### Part 5
This is apparent, <b>as it is stated: “In order that the children of Israel shall bring their sacrifices, which they slaughter</b> upon the open field, that they shall bring them to the Lord, to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting” (Leviticus 17:5). The phrase: “Their sacrifices, which they slaughter,” is interpreted as referring to offerings <b>that I have previously permitted you</b> to slaughter on private altars. This verse teaches that those offerings may now be sacrificed only inside the Tabernacle. The phrase <b>“upon the open field” teaches that</b> in the case of <b>anyone who slaughters</b> an offering <b>on</b> a private <b>altar during a period when the prohibition of</b> sacrificing on private <b>altars</b> is in effect, even if he sacrifices the offering to God, <b>the verse ascribes him</b> blame <b>as if he is slaughtering</b> it <b>upon the open field</b> in idolatrous worship.

### Part 6
The verse continues: <b>“That they shall bring them to the Lord.” This</b> is <b>a positive mitzva</b> to sacrifice even offerings that were consecrated before the Tabernacle was erected in the wilderness. <b>And from where</b> is it derived that there is <b>a prohibition</b> against sacrificing them outside the Tabernacle? <b>The verse states: “And they shall not slaughter their offerings anymore</b> to the <i>se’irim</i> after whom they go astray; this shall be to them an eternal statute, throughout their generations” (Leviticus 17:7).

### Part 7
One <b>might</b> have thought that sacrificing these offerings outside the Tabernacle <b>would be punishable by <i>karet</i>,</b> as this is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to offerings consecrated after the Tabernacle was consecrated. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This shall be to them an eternal statute,</b> throughout their generations” (Leviticus 17:7). One can infer from this verse that <b>this,</b> the punishment for transgressing a positive mitzva and a prohibition, applies <b>to them, but no other</b> punishment applies <b>to them.</b> In any event, the <i>baraita</i> interprets the verse: “And they shall not slaughter their offerings anymore to the <i>se’irim</i>,” as prohibiting sacrificing to God on private altars, not as Rabbi Elazar interpreted it, as prohibiting the worship of an idol in an atypical manner.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said:</b> One may derive both <i>halakhot</i> from the verse, as the term “And they shall not” can be interpreted as referring to two distinct prohibitions. <b>Read into</b> the verse: <b>“And they shall not slaughter,”</b> which is interpreted as prohibiting offerings to God on private altars. <b>And</b> also <b>read into</b> the verse: <b>“And they shall not</b> slaughter…<b>anymore</b> to the <i>se’irim</i>,” which is interpreted as prohibiting the worship of an idol in an atypical manner.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one <b>found money, a garment, or vessels at the head of</b> Mercury, <b>these are permitted.</b> If one found vine <b>branches</b> laden with clusters <b>of grapes, or wreaths</b> made <b>of stalks, or</b> containers of <b>wine, oil, or flour, or any</b> other <b>item the likes of which is sacrificed on the altar</b> there, it is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that money, clothing, or vessels found at the head of the idol are not forbidden. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Yosef says</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya says: One verse states: “And you have seen their detestable things and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which are with them”</b> (Deuteronomy 29:16). <b>And one verse states: “You shall not covet the silver or the gold that is on them,</b> nor take it for yourself” (Deuteronomy 7:25). <b>How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? The second verse mentions the prohibition of only silver and gold, whereas the first verse also mentions wood and stone.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: This teaches that the prohibition with regard to those items that are <b>“with them,”</b> i.e., those found next to the idols, is <b>similar to</b> the prohibition with regard to those items that are <b>“on them.” Just as</b> with regard to those items that are <b>on</b> the idols, <b>a decorative item,</b> e.g., gold or silver, is <b>prohibited,</b> but that <b>which is not a decorative</b> item is <b>permitted, so too,</b> with regard to those items that are <b>with</b> the idols, <b>a decorative item</b> is <b>prohibited, and</b> that <b>which is not a decorative</b> item is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> one could <b>say</b> to the contrary, that the prohibition with regard to those items that are <b>“on them”</b> is <b>similar to</b> the prohibition with regard to those items that are <b>“with them.” Just as</b> with regard to those items that are <b>with</b> the idols, <b>everything that is</b> found <b>with them</b> is included in the prohibition, as the verse mentions wood and stone, which are not decorative items, <b>so too,</b> with regard to those items that are <b>on</b> the idols, <b>everything that is on them</b> is forbidden. The Gemara explains: <b>If so,</b> the verse <b>should not state</b> the prohibition with regard to items that are <b>on</b> the idols, as it may be inferred <i>a fortiori</i> from the prohibition with regard to items that are found next to them.

### Part 13
The Gemara challenges: The mishna teaches that money that is found at the head of the idol is permitted. This is difficult, as <b>money is a decorative item. The school of Rabbi Yannai say:</b> The ruling of the mishna is not stated with regard to a case where coins were placed on the idol in order to adorn it. Rather, the ruling of the mishna is stated <b>with regard to</b> a case where the money is inside <b>a purse</b> that is <b>tied</b> onto the idol <b>and suspended from its neck</b> for safekeeping, or left there as payment for the priests.

### Part 14
The Gemara challenges: The mishna teaches that a garment found at the head of the idol is permitted. This is difficult, as <b>a garment is a decorative item. The school of Rabbi Yannai say:</b> The ruling of the mishna is not stated with regard to a garment that was placed on the idol in order to adorn it. Rather, the ruling of the mishna is stated <b>with regard to a garment</b> that is <b>folded and placed upon the head of</b> the idol. The Gemara challenges: The mishna teaches that vessels found at the head of the idol are permitted. This is difficult, as <b>a vessel is a decorative item. Rav Pappa said:</b> The mishna is referring to <b>where a pot [<i>mashkilta</i>] is placed upside down upon the head of</b> the idol, in which case it does not serve as decoration.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Asi bar Ḥiyya says: Any</b> item <b>that is</b> found <b>within the</b> inner <b>partitions [<i>hakilkalin</i>]</b> that surround the idol, <b>even water or salt, is prohibited,</b> as it is assumed to be an offering brought in idolatrous worship. With regard to items that are found <b>outside the partitions, a decorative item</b> is <b>prohibited,</b> but that <b>which is not a decorative</b> object is <b>permitted. Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina says: We have a tradition</b> that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>partitions</b> applies <b>neither to Peor nor to Mercury.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> <i>halakha</i> is this stated? <b>If we say</b> that this means <b>that</b> with regard to Peor and Mercury <b>even</b> items that are found <b>inside</b> the partitions <b>are</b> treated <b>like</b> those that are found <b>outside</b> the partitions <b>and</b> they are <b>permitted,</b> this is difficult. <b>Now,</b> Peor is worshipped by <b>defecating before it.</b> Even excrement is offered to Peor. Is it possible that its worshippers <b>do not sacrifice water and salt to it?</b> Although water and salt are not generally offered to an idol, in the case of Peor they certainly can be. <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina means that with regard to Peor and Mercury <b>even</b> items that are found <b>outside</b> the partitions <b>are</b> treated <b>like</b> those that are found <b>inside</b> the partitions, <b>and</b> they <b>are prohibited</b> even if they are not decorative items.

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of an object of <b>idol worship that had a garden or a bathhouse,</b> one <b>may derive benefit from them when</b> it is <b>not to</b> the <b>advantage</b> of the idol worship, i.e., when he does not pay for his use, <b>but</b> one <b>may not derive benefit from them</b> when it is <b>to</b> their <b>advantage,</b> i.e., if one is required to pay for his use. If the garden or bathhouse <b>belonged</b> jointly <b>to</b> the place of idol worship <b>and to others,</b> one <b>may derive benefit from them, both</b> when it is <b>to</b> their <b>advantage and when</b> it is <b>not to</b> their <b>advantage. A gentile’s</b> object of <b>idol worship</b> is <b>prohibited immediately,</b> i.e., as soon as it is fashioned for that purpose, <b>but a Jew’s</b> object of idol worship is <b>not prohibited until it is</b> actually <b>worshipped.</b>

### Part 18
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Abaye says:</b> The case where use of the garden or bathhouse is <b>to</b> the financial <b>advantage</b> of the idol worship is referring to a case where it is <b>to</b> the financial <b>advantage of</b> the <b>priests [<i>komarin</i>],</b> who receive payment for the use of the garden or bathhouse. The case <b>where</b> it is <b>not to</b> their financial <b>advantage</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> it is <b>not to</b> the financial <b>advantage of</b> the <b>priests.</b> This is <b>to the exclusion of</b> a situation where using the facility is only to the financial <b>advantage of</b> the idol’s <b>worshippers,</b> in <b>which</b> case one is <b>permitted</b> to derive benefit from them.

### Part 19
The Gemara comments: <b>There are those who teach</b> Abaye’s statement <b>with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If the garden or bathhouse <b>belonged to</b> the place of idol worship <b>and to others,</b> one <b>may derive benefit from them</b> both when it is <b>to</b> their <b>advantage and when</b> it is <b>not to</b> their <b>advantage. Abaye says:</b> The term: When it is <b>to</b> their <b>advantage,</b> is referring to a case where it is <b>to</b> the financial <b>advantage of</b> the <b>other</b> owners, while the term: <b>When</b> it is <b>not to</b> their <b>advantage,</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> it is <b>not to</b> the financial <b>advantage of</b> the <b>priests.</b> But if the use of the place is to the financial advantage of the priests, one may not derive benefit from the place.

### Part 20
The Gemara notes: According to the <b>one who teaches</b> Abaye’s statement <b>with regard to</b> the case presented in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna, where the garden or bathhouse is only partially owned by the place of idol worship, <b>all the more so</b> does this statement apply <b>to</b> the case presented in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, where the garden or bathhouse is owned exclusively by the place of idol worship. <b>But</b> according to the <b>one who teaches</b> Abaye’s statement <b>with regard to</b> the case presented in <b>the first clause,</b> Abaye’s statement applies only to that case. <b>But with regard to</b> the case presented in <b>the latter clause, since there are others</b> who own the place <b>together with</b> the place of idol worship, <b>even</b> if the use of the garden or bathhouse is <b>to</b> the financial <b>advantage of</b> the <b>priests</b> it is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 21
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A gentile’s</b> object of <b>idol worship</b> is <b>prohibited immediately,</b> i.e., as soon as it is fashioned for that purpose. The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“You shall destroy all the places, where the nations</b> that you are to dispossess <b>served</b> their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every leafy tree” (Deuteronomy 12:2). <b>The verse is speaking of vessels that were used</b> by the gentiles <b>for idol worship.</b>

### Part 22
One <b>might</b> have thought that the vessels are prohibited even if the gentiles <b>fashioned them but did not complete them, completed them but did not bring them</b> to the idol, or <b>brought them</b> to the idol <b>but did not use them</b> for idolatrous worship. <b>Might</b> one have thought that in these cases the vessels <b>are prohibited? The verse states: “Where the nations</b> that you are to dispossess <b>served</b> their gods” (Deuteronomy 12:2). This indicates <b>that</b> the vessels <b>are not prohibited until they are</b> used for <b>worship.</b> It is <b>from here</b> that the Sages <b>stated: A gentile’s</b> object of <b>idol worship is not prohibited until it is worshipped, but a Jew’s</b> object of idol worship <b>is prohibited immediately.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 23
<b>Rabbi Akiva says: The matters are reversed. A gentile’s</b> object of <b>idol worship is prohibited immediately, but a Jew’s</b> object of idol worship is not forbidden <b>until it is worshipped.</b> The mishna is therefore in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva.

### Part 24
<b>The Master said</b> above: <b>The verse is speaking of vessels that were used</b> by the gentiles <b>for idol worship.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> it <b>written</b> “You shall destroy all <b>the places”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:2), indicating that the verse is not referring to vessels? The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated in this verse <b>is not</b> applicable for the <b>matter of places</b> that were worshipped, it must apply to another matter. The verse cannot apply to the places themselves, <b>as they are not rendered prohibited, as it is written:</b> “You shall destroy…<b>their gods, upon the</b> high <b>mountains”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:2), indicating that one is <b>not</b> required to destroy <b>the mountains</b> that are themselves <b>their gods.</b> Something that is attached to the ground is not rendered forbidden, and therefore even if idol worshippers worshipped the mountain itself it does not need to be destroyed.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC