
### Part 1
We are dealing <b>with an expert physician,</b> who will not risk his reputation by harming a child. This is similar to that which Rabbi Yoḥanan said, <b>as when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: If</b> the physician <b>was</b> considered <b>a recognized expert,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> for one to be healed by him. When Rabbi Meir said that an Aramean may circumcise a Jewish boy, he was referring specifically to a doctor who is known for his expertise.

### Part 2
The latter clause of the <i>baraita</i> states that Rabbi Yehuda maintains that a Samaritan may circumcise a Jewish infant. The Gemara asks: <b>And does Rabbi Yehuda</b> actually <b>hold</b> that it is <b>permitted</b> for a Samaritan to perform circumcision? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A Jew may circumcise a Samaritan but a Samaritan may not</b> be allowed to <b>circumcise a Jew, because he circumcises</b> him <b>for the sake of Mount Gerizim;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yosei said to him: And where do we find that</b> the mitzva of <b>circumcision from the Torah</b> must be performed <b>for the sake of</b> fulfilling God’s will? <b>Rather,</b> a Samaritan <b>may continue to circumcise</b> Jews <b>until his soul leaves</b> his body, i.e., until the Samaritan dies, and there is no room for concern. But Rabbi Yehuda explicitly states above that circumcision may not be performed by a Samaritan.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, actually</b> you should <b>reverse</b> the opinions in the <i>baraita</i> <b>as we reversed</b> them <b>initially. And</b> as for the <b>difficulty</b> raised with regard to one statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda against</b> the other statement <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, that</b> opinion, that a gentile may not perform circumcision, <b>is</b> actually the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi.</b> Conversely, the first <i>baraita</i>, which is reversed and therefore cites Rabbi Yehuda as maintaining that an Aramean may perform circumcision, is referring to Rabbi Yehuda bar Ilai. Accordingly, the different opinions reflect a dispute between <i>tanna’im</i> rather than a contradiction.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites a proof that according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi a gentile is not qualified to perform circumcision. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to circumcision</b> performed <b>by a gentile that</b> it <b>is not valid? The verse states:</b> “And God said to Abraham: <b>And as for you, you shall keep My covenant,</b> you, and your seed after you throughout their generations” (Genesis 17:9).

### Part 6
§ It was stated that according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda circumcision must be performed for the sake of fulfilling a mitzva, whereas Rabbi Yosei holds that no particular intention is necessary. The Gemara analyzes these opinions. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: What is the reasoning of Rabbi Yehuda? As it is written:</b> “And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover <b>to the Lord let</b> all his males <b>be circumcised”</b> (Exodus 12:48). It can be inferred from the verse that the males must be circumcised “to the Lord,” i.e., for the sake of fulfilling God’s will. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what is the reasoning of <b>Rabbi Yosei?</b> It is written: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>]”</b> (Genesis 17:13). The usage of the doubled verb teaches that circumcision may be performed by anyone.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> Sage, i.e., Rabbi Yosei, <b>isn’t it written: “To the Lord let</b> all his males <b>be circumcised,”</b> which indicates that circumcision must be performed for the sake of fulfilling God’s will? The Gemara answers: <b>That is written with regard to Passover.</b> According to Rabbi Yosei, the phrase “to the Lord” is referring to the previous mention of the Paschal offering, rather than to circumcision. Accordingly, the verse should be read: “Will keep Passover to the Lord.” The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Yehuda, <b>isn’t it also written: “He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],”</b> indicating that circumcision may be performed by anyone? The Gemara answers: <b>The Torah spoke in the language of people,</b> i.e., the doubled verb is the usual style of the Torah, which does not serve to teach a novel <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara continues discussing the issue of circumcisions performed by gentiles. <b>It was stated: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to circumcision</b> performed <b>by a gentile that</b> it <b>is not valid? Daru bar Pappa says in the name of Rav:</b> This is derived from a verse, as it is stated: And God said to Abraham: <b>“And as for you, you shall keep My covenant,</b> you, and your seed after you throughout their generations.” <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says that it is derived from the verse: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>].”</b> According to Rabbi Yoḥanan, this verse teaches that a Jew must be circumcised by one who is already circumcised.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the practical difference <b>between</b> these two opinions? <b>There is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>a circumcised Arab or a circumcised hill person [<i>gavnuni</i>].</b> According to <b>the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that a Jewish infant may be circumcised only by one who has been circumcised himself is derived from the verse: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],” there is</b> reason to permit an Arab or <i>gavnuni</i> to perform the circumcision, as they are circumcised. <b>And</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> that circumcision may not be performed by a gentile is derived from the phrase: <b>“You shall keep my covenant,” there is no</b> reason to permit an Arab or Gibeonite to perform circumcision.

### Part 10
The Gemara raises an objection: <b>And</b> is it so, <b>according to the one who says</b> it is derived from the verse: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],”</b> that a Jew may not be circumcised by a gentile, that <b>there is</b> reason to permit a circumcised gentile to perform circumcision? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 31b): With regard to one who vows: <b>Deriving benefit from those who are uncircumcised is <i>konam</i> for me,</b> he <b>is permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from uncircumcised Jews</b> because they are not regarded as uncircumcised, <b>but he is prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from the uncircumcised of the nations of the world? Apparently, even though</b> some gentiles <b>are circumcised, they are</b> nevertheless <b>considered as those who are uncircumcised.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rather, there is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>a Jew whose brothers died due to circumcision, and</b> as a result, <b>they did not circumcise him. According to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the verse: <b>“And as for you, you shall keep My covenant,” there is</b> reason to permit such a person to perform circumcision, as he is a Jew. <b>According to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the phrase: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],” there is no</b> reason to permit this Jew to perform circumcision, as he is not circumcised himself.

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this suggestion as well: <b>And</b> is it so that <b>according to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the verse: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],” there is no</b> reason to permit an uncircumcised Jew to perform circumcision? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 31b): With regard to one who vows: <b>Deriving benefit from those who are circumcised</b> is <i>konam</i> <b>for me, he is prohibited</b> from deriving benefit even <b>from uncircumcised Jews and</b> he is <b>permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from the circumcised of the nations of the world. Apparently, even though</b> some Jews <b>are not circumcised, they are</b> nevertheless <b>considered as those who are circumcised.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather, there is</b> a difference <b>between</b> these two opinions with regard to <b>a woman. According to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the verse: <b>“And as for you, you shall keep My covenant,” there is no</b> reason to permit a woman to perform circumcision, <b>as a woman is not subject to</b> the mitzva of <b>circumcision,</b> and therefore she is not included in those who must keep God’s covenant. <b>And according to the one who says</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the verse: <b>“He must be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>],” there is</b> reason to permit a woman to perform circumcision, <b>as a woman is considered as one who is</b> naturally <b>circumcised.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara raises a difficulty against this explanation: <b>And is there anyone who says</b> that <b>a woman may not</b> perform circumcision? <b>But isn’t it written: “Then Zipporah took [<i>vattikkaḥ</i>] a flint</b> and cut off the foreskin of her son” (Exodus 4:25). This verse explicitly states that a circumcision was performed by a woman. The Gemara answers that one should <b>read into</b> the verse: <b>And she caused to be taken [<i>vattakkaḥ</i>],</b> i.e., she did not take a flint herself. <b>But isn’t it written: And she cut off [<i>vattikhrot</i>]? Read into</b> the verse: <b>And she caused to be cut off [<i>vattakhret</i>], as she told another person</b> to take a flint and cut off her son’s foreskin, <b>and he did</b> so. The Gemara provides an alternative explanation: <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>She came and began</b> the act, <b>and Moses came and completed</b> the circumcision.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna discusses the issue of accepting certain professional services from a gentile. <b>One may be treated by</b> gentiles, provided that it is <b>monetary treatment, but not personal treatment. And one may not have his hair cut by them anywhere,</b> due to the danger that the gentile will kill him with the razor; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: In the public thoroughfare,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to have one’s hair cut by a gentile, <b>but not</b> when the Jew and gentile are <b>alone together.</b>

### Part 16
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What</b> is <b>monetary treatment, and what</b> is <b>personal treatment? If we say</b> that <b>monetary treatment</b> is medical attention provided in exchange <b>for payment,</b> whereas <b>personal treatment</b> is medical attention provided <b>for free,</b> then <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach: One may be treated by</b> gentiles in exchange <b>for payment, but not for free.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara suggests another explanation: <b>Rather, monetary treatment</b> is referring to medical treatment for <b>a matter that poses no</b> life-threatening <b>danger,</b> whereas <b>personal treatment</b> is referring to treatment for <b>a matter that does pose</b> life-threatening <b>danger.</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion as well. <b>But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say: Even</b> with regard to the wound of <b>a bloodletting incision [<i>rivda dekhusilta</i>] we are not</b> permitted to be <b>treated by</b> gentiles. The wound left after bloodletting certainly does not pose life-threatening danger, and yet a Jew is prohibited from having it treated by a gentile.

### Part 18
<b>Rather, monetary treatment</b> is referring to medical treatment provided for <b>one’s animal,</b> whereas <b>personal treatment</b> is referring to treatment provided for <b>his</b> own <b>body, and this is</b> in accordance with <b>that</b> which <b>Rav Yehuda says: Even</b> with regard to the wound of <b>a bloodletting incision, we are not</b> permitted to be <b>treated by them.</b>

### Part 19
<b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Mar Ukva says: But if</b> a gentile <b>said to him: Such and such a potion is beneficial for</b> this ailment, or <b>such and such a potion is harmful for</b> this ailment, it is <b>permitted</b> to adhere to the gentile’s advice.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC