
### Part 1
<b>that split lengthwise</b> from top to bottom, and <b>a certain gentile jumped up</b> and <b>encircled it</b> with his arms in order to prevent the wine from spilling. <b>Rafram bar Pappa, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, deemed it permitted to sell</b> the wine <b>to gentiles,</b> as the wine was rendered prohibited only for drinking but not with regard to deriving benefit. The Gemara notes: <b>This statement</b> applies only in a case <b>where it split lengthwise. But</b> where the barrel split <b>widthwise</b> and the gentile held the top and bottom halves together, it is <b>permitted even for drinking. What is the reason</b> that the wine is permitted? The gentile <b>is</b> merely <b>performing the action of a brick</b> by weighing the barrel down, and he is not doing anything to the wine.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain gentile who was found standing in a winepress. Rav Ashi said: If there is</b> enough wine in the winepress that it is <b>moist</b> enough <b>to moisten</b> other items, the winepress <b>requires rinsing and requires</b> a more thorough <b>cleansing,</b> as the Gemara will explain (74b). <b>But if</b> there is <b>not</b> enough wine to moisten other items, <b>merely rinsing is sufficient for it.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>a gentile who was found standing next to the wine</b> collection <b>vat, if there is a loan</b> owed <b>by</b> the owner of the wine vat <b>to</b> the gentile, the wine is <b>prohibited.</b> Since the gentile maintains that he has a right to the owner’s property he has no compunctions about touching the wine. But if <b>there is no loan</b> owed <b>by</b> the owner of the wine vat <b>to</b> the gentile, the wine is <b>permitted,</b> as it is assumed that the gentile did not touch the wine that was not his.

### Part 4
If a gentile <b>fell into the</b> wine collection <b>vat and emerged</b> from it, or if <b>he measured</b> the wine in the winepress <b>with a pole</b> without touching it with his hands, or if <b>he cast a hornet</b> out of the wine <b>by</b> means of <b>a pole</b> and the pole touched the wine, <b>or where</b> the gentile <b>was removing the foam</b> that was <b>on</b> the <b>top of a fermenting barrel</b> of wine; <b>with regard to all these</b> cases <b>there was</b> such <b>an incident. And</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that the wine <b>may be sold</b> to gentiles, as it is permitted to derive benefit from the wine, but not to drink it. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems</b> the wine <b>permitted</b> even for drinking. In a case where a gentile <b>took the barrel</b> of wine <b>and threw it, in his anger, into the</b> wine collection <b>vat, this was an incident</b> that occurred <b>and</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> the wine <b>fit</b> for drinking.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that in the case of a gentile who was found standing next to a wine collection vat, if the owner of the vat owes money to the gentile the wine is prohibited. <b>Shmuel says: And this</b> <i>halakha</i> applies only <b>when</b> the <b>loan</b> includes the qualification that the gentile <b>has</b> a lien <b>on that wine,</b> as only then does the gentile feel that he is entitled to touch the wine.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The wording of <b>the mishna is also precise</b> according to Shmuel’s interpretation, <b>as we learned</b> in the following mishna (61a): In the case of a Jew <b>who renders the wine of a gentile permitted</b> by treading the gentile’s grapes so that the wine can be sold to Jews, <b>and he</b> then <b>places</b> the wine <b>in</b> the gentile’s <b>domain</b> until he sells it, the <i>halakha</i> depends on the circumstances. If <b>that one,</b> the gentile, <b>writes for</b> the Jew: <b>I received money from you</b> in payment for the wine, even though he did not yet receive the actual payment, the wine is <b>permitted.</b> This is because the wine is considered the Jew’s property and there is no reason to suppose that the gentile might touch it. <b>But</b> in a case <b>where the Jew desires to remove</b> the wine <b>and</b> the gentile <b>does not allow him</b> to do so <b>until</b> the Jew <b>gives him the money</b> due to <b>him, this was an incident</b> that occurred <b>in Beit She’an and</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> the wine <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 7
Rav Ashi explains: <b>The reason</b> that the wine is prohibited is <b>that</b> the gentile <b>does not allow</b> the Jew to remove the wine, and therefore the gentile is considered to have some degree of ownership of the wine. <b>Therefore,</b> one can infer that if the gentile <b>allows him</b> to remove the wine, the wine is <b>permitted,</b> even though the Jew still owes him money. One may <b>conclude from</b> the mishna that in order for the wine to be prohibited <b>we require</b> the <b>loan</b> to include the qualification that the gentile has a lien <b>on that wine.</b> The Gemara affirms: One <b>may conclude</b> Shmuel’s principle <b>from</b> the mishna.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that if a gentile <b>fell into the</b> wine collection <b>vat and emerged,</b> it is not prohibited to derive benefit from the wine. <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the gentile <b>emerged</b> from the vat <b>dead. But</b> if he <b>emerged alive,</b> the wine is <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that the wine is prohibited? <b>Rav Pappa said: Since</b> the gentile was rescued from death, <b>he considers</b> that day <b>like their festival day,</b> and he offers the wine as an idolatrous libation in thanksgiving.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that if a gentile <b>measured</b> the wine in the winepress <b>with a pole,</b> or if he cast a hornet out of the wine by means of a pole, or if he removed the foam on top of a fermenting barrel of wine, with regard to <b>all these</b> cases <b>there was</b> such <b>an incident, and</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that the wine <b>may be sold</b> to gentiles but one may not drink it. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems</b> the wine <b>permitted</b> even for drinking. <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava says: May blessings rest upon Rabbi Shimon’s head,</b> as his reasoning is clear. <b>When he deems</b> the wine <b>permitted, he deems</b> it <b>permitted even with regard to drinking, and when he deems</b> the wine <b>prohibited, he deems</b> it <b>prohibited even with regard to</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from it.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ḥiyya, son of Abba bar Naḥmani, says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Rav says, and some say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Ze’eiri says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says: Abba bar Ḥanan said to me: This</b> is what <b>Ze’eiri says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> Despite this, the Gemara concludes: <b>But</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to the case where a gentile <b>took a barrel</b> of wine <b>and threw it, in his anger, into the</b> wine collection <b>vat, this was an incident</b> that occurred <b>and</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> the wine <b>fit</b> for drinking. <b>Rav Ashi says:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> form of contact <b>through which a <i>zav</i></b> renders an object <b>ritually impure, in</b> a case where <b>a gentile</b> has that same type of contact with wine, he <b>renders</b> it <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation.</b> In the case of <b>any</b> form of contact <b>through which a <i>zav</i></b> does not transmit ritual impurity, leaving an object <b>ritually pure, a gentile does not render</b> the wine with which he has contact <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rav Huna raised an objection to Rav Ashi</b> from the mishna: With regard to the case where a gentile <b>took the barrel</b> of wine <b>and threw it, in his anger, into the</b> wine collection <b>vat, this was an incident</b> that occurred <b>in Beit She’an and</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> the wine <b>fit</b> for drinking. One may infer that if the gentile threw the wine <b>in his anger, yes,</b> it is permitted. But if it was <b>not in his anger</b> the wine is <b>not</b> permitted, even though in the case of a <i>zav</i>, if he threw an object at a vessel, it does not render the vessel impure.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC