
### Part 1
<b>One who cuts the hooves of</b> the animal, severing the legs <b>from the knee and below,</b> does not render the animal a <i>tereifa</i>. It is evident from the <i>baraita</i>, which discusses the cases in which an animal is rendered a <i>tereifa</i> and is therefore unfit to eat, that it is discussing kosher animals. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Pappa interpreted</b> the <i>baraita</i> as referring <b>to</b> the <b>calf that pulls</b> the king’s <b>coach,</b> a kosher animal of which the king made use.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The day of shaving his,</b> i.e., the gentile’s, <b>beard</b> and his locks. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the mishna <b>teaching</b> here? Is it referring to <b>the day of shaving his beard and</b> head, when he cuts the hair of his head and as a result <b>his</b> long <b>locks</b> at the back of his head are <b>left</b> as a form of idol worship? <b>Or perhaps</b> the mishna is speaking of <b>the day of shaving his beard and removing his locks,</b> which are removed some time after they were left on the head? The Gemara responds: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an answer, <b>as both</b> opinions <b>are taught</b> in <i>baraitot</i>: One <i>baraita</i> mentions <b>the day of shaving his beard and</b> head when <b>his</b> long <b>locks</b> at the back of his head are <b>left,</b> whereas a different <i>baraita</i> specifies <b>the day of shaving his beard and removing his locks.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara continues to discuss Roman festivals. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: They have another</b> festival <b>in Rome: Once every seventy years they bring a man</b> who is <b>whole</b> and free from any defect <b>and have him ride on a lame man,</b> to symbolize the healthy Esau ruling over Jacob, who walked with a limp after his fight with the angel. <b>And they dress him</b> in the <b>garments of Adam the first</b> man <b>and place on his head the scalp [<i>karkifelo</i>] of Rabbi Yishmael,</b> which the Romans flayed when they executed him.

### Part 4
<b>And they hang gold on his neck weighing two hundred dinars, and cover the markets with onyx, and announce before him: The calculation [<i>sakh</i>]</b> of <b>the master [<i>kiri</i>]</b> Jacob with regard to the time of the redemption is <b>fraudulent [<i>plaster</i>]; the brother of our master,</b> i.e., Esau, <b>a forger.</b> They further announce: One <b>who witnesses</b> this festival <b>witnesses</b> it, <b>and whoever does not witness</b> it will <b>not</b> witness it ever, as it was celebrated only once every seventy years. <b>What purpose does deceit serve for the deceiver, and forgery for the forger? And they conclude in this</b> fashion: <b>Woe unto this</b> one, Esau, <b>when that</b> one, Jacob, <b>will arise,</b> as this will cause Esau’s downfall.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi says: The mouths of</b> these <b>wicked</b> people <b>have caused their downfall. Had they said: A forger</b> is <b>the brother of our master,</b> their claim would be interpreted <b>as they say</b> and wish to be understood. <b>Now that they say:</b> The brother <b>of our master, a forger;</b> they can be understood as saying: <b>It is our master himself</b> who is the <b>forger.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that <b>the <i>tanna</i> of our</b> mishna <b>does not count this</b> festival in his list of gentile festivals? The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>counts those</b> festivals <b>that occur each and every year,</b> and <b>he does not count</b> those festivals <b>that do not occur each and every year.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>Those</b> festivals enumerated in the mishna are the festivals <b>of the Romans.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> are the idolatrous festivals <b>of the Persians?</b> The Gemara answers: <b><i>Mutredei</i> and <i>Turyaskei</i>, <i>Moharnekei</i> and <i>Moharin</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Those</b> are the festivals <b>of the Persians and the Romans,</b> and <b>what</b> are the festivals <b>of the Babylonians?</b> The Gemara answers: <b><i>Moharnekei</i> and <i>Akenitei</i>, <i>Beḥanunei</i> and the tenth of Adar.</b>

### Part 8
§ <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Rav says, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rava</b> who <b>says</b> that <b>Rav says: There are five established temples of idol worship,</b> and <b>they are: The temple of Bel in Babylonia; the temple of Nebo in</b> the city of <b>Khursei;</b> the temple of <b><i>Tirata</i>, which is</b> located <b>in</b> the city of <b>Mapag; <i>Tzerifa</i>, which is</b> located <b>in Ashkelon;</b> and <b><i>Nashra</i>, which is</b> located <b>in Arabia. When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said: The Sages <b>added to these</b> places <b>the marketplace that is</b> located <b>in Ein Bekhi</b> and <b><i>Nadbekha</i>, which is</b> located <b>in Akko. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that Rav Dimi was referring to <b><i>Natbera</i> that is</b> located <b>in Akko. Rav Dimi from Neharde’a teaches the opposite,</b> that it is the <b>marketplace that is</b> located <b>in Akko,</b> and <b><i>Nadbekha</i> that is</b> located <b>in Ein Bekhi.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rav Ḥisda said to Rav Ḥisda: What</b> does it mean that these temples of idol worship <b>are established?</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: This is what your mother’s father,</b> Rav Ḥanan bar Rava, <b>said:</b> In contrast to festivals, which last for one or several days, <b>they are always fixed</b> as the site of idol worship, as <b>constantly, all year</b> round, <b>worship</b> takes place there.

### Part 10
§ <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that <b>in the Diaspora,</b> engaging in business with gentiles <b>is prohibited only</b> on <b>the day of their festival</b> itself, not during the days preceding and following the festival. Since Jews live among the gentiles, they are unable to refrain from engaging in business with them for such an extended period. The Gemara asks: <b>And is</b> it <b>prohibited even</b> on <b>their festival day</b> itself? <b>But didn’t Rav Yehuda permit Rav Beruna to sell wine</b> to gentiles, <b>and</b> permitted <b>Rav Giddel to sell wheat, on the festival of the Arab</b> merchants? The Gemara answers: <b>The festival of the Arab</b> merchants <b>is different, as</b> it does <b>not</b> have <b>a fixed</b> time, and therefore the Sages did not include it in the prohibition.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>a city in which there is</b> active <b>idol worship,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to engage in business transactions with gentiles who live <b>outside of</b> the city. If the <b>idol worship</b> is <b>outside</b> the city, it is <b>permitted</b> to engage in business <b>within</b> the city. <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>traveling there,</b> a place where a pagan festival is being celebrated? <b>When the road is designated</b> only <b>for that place,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to use the road, as onlookers will assume that the traveler intends to join the festival. <b>But if one were able to travel on it to</b> arrive at <b>another place,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to use the road to reach the place that is observing the festival.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> that determine whether a place is sufficiently far from a city to be considered <b>outside of it? Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina:</b> A place that is far enough away is, <b>for example, the bazaar [<i>atluza</i>] of Gaza,</b> which is located outside the city walls. <b>And some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish asked Rabbi Ḥanina</b> about this issue: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the bazaar of Gaza?</b> May one conduct business there on the day of a festival celebrated in Gaza? Rabbi Ḥanina <b>said to him: Did you never in your lifetime travel to Tyre and see a Jew and a gentile</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC