
### Part 1
<b>Ḥizkiyya says:</b> If the volume of the water and the wine <b>was increased by</b> the <b>forbidden</b> wine, i.e., the forbidden wine fell in last, the mixture is <b>forbidden,</b> because the forbidden wine renders the permitted wine forbidden by the principle of a substance in contact with the same type of substance, and the water does not nullify the forbidden wine. But if the volume of the water and the forbidden wine <b>was increased by</b> the <b>permitted</b> wine, i.e., there was a mixture of wine used for a libation and water, and the wine used for a libation was nullified by the water and then permitted wine fell into the mixture, in such a case the permitted wine is not rendered forbidden by the forbidden wine that had already been nullified, and so the entire mixture is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Even</b> if the volume of the permitted wine and the water <b>was increased by</b> the <b>forbidden</b> wine, the mixture is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zeira: Shall we say</b> that <b>Ḥizkiyya and Rabbi Yoḥanan disagree with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis?</b>

### Part 4
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Orla</i> 2:11): In the case of <b>non-sacred leaven and <i>teruma</i></b> leaven <b>that fell into</b> a non-sacred <b>batch of dough,</b> and <b>neither is this one</b> alone potent enough <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to become leavened, nor is that one</b> alone potent enough <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to become leavened, and they combined and caused</b> the dough <b>to become leavened,</b> there is a dispute as to whether this dough has the status of <i>teruma</i>, and is therefore forbidden to non-priests, or non-sacred bread.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says: I follow the final</b> element that fell into the dough. If the <i>teruma</i> fell in last, the dough is forbidden to non-priests. <b>And the Rabbis say: Whether</b> the <b>forbidden item,</b> i.e., the <i>teruma</i>, <b>fell</b> in <b>first or whether</b> it fell in <b>last,</b> the dough <b>is not forbidden unless there is enough of</b> the forbidden leaven alone <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to become leavened.</b> Apparently, Ḥizkiyya holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer that if the forbidden substance is mixed in last, the mixture is rendered forbidden, and Rabbi Yoḥanan holds in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis that if the amount of the forbidden substance is not sufficient in and of itself to render the mixture forbidden, the mixture is permitted.

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> that this is the same dispute? <b>But doesn’t Abaye say:</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>taught</b> that the mixture is permitted when the permitted leaven fell in last <b>only</b> in a case <b>when one first removed the forbidden</b> leaven before the permitted leaven fell into the dough and made it rise. <b>But</b> if <b>one did not first remove the forbidden</b> leaven, the dough is <b>forbidden</b> even if the permitted leaven fell in last. According to Abaye’s interpretation, <b>in accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>does Ḥizkiyya state his ruling</b> with regard to a mixture of forbidden wine, permitted wine, and permitted water, that if the forbidden wine was mixed in last the mixture is forbidden? According to the Rabbis the mixture should be permitted in any event, as there is not enough forbidden wine to render the mixture forbidden, and according to Rabbi Eliezer, even if the permitted wine was mixed in last the mixture should be forbidden, as the forbidden wine was not removed.

### Part 7
<b>Rather, here</b> Ḥizkiyya and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagree concerning</b> the principle that with regard to a mixture of a forbidden substance and a permitted substance of the same type, and a permitted substance of a different type, <b>one considers</b> the permitted substance of the same type as though it were nonexistent so that the substance of the other type can nullify the forbidden substance. <b>Ḥizkiyya is not of</b> the opinion that <b>one considers</b> it as though it were nonexistent, whereas <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan is of</b> the opinion that one considers it as though it were nonexistent, and so he maintains that in any event the water nullifies the forbidden wine, and the permitted wine in the mixture is disregarded.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And is Rabbi Yoḥanan of</b> the opinion that <b>one considers</b> the permitted substance of the same type as though it were nonexistent? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Asi ask Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> the following question: If one had <b>two cups</b> of wine, <b>one non-sacred and one of <i>teruma</i>, and he diluted them</b> with water <b>and mixed them together,</b> and there is sufficient water in each of the cups to nullify the <i>teruma</i> wine, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is the non-sacred wine, which is the same type of substance as the <i>teruma</i> wine, considered to be nonexistent, and the water in the mixture nullifies the <i>teruma</i> wine, or does the <i>teruma</i> wine render the non-sacred wine forbidden, and the water in both cups is insufficient to nullify the combined wine? <b>And</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>did not resolve</b> the dilemma <b>for him,</b> indicating that he did not have a set opinion on the matter.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Initially he did not resolve</b> the dilemma <b>for him,</b> but <b>ultimately he resolved for him</b> that the permitted substance of the same type is considered as though it were nonexistent. It <b>was also stated</b> that this was Rabbi Yoḥanan’s ultimate opinion, as <b>Rabbi Ami says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says, and some say</b> that it is <b>Rabbi Asi</b> who <b>says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If one had <b>two cups</b> of wine, <b>one non-sacred and one of <i>teruma</i>, and he diluted them</b> with water <b>and mixed them together,</b> and there is sufficient water in each of the cups to nullify the <i>teruma</i> wine, <b>one considers the permitted</b> wine <b>as though it were nonexistent, and</b> as for <b>the rest,</b> the <i>teruma</i> wine, the volume of the <b>water is greater than</b> the volume of the wine <b>and nullifies it.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna states that <b>this is the principle: A substance</b> in contact <b>with</b> the <b>same</b> type of <b>substance</b> renders the mixture forbidden <b>with any amount</b> of the forbidden substance, <b>but</b> a substance in contact <b>with a different</b> type of <b>substance</b> renders the mixture forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where it <b>imparts flavor</b> to it.

### Part 11
The Gemara presents an amoraic dispute with regard to this principle: <b>Rav and Shmuel both say:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> food <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that becomes mixed with permitted food, if the permitted food is <b>of</b> its own <b>type,</b> then even <b>any amount</b> of the forbidden substance renders the entire mixture forbidden. If the forbidden food is mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, then the mixture becomes forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where there is enough of the forbidden food to <b>impart flavor</b> to the mixture.

### Part 12
According to Rav and Shmuel, <b>what is added</b> by the statement in the mishna: <b>This is the principle,</b> etc.? This is stated <b>to include any</b> food <b>forbidden by the Torah,</b> and not only wine used for a libation.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish both say:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> food <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that falls into a mixture, <b>whether of its</b> own <b>type</b> of food <b>or another type</b> of food, the mixture is forbidden <b>in</b> a case where there is enough of the forbidden item to <b>impart flavor</b> to the mixture. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>except for</b> the cases of <b>untithed produce and wine</b> used for <b>a libation,</b> which render a mixture <b>with their</b> own <b>type</b> of food forbidden <b>in</b> a case where <b>any amount</b> of the forbidden food was mixed with the permitted food; <b>but</b> if they are mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, the mixture is forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where it <b>imparts flavor</b> to it. <b>And</b> according to this opinion, the statement in the mishna: <b>This is the principle,</b> etc., is stated <b>to include</b> the case of <b>untithed produce,</b> which is not mentioned in the mishna explicitly.

### Part 14
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav and Shmuel,</b> and <b>it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara elaborates: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav and Shmuel:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> food <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that becomes mixed with a permitted food, <b>in</b> a case where the permitted food is of <b>its</b> own <b>type,</b> then even <b>any amount</b> of the forbidden substance renders the entire mixture forbidden. But in a case where the forbidden food was mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, then the mixture becomes forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where there is enough of the forbidden item to <b>impart flavor</b> to the mixture.

### Part 16
<b>It is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> food <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that falls into a mixture, <b>whether of its</b> own <b>type</b> of food <b>or another type</b> of food, the mixture is forbidden <b>in</b> a case where there is enough of the forbidden food to <b>impart flavor</b> to the mixture. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>except for</b> the cases of <b>untithed produce and wine</b> used for <b>a libation,</b> which render a mixture <b>with their</b> own <b>type</b> of food forbidden <b>in</b> a case where <b>any amount</b> of the forbidden food was mixed with the permitted food; but if they are mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, the mixture is forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where they <b>impart flavor</b> to it.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, why are untithed produce and wine used for a libation treated more stringently than other forbidden foods? <b>Granted, wine</b> used for <b>a libation</b> is treated stringently <b>due to the severity of idol worship, but</b> with regard to <b>untithed produce, what is the reason</b> that any amount of it that is mixed with permitted food of its own type renders the mixture forbidden?

### Part 18
The Gemara answers: Just <b>as</b> it assumes <b>its permitted</b> status, <b>so</b> it assumes <b>its forbidden</b> status, <b>as Shmuel says:</b> Even <b>one grain of wheat</b> given as <i>teruma</i> <b>exempts the</b> entire <b>heap</b> of grain from the obligation of <i>teruma</i>. Since any amount of <i>teruma</i> given renders the entire heap of produce permitted, any amount of untithed produce also renders the entire mixture forbidden. <b>And this is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>With regard to what</b> situation <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that <b>any amount</b> of <b>untithed produce renders</b> a mixture <b>forbidden?</b> It is with regard to untithed produce that becomes mixed <b>with its</b> own <b>type,</b> but with regard to untithed produce that becomes mixed <b>with another type,</b> the mixture is forbidden only <b>in</b> a case where the untithed produce <b>imparts flavor</b> to it.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC