
### Part 1
<b>and you derived pleasure from it, and because of</b> this <b>you were held responsible</b> by Heaven. Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: Akiva,</b> you are right, as <b>you have reminded me</b> that <b>once I was walking in the upper marketplace of Tzippori, and I found a man</b> who was one <b>of the students of Jesus the Nazarene, and his name was Ya’akov of Kefar Sekhanya. He said to me: It is written in your Torah: “You shall not bring the payment to a prostitute,</b> or the price of a dog, into the house of the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 23:19). <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: Is it permitted <b>to make from</b> the payment to a prostitute for services rendered <b>a bathroom for a High Priest</b> in the Temple? <b>And I said nothing to him</b> in response.

### Part 2
<b>He said to me: Jesus the Nazarene taught me the following:</b> It is permitted, as derived from the verse: <b>“For of the payment to a prostitute she has gathered them, and to the payment to a prostitute they shall return”</b> (Micah 1:7). Since the coins <b>came from a place of filth, let them go to a place of filth</b> and be used to build a bathroom.

### Part 3
<b>And I derived pleasure from the statement,</b> and <b>due to this, I was arrested for heresy</b> by the authorities, because <b>I transgressed that which is written in the Torah:</b> “Remove your way far from her, and do not come near the entrance of her house” (Proverbs 5:8). <b>“Remove your way far from her,” this</b> is a reference to <b>heresy; “and do not come near the entrance of her house,” this</b> is a reference to <b>the ruling authority.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different interpretation: <b>“Remove your way far from her,” this</b> is a reference to <b>heresy and the ruling authority; “and do not come near the entrance of her house,” this</b> is a reference to <b>a prostitute. And how much</b> distance must one maintain from a prostitute? <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Four cubits.</b>

### Part 4
With regard to the derivation of the verse by Jesus the Nazarene, the Gemara asks: <b>And what do the Sages derive from this</b> phrase: <b>“Payment to a prostitute”?</b> The Gemara answers: They explain it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ḥisda, as Rav Ḥisda says: Any prostitute who hires herself</b> out to others for money will become so attached to this practice that <b>ultimately,</b> when others no longer wish to hire her, <b>she</b> will <b>hire</b> others to engage in intercourse with her. <b>As it is stated: “And in that you gave payment, and no payment is given to you, therefore you are contrary”</b> (Ezekiel 16:34).

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> Rav Ḥisda, who stated above that the Torah requires one to maintain a distance of four cubits from a prostitute, <b>disagrees with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Pedat. As Rabbi Pedat says: The Torah prohibited only intimacy that involves engaging in prohibited sexual relations, as it is stated: “None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness”</b> (Leviticus 18:6). The prohibition against intimacy in the Torah applies exclusively to sexual intercourse, and all other kinds of intimacy that do not include actual intercourse are not included in the prohibition.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>When Ulla would come from the study hall, he would kiss his sisters on their hands. And some say: On their chests. And</b> the Gemara points out that this action of <b>his disagrees with</b> another ruling that Ulla <b>himself</b> issued, <b>as Ulla says: Mere intimacy</b> with a woman with whom one is prohibited from engaging in sexual intercourse is <b>prohibited, due to</b> the maxim: <b>Go, go, we say to a nazirite, go around, go around</b> but <b>do not come near to the vineyard.</b> Just as a nazirite is warned not even to come into close proximity of a vineyard lest he consume a product of the vine, so too one is obligated to distance himself from anyone with whom intercourse is forbidden.

### Part 7
§ In connection to the earlier mention of heresy and the ruling authorities, the Gemara cites a verse: <b>“The horseleech has two daughters: Give, give”</b> (Proverbs 30:15). <b>What</b> is meant by <b>“give, give”? Mar Ukva says:</b> This is the <b>voice</b> of <b>the two daughters who cry</b> out <b>from Gehenna</b> due to their suffering; <b>and</b> they are the ones who <b>say in this world: Give, give,</b> demanding dues and complete allegiance. <b>And who are they?</b> They are <b>heresy and the ruling authority. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Mar Ukva says: The voice of Gehenna cries</b> out <b>and says: Bring me two daughters who cry and say in this world: Give, give.</b>

### Part 8
The following verse in Proverbs makes reference to a foreign woman, which according to the Sages is a euphemism for heresy: <b>“None that go to her return, neither do they attain the paths of life”</b> (Proverbs 2:19). The Gemara asks: <b>Since</b> those that are drawn to heresy <b>do not return,</b> from <b>where would they attain</b> the path of life? Why is it necessary for the verse to add that they do not attain the paths of life? The Gemara explains that <b>this</b> is what the verse <b>is saying:</b> In general, those who go to her do not return, <b>and</b> even <b>if they return, they do not attain the paths of life,</b> i.e., the pain of their regret will shorten their lives.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that anyone who separates</b> himself <b>from heresy</b> and returns from his mistaken ways must <b>die? But</b> what about <b>that</b> woman <b>who came before Rav Ḥisda</b> to confess to him, <b>and she said to him: The lightest of the light,</b> i.e., the least of the sins that she committed, is that <b>she conceived her younger son from</b> engaging in intercourse with <b>her older son. And Rav Ḥisda said to her: Prepare funeral shrouds for her,</b> i.e., yourself, as you will certainly die soon, <b>but she did not die.</b>

### Part 10
The above incident refutes the claim that anyone who repents for the sin of heresy must die, as <b>from</b> the fact <b>that she said</b> that <b>the lightest of the light</b> of her sins was that <b>she conceived</b> one son from engaging in intercourse with another son, <b>by inference</b> one can learn <b>that she was also involved in heresy,</b> and yet she did not die. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> is a case <b>where</b> the woman <b>did not repent properly, and due to that</b> reason <b>she did not die.</b>

### Part 11
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> there is a different version of the objection to the Gemara’s statement that those who repent for the sin of heresy must die: Is that to say that if one repents <b>for</b> the sin of <b>heresy, yes,</b> the result is death, whereas if one repents <b>for</b> the <b>sin</b> of forbidden sexual intercourse he does <b>not</b> die? <b>But</b> what about <b>that</b> woman <b>who came before Rav Ḥisda</b> to confess to him <b>and Rav Ḥisda said to</b> those present: <b>Prepare funeral shrouds for her, and she died?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that she said: The lightest of the light, by inference</b> one can learn <b>that she was also involved in heresy.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is it correct that one who repents <b>of the sin</b> of forbidden sexual intercourse does <b>not</b> die? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They said about Rabbi Elazar ben Durdayya that</b> he was so promiscuous that <b>he did not leave one prostitute in the world with whom he did not engage in sexual intercourse. Once, he heard that there was one prostitute in</b> one of the <b>cities overseas who would take a purse</b> full of <b>dinars as her payment. He took a purse</b> full of <b>dinars and went and crossed seven rivers</b> to reach <b>her. When</b> they were engaged in the <b>matters</b> to which they were <b>accustomed,</b> a euphemism for intercourse, <b>she passed wind</b> and <b>said: Just as this passed wind</b> will <b>not return to its place, so too Elazar ben Durdayya will not be accepted in repentance,</b> even if he were to try to repent.

### Part 13
This statement deeply shocked Elazar ben Durdayya, and <b>he went and sat between two mountains and hills</b> and <b>said: Mountains and hills, pray for mercy on my</b> behalf, so that my repentance will be accepted. <b>They said to him: Before we pray for mercy on your</b> behalf, <b>we must pray for mercy on our own</b> behalf, <b>as it is stated: “For the mountains may depart, and the hills be removed”</b> (Isaiah 54:10). <b>He said: Heaven and earth, pray for mercy on my</b> behalf. <b>They said</b> to him: <b>Before we pray for mercy on your</b> behalf, <b>we must pray for mercy on our own</b> behalf, <b>as it is stated: “For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment”</b> (Isaiah 51:6).

### Part 14
<b>He said: Sun and moon, pray for mercy on my</b> behalf. <b>They said to him: Before we pray for mercy on your</b> behalf, <b>we must pray for mercy on our own</b> behalf, <b>as it is stated: “Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed”</b> (Isaiah 24:23). <b>He said: Stars and constellations, pray for mercy on my</b> behalf. <b>They said to him: Before we pray for mercy on your</b> behalf, <b>we must pray for mercy on our own</b> behalf, <b>as it is stated: “And all the hosts of heaven shall molder away”</b> (Isaiah 34:4).

### Part 15
Elazar ben Durdayya <b>said:</b> Clearly <b>the matter depends on nothing other than myself. He placed his head between his knees and cried loudly until his soul left</b> his body. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said: Rabbi Elazar ben Durdayya is destined for life in the World-to-Come.</b> The Gemara explains the difficulty presented by this story: <b>And here</b> Elazar ben Durdayya <b>was</b> guilty of <b>the sin</b> of forbidden sexual intercourse, <b>and</b> yet <b>he died</b> once he repented. The Gemara answers: <b>There too, since he was attached so strongly</b> to the sin, to an extent that transcended the physical temptation he felt, <b>it is similar to heresy,</b> as it had become like a form of idol worship for him.

### Part 16
When <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi heard this story of Elazar ben Durdayya, <b>he wept and said: There is</b> one who <b>acquires his</b> share in the World-to-Come only <b>after many years</b> of toil, <b>and there is</b> one who <b>acquires his</b> share in the World-to-Come <b>in one moment. And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi further <b>says: Not only are penitents accepted, but they are even called: Rabbi,</b> as the Divine Voice referred to Elazar ben Durdayya as Rabbi Elazar ben Durdayya.

### Part 17
§ In relation to the issue of distancing oneself from idol worship and prostitution, the Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Yonatan were</b> once <b>walking along the road</b> when <b>they came to a certain two paths, one</b> of which <b>branched off toward the entrance of</b> a place of <b>idol worship, and</b> the other <b>one branched off toward the entrance of a brothel. One said to the other: Let us go by</b> the path that leads to <b>the entrance</b> of the place <b>of idol worship,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC