
### Part 1
he should store them until <b>they decompose.</b> And if he dedicated <b>money or metal vessels, he should take them</b> and cast them <b>into the Dead Sea. And what</b> constitutes <b>destroying? He locks the door before it, and</b> the animal <b>dies on its own</b> from hunger. According to the <i>baraita</i>, the disposal of the animal is carried out by starving it, not by cutting its hooves.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said: There,</b> in the case of a consecrated animal, the method employed <b>is different, because</b> cutting the animal’s hooves would cause the <b>degradation of sacrificial</b> animals. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why does the <i>baraita</i> require this complicated method of killing the animal? Why not simply state that <b>he should slaughter it?</b> The Gemara answers: If he were to slaughter it, someone might <b>come to</b> experience <b>a mishap through it,</b> by eating the meat and thereby misusing consecrated property.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>let him render</b> the animal <b>a shard [<i>gistera</i>],</b> by mutilating it so that it is unfit to be eaten? Why is it necessary to kill it in such a drawn-out fashion, by starving it to death? <b>Abaye said</b> that it is because <b>the verse states: “And you shall break down their altars…you shall not do so to the Lord your God”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:3–4). It is derived from here that one may not actively destroy any sacred item.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said</b> there is a different reason a consecrated animal may not be disposed of by cutting its hooves: It is <b>because it appears as though</b> he is <b>inflicting a blemish on a sacrificial</b> animal. The Gemara asks: Why does Rava say that it merely <b>appears</b> as though he is inflicting a blemish, when in actual fact he <b>is</b> inflicting <b>a full-fledged blemish?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This matter,</b> that one may not inflict a blemish on a sacrificial animal, applies only <b>when the Temple is standing, as</b> the animal <b>is fit for sacrifice</b> and he renders it unfit. By contrast, <b>now, when</b> the animal <b>is not fit for sacrifice,</b> since there is no Temple, <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with it</b> by Torah law. The only problem is that it appears as though one is inflicting a blemish on a sanctified animal.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> this <b>should be</b> considered equivalent <b>to one who inflicts a blemish on</b> an animal that is already <b>blemished,</b> which is <b>prohibited even though that</b> animal <b>is not fit for sacrifice.</b> The Gemara answers: In the case of <b>a blemished</b> animal when the Temple is standing it is prohibited to inflict a blemish upon it, as <b>granted, it itself is not fit</b> to serve as an offering; but <b>it is fit to</b> make use of <b>its monetary</b> value, i.e., another animal may be purchased with the proceeds of its sale and sacrificed in its place. This is <b>to the exclusion of</b> the case <b>here,</b> when there is no Temple, <b>as</b> the animal <b>is not fit for its monetary value and it is not fit to</b> serve as an offering <b>itself.</b>

### Part 6
§ <b>Rabbi Yona found Rabbi Elai, who was standing at the entrance to</b> the city of <b>Tyre.</b> Rabbi Yona <b>said to him:</b> The <i>baraita</i> cited above <b>teaches</b> that if one bought <b>an animal</b> at a pagan fair <b>it should be destroyed. What</b> should be done with <b>a slave</b> purchased at the fair? Rabbi Yona elaborated: <b>I do not raise the dilemma</b> about <b>a Jewish slave,</b> as it is obvious that the master cannot cause him harm. <b>Where it is a dilemma for me</b> is the case of <b>a gentile slave; what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabbi Elai <b>said to him</b> in response: <b>What</b> is the reason that this is <b>a dilemma for you? It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the gentiles and shepherds of small domesticated animals, we do not raise</b> them from a pit <b>but we do not</b> actively <b>lower</b> them into a pit either. It may be inferred from here that one may not cause the death of a gentile slave.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zeira:</b> The second <i>baraita</i> cited above <b>teaches</b> that <b>one may</b> go to a pagan fair and <b>buy from</b> the gentiles <b>animals, slaves, and maidservants.</b> Does the <i>baraita</i> mean that one may buy <b>a Jewish slave, or perhaps,</b> is it teaching that one may buy <b>even a gentile slave?</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: It stands to reason</b> that the <i>baraita</i> means specifically <b>a Jewish slave; as, if</b> it is referring to <b>a gentile slave, what</b> is the reason that it is <b>necessary</b> for the Sages to permit this purchase? <b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> It is permitted to purchase <b>even a gentile slave, because he brings him under the wings of the Divine Presence</b> by having him undergo the process of conversion when he becomes the slave of a Jew.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ashi said: But</b> with regard to the permission to buy <b>an animal, what is there</b> about this purchase that one can be said to <b>bring</b> the animal <b>under the wings of the Divine Presence? Rather,</b> the reason it is permitted is <b>because</b> through this purchase the Jew <b>reduces</b> the possessions of the gentile. <b>And here too, as he reduces</b> the gentile’s property by purchasing the slave, it is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ya’akov bought sandals</b> and <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bought bread</b> at a pagan fair. <b>One said to the other: Orphan,</b> i.e., one with no guide, <b>would your teacher act in this manner? The other</b> likewise <b>said to him: Orphan, would your teacher act in this manner?</b> The Gemara explains: Actually, <b>both purchased</b> these items <b>from a homeowner,</b> i.e., a private individual, <b>and each one thought</b> that <b>the other</b> had <b>purchased</b> his item <b>from a merchant. As Rabbi Abba, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that it is prohibited to buy from a gentile at a pagan fair <b>only</b> in the case <b>of one who buys from a merchant, as a tax is taken from him</b> and used for the benefit of idol worship. <b>But with regard to one who buys from a homeowner, when a tax is not taken from him,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to make the purchase.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Abba, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, says: If Rabbi Yoḥanan had been</b> present <b>at this time</b> and age, <b>in a place where the tax is taken</b> from all sales, including those conducted with private individuals, <b>he would have prohibited</b> buying items <b>even from a homeowner.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>how did</b> these Sages, Rabbi Ya’akov and Rabbi Yirmeya, <b>purchase</b> items at the fair? The Gemara answers: <b>They purchased</b> the items <b>from a homeowner</b> who sells solely on <b>a temporary</b> basis.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>These are the items that</b> it is <b>prohibited to sell to a gentile</b> at any time of year, as they are used specifically for idol worship: <b><i>Itzterubalin</i>, <i>benot shuaḥ</i>, <i>petotarot</i>, frankincense, and a white rooster. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>permitted to sell a white rooster to</b> a gentile provided that it is sold <b>along with</b> other types of <b>roosters. But when it is</b> sold <b>by itself, one</b> should <b>cut off its toe and sell it to</b> the gentile, <b>because</b> they <b>do not sacrifice a defective</b> animal <b>to</b> their object of <b>idol worship.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>all remaining items, without specification</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to sell them, <b>but</b> with <b>specification</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to sell them. <b>Rabbi Meir says: Even</b> in the case of <b>a good palm tree, <i>ḥatzav</i>, and <i>naklav</i>,</b> it is <b>prohibited to sell</b> them <b>to gentiles.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC