
### Part 1
<b>floating in it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Now</b> that <b>you have said</b> that brine which has only <b>one <i>kilbit</i></b> in it is <b>permitted, is it necessary</b> to teach that brine that has <b>two <i>kilbiyot</i></b> in it is also permitted? The Gemara explains that it is <b>not difficult: Here,</b> two <i>kilbiyot</i> are required to permit the brine, as it is contained <b>in open</b> barrels, but <b>there,</b> only one is required, since it is <b>in sealed</b> barrels.

### Part 2
§ <b>It was stated</b> that <b>Rav Huna says:</b> <i>Tarit</i> is not permitted for consumption <b>until</b> its <b>head and spine</b> are <b>recognizable. Rav Naḥman says:</b> It is permitted if <b>either</b> the <b>head or</b> the <b>spine</b> is recognizable. <b>Rav Ukva bar Ḥama raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Ḥullin</i> 59a): <b>And with regard to fish, any that has fins and scales</b> is permitted. Evidently, the kashrut of fish is determined only by its fins and scales, not its head or its spine. <b>Abaye said: When that</b> mishna <b>is taught,</b> it is <b>in</b> reference to the <b><i>ara’a</i> and <i>falmuda</i></b> fish, <b>whose heads are similar to</b> the heads of <b>non-kosher</b> fish.

### Part 3
The Gemara analyzes the dispute between Rav Huna and Rav Naḥman. <b>Rav Yehuda said in the name of Ulla:</b> The <b>dispute</b> applies <b>to dipping</b> foods <b>in their brine, but with regard to</b> eating <b>their</b> actual <b>bodies, everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>prohibited until</b> both the <b>head and</b> the <b>spine</b> are <b>recognizable.</b> The Gemara notes that <b>Rabbi Zeira said: Originally, I would dip</b> foods <b>in their brine,</b> but <b>once I heard that which Rav Yehuda said in the name of Ulla:</b> The <b>dispute</b> is only with regard <b>to dipping</b> foods <b>in their brine, but with regard to</b> eating <b>their</b> actual <b>bodies everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>prohibited until</b> both the <b>head and</b> the <b>spine</b> are <b>recognizable; I too no</b> longer <b>dip</b> foods <b>in their brine.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <i>tarit</i> is prohibited <b>until</b> the <b>head and spine of each and every</b> fish is <b>recognizable.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to Rav Pappa’s statement from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>pieces</b> of fish <b>that have a sign</b> of kashrut, <b>whether</b> this sign is present <b>in all of them or</b> only <b>in a minority of them, and even</b> if it is present <b>in</b> only <b>one</b> fish <b>out of one hundred of them, they are all permitted. And</b> there was <b>an incident involving a certain gentile who brought a large jug of pieces</b> of fish, <b>and a sign</b> of kashrut <b>was found in one of them, and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel permitted the entire jug</b> of fish. This apparently contradicts Rav Pappa’s assertion that all the pieces must be recognizable for them to be permitted.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa interpreted</b> that <i>baraita</i> as referring to a case <b>where the pieces correspond</b> to each other, i.e., they fit together so that it is clear that they are all from the same fish. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If that is so, what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> this explicitly? It the pieces correspond it is obvious that they are permitted, as they evidently come from the same kosher fish. The Gemara explains that this was taught <b>lest you say</b> that one should <b>be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps</b> the pieces merely <b>happened</b> to fit together; the <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that in such a case the pieces are permitted.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that there was <b>a certain ship</b> carrying <b><i>tzaḥanta</i> which came to</b> the city of <b>Sikhra. Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana went out and saw</b> that the fish had <b>scales on them and permitted them,</b> as any fish with scales is kosher. <b>Rava said to him: But is there anyone who permits</b> <i>tzaḥanta</i> in <b>a case like this,</b> when it is from <b>a land where</b> fish with <b>scales are common</b> and it is very possible that the scales are from kosher fish that had been in the boat previously? <b><i>Shofarot</i> went out</b> from the court <b>of Rava</b> to herald a declaration promulgating his ruling, <b>and he</b> thereby <b>prohibited</b> all the fish on that boat. And <b><i>shofarot</i></b> went out from the court <b>of Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana, and he</b> thereby <b>permitted</b> the fish.

### Part 7
The Gemara presents two interpretations of the above ruling. <b>Rav Yirmeya of Difti said: Rav Pappi said to me</b> that <b>when Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana permitted</b> the fish on the ship, he was referring only <b>to their brine, but with regard to their bodies, no,</b> he did not permit them. <b>Rav Ashi said: Rav Pappa said to me</b> that <b>when Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana permitted</b> the fish, he was referring <b>even to their bodies.</b>

### Part 8
Rav Ashi continued: <b>And I do not prohibit</b> the fish, <b>as Rav Pappa said to me</b> that Rav Huna permitted it, <b>but I</b> also <b>do not permit</b> the fish, <b>as Rav Yehuda said to me in the name of Ulla</b> that the <b>dispute</b> between Rava and Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana is referring <b>to dipping</b> foods <b>in their brine, but with regard to</b> eating <b>their</b> actual <b>bodies, everyone agrees</b> that it is prohibited <b>until</b> both the <b>head and spine of each and every</b> fish are <b>recognizable.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥinnana bar Idi sat before Rav Adda bar Ahava, and he sat and said:</b> With regard to <b>a gentile who brought a boat</b> that was <b>full of barrels</b> of fish brine, <b>and a <i>kilbit</i> was found in one of</b> the barrels, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: If the barrels were <b>open,</b> they are <b>all permitted;</b> if they were <b>closed,</b> then the barrel with the <i>kilbit</i> <b>is permitted, and all</b> the others <b>are prohibited.</b> Rav Adda bar Ahava <b>said to him: From where</b> do <b>you</b> know <b>this?</b> Rav Ḥinnana bar Idi responded: <b>I heard</b> this <b>from three verses,</b> i.e., great Sages upon whom one can rely as though their statements were recorded in verses: <b>From Rav and Shmuel and Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 10
§ The Gemara discusses the <i>halakha</i> with regard to other parts of fish. <b>Rav Beruna says</b> that <b>Rav says: Fish intestines and their roe may be purchased only from an expert. Ulla raises a contradiction to Rabbi Dostai of Biri: From</b> the fact <b>that Rav says: Fish intestines and their roe may be purchased only from an expert,</b> it may be <b>inferred that a non-kosher fish has roe,</b> as otherwise there would be no reason to permit only roe purchased from an expert. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> to this claim from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>A non-kosher fish gives birth</b> whereas <b>a kosher fish lays eggs.</b>

### Part 11
Rabbi Dostai accepted this opinion and said: <b>Delete</b> the phrase: <b>Their roe, from here. Rabbi Zeira said to him: Do not delete</b> it, as <b>both</b> kosher and non-kosher fish <b>are</b> fish that <b>lay,</b> i.e., produce, <b>eggs, but this</b> kosher fish <b>propagates externally</b> by laying eggs in the water which later hatch, <b>and that</b> non-kosher fish <b>propagates internally</b> by keeping the eggs in its own body until they develop. Nevertheless, both produce roe, and there is therefore reason to be concerned that a Jew might purchase non-kosher roe.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: But even so, <b>why do I</b> need <b>an expert? Let</b> one <b>check the signs</b> of kashrut on the roe himself, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Like the signs of</b> bird <b>eggs, so are the signs of fish.</b> The Gemara interjects: Does it <b>enter your mind</b> to say that the <b>signs of</b> kashrut for <b>fish</b> are the same as the signs of kashrut for eggs? This is not so, as the <b>signs of</b> kosher <b>fish are</b> the possession of <b>fins and scales,</b> as <b>written</b> in the Torah <b>with regard to them. Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> means to say: <b>Like the signs of</b> bird <b>eggs, so are the signs of fish roe.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And these are the signs of</b> bird <b>eggs: Any</b> egg <b>that narrows</b> at the top <b>and is rounded,</b> so that <b>one of its ends is wide and</b> the other <b>one of its ends is pointed</b> is <b>kosher.</b> If <b>both of its ends are sharp or both of its ends are wide,</b> it is <b>non-kosher.</b> If the <b>yolk</b> is <b>on the outside and</b> the <b>albumen</b> is <b>on the inside,</b> it is <b>non-kosher;</b> if the <b>albumen</b> is <b>on the outside and</b> the <b>yolk</b> is <b>on the inside,</b> it is <b>kosher.</b> If the <b>yolk and albumen are mixed with each other, this is the egg of a creeping animal.</b> Considering that one can easily determine the kashrut of such eggs, why are only those purchased from an expert permitted? <b>Rava says:</b> Rav’s ruling refers specifically to a case <b>where</b> the eggs <b>have melted</b> together and it is impossible to determine whether or not they are kosher based on these signs.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Dostai of Biri, who</b> accepted the idea that non-kosher fish do not lay eggs and <b>says: Delete from here</b> the phrase: <b>Their roe,</b> it is difficult.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC