
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>There are three</b> types of <b>trees</b> that were used as part of idolatrous rites <b>[<i>ashera</i>]: A tree that one initially planted for the sake of idol worship is forbidden,</b> and one may not derive benefit from any part of the tree. If one <b>lopped</b> off part of the trunk of a tree <b>or trimmed</b> its branches <b>for the sake of idol worship,</b> i.e., to worship that which would regrow there, <b>and</b> the tree’s trunk or limbs <b>regrew, one removes that which has regrown</b> and burn it. The remainder of the tree is then permitted. If one <b>erected</b> an object of <b>idol worship beneath</b> a tree <b>and</b> subsequently <b>removed it, it is permitted</b> to derive benefit from the tree.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that if one lopped off or trimmed a tree’s branches for the sake of idol worship and it regrew, the tree is permitted upon the removal of the new growth. The Sages of <b>the school of Rabbi Yannai say: And</b> this <b>is</b> the <i>halakha</i> only <b>when one sank</b> the shoot of a vine into the ground <b>or grafted onto</b> the trunk of <b>the tree itself.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> that if he <b>lopped</b> off part of the trunk <b>or trimmed</b> the tree’s branches, the growth is forbidden? In order to render a tree forbidden, according to the Sages of the school of Rabbi Yannai, the act dedicated to idol worship must be sinking or grafting, which are tantamount to replanting the entire tree. The mishna indicates that even cutting off part of a tree renders the new growth forbidden.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, when</b> the statement of the Sages of the school <b>of Rabbi Yannai was stated,</b> it <b>was stated with regard to</b> the <b>revocation</b> of the idolatrous status. What they meant to say was <b>that even if one sank</b> the shoot of a vine into the ground <b>or grafted onto the tree itself,</b> effecting a more significant change, nevertheless, <b>when one removes that which has regrown,</b> the tree is <b>permitted. As, lest you say</b> that <b>since one sank</b> the shoot of a vine into the ground <b>or grafted onto the tree itself, it is similar to a tree that one initially planted</b> for idol worship <b>and the entire</b> tree <b>should be forbidden,</b> the Sages of the school of Rabbi Yannai counter this and <b>teach us</b> that even in this case the tree is permitted when that which has regrown is removed.

### Part 5
<b>Shmuel says:</b> In the case of <b>one who bows to a tree, its additional</b> subsequent growth is <b>forbidden. Rabbi Elazar raises an objection</b> from the mishna: If one <b>lopped or trimmed</b> the tree <b>for</b> the sake of <b>idol worship and</b> the tree’s trunk or limbs <b>regrew, one removes that which has regrown</b> and burn it. This indicates that if one <b>lopped or trimmed it</b> the additional growth <b>is</b> forbidden, but if one <b>did not lop or trim it,</b> even if one bowed to the tree, the growth is <b>not</b> forbidden.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers that <b>Shmuel</b> could <b>say to you:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that a tree that was planted and only subsequently worshipped is permitted, as it was not initially planted for idol worship. <b>And Shmuel says</b> his statement <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda, who says</b> that <b>a tree that one planted and subsequently worshipped</b> is <b>forbidden.</b> Accordingly, bowing to a tree renders its subsequent growth forbidden.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Ashi objects to this</b> answer: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda and the Rabbis disagree with regard to additional</b> growth? <b>Perhaps all agree</b> that <b>additional</b> growth after the tree was worshipped is <b>forbidden, and they disagree</b> only <b>with regard to its trunk.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains what the nature of this dispute would be: <b>As Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda maintains</b> that <b>its trunk is also forbidden, as it is written:</b> “And you shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, <b>and burn their <i>asherim</i> with fire”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:3). Burning with fire destroys the whole tree, which indicates that the entire tree is forbidden, including its trunk. <b>And the Rabbis maintain</b> that <b>the trunk of the tree</b> is <b>permitted, as it is written:</b> “You shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, <b>and hew down their <i>asherim</i>,</b> and burn their graven images with fire” (Deuteronomy 7:5). <b>Which is the tree whose hewn part</b> is <b>forbidden, but its trunk</b> is <b>permitted? You must say</b> it is <b>a tree that one planted and subsequently worshipped.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And if you would say that we did not explain</b> their opinions <b>in this manner</b> previously (45b), as the source given there for the opinion of Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda is the same verse given here as the source for the opinion of the Rabbis, simply <b>reverse</b> the explanation given there to match the one given here. The verse cited there as the source for the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> namely, “and burn their <i>asherim</i> with fire,” should instead be considered the source <b>for</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda,</b> who deems even the trunk of a subsequently worshipped tree forbidden. <b>And</b> the verse cited there as the source for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda,</b> namely, “and hew down their <i>asherim</i>,” should instead be considered the source <b>for</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> that only subsequent growth is forbidden.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects Rav Ashi’s suggestion: It cannot be that all agree that additional growth is forbidden when a tree is planted and subsequently worshipped, because <b>if so, who teaches</b> the mishna that says that the tree is forbidden when one <b>lopped it or trimmed it?</b> It is <b>neither the Rabbis nor Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda. If</b> one were to say that <b>the Rabbis</b> teach it, this cannot be, as they maintain that <b>even in</b> a case where one <b>did not lop it or trim it,</b> but simply bowed to it, the <b>additional</b> growth is <b>forbidden. If</b> one were to say that <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda</b> teaches the mishna, this cannot be, as he maintains that <b>even the trunk of the tree</b> is <b>forbidden</b> after it has been worshipped, and not just the subsequent growth.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds, defending Rav Ashi’s suggestion: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>the Rabbis</b> teach the mishna, <b>and if you wish, say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda</b> teaches it. The Gemara explains each possibility: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda</b> teaches it, as <b>when Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says</b> that even <b>in</b> a case where one <b>did not lop it or trim it, the trunk of the tree is</b> nevertheless <b>forbidden,</b> it is only <b>in</b> a case where one worshipped the tree <b>without specification,</b> i.e., not to any specific part of the tree. <b>But</b> if one <b>lopped it or trimmed it</b> for the sake of idol worship, <b>he has revealed his intention,</b> namely, <b>that</b> he believes that the <b>additional</b> growth <b>is suitable for</b> his idol worship, but that <b>the trunk of the tree is not suitable for</b> his idol worship. Therefore, in such a case only the additional growth is forbidden.

### Part 12
The Gemara explains the other possibility. <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>the Rabbis</b> teach it. Although they maintain that even without lopping or trimming the tree the additional growth is forbidden if it is worshipped, nevertheless it <b>was necessary for</b> the mishna to mention the case where one <b>lopped it or trimmed it</b> specifically. Otherwise, it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since one performed an action on</b> the tree <b>itself, the trunk of the tree should also be forbidden.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that only the additional growth is forbidden and not the trunk.

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Which</b> tree <b>is</b> deemed forbidden as <b>an <i>ashera</i>? Any</b> tree <b>that has</b> an object of <b>idol worship beneath it. Rabbi Shimon says: Any</b> tree <b>that</b> people <b>worship. And</b> there was <b>an incident in Tzaidan involving a tree that</b> people <b>would worship, and</b> Jews <b>found beneath it a heap</b> of stones. <b>Rabbi Shimon said to them: Examine this heap</b> of stones. <b>And they examined it and found in it</b> an idolatrous <b>image.</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>said to them: Since</b> it is <b>the image</b> that <b>they worship, we can permit</b> use of <b>the tree to</b> those who wish to derive benefit from it.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: <b>Which</b> tree <b>is an <i>ashera</i>?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the previous mishna that there are <b>three</b> types of <b><i>ashera</i></b> trees? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> Of the three trees mentioned in the previous mishna, there are <b>two</b> where the trees themselves are worshipped, and <b>everyone agrees</b> that they are forbidden. <b>And</b> there is <b>one</b> that is subject to <b>a dispute between Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis. Which is the <i>ashera</i> with regard to which Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis disagree?</b> It is <b>any</b> tree <b>that has</b> an object of <b>idol worship beneath it,</b> as <b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> that <b>any</b> tree <b>that</b> people <b>worship</b> is forbidden, but that a tree under which an idol was placed is not forbidden.

### Part 15
The Gemara presents a question: <b>Which</b> tree <b>is</b> assumed to be <b>an <i>ashera</i>,</b> even <b>without specific</b> knowledge that it was worshipped? <b>Rav says: Any</b> tree <b>that</b> gentile <b>priests sit beneath and do not taste of its fruits,</b> as they apparently consider the fruits consecrated to the idol. <b>And Shmuel says: Even</b> if <b>they</b> so much as <b>say: These dates are for the house of Natzrefei,</b> a house of idol worship, the tree is <b>forbidden.</b> This is <b>because</b> the idol worshippers would <b>throw</b> the dates <b>into beer and drink it on their festival day. Ameimar says: The elders of Pumbedita said to me</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC