
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>a stone winepress that a gentile lined with pitch</b> and then poured wine onto the pitch to neutralize its flavor, <b>one may cleanse it and it is pure,</b> i.e., wine pressed in it is permitted. <b>And</b> if the winepress is fashioned <b>of wood, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: One may cleanse it, but the Rabbis say: One must peel off the pitch</b> completely. <b>And</b> if the winepress is <b>of earthenware, even if one peeled off the pitch, this</b> press <b>is forbidden.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rava says:</b> The requirement to cleanse the winepress applies <b>specifically</b> if the gentile <b>lined it with pitch. But</b> if he only <b>trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it</b> without lining it with pitch, this is <b>not</b> required. The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious? We learned</b> in the mishna that cleansing the winepress is necessary if the gentile <b>lined it with pitch.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>the same is true</b> that it requires cleansing <b>even</b> if he <b>trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it, and</b> the fact <b>that</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> a case where he <b>lined it with pitch</b> is because the mishna <b>is teaching the manner</b> in <b>which the matter</b> typically occurs, therefore Rava <b>teaches us</b> that this is not the case.

### Part 3
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rava says:</b> Cleansing the winepress is effective <b>specifically</b> if the gentile <b>lined it with pitch. But</b> if he <b>trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it</b> as well, <b>cleansing</b> it <b>is not sufficient</b> to purify the winepress. The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious? We learned</b> in the mishna that cleansing the winepress is sufficient if the gentile <b>lined it with pitch.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>the same is true</b> and <b>that</b> cleansing is sufficient <b>even</b> if he <b>trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it, and</b> the fact <b>that</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> a case where he <b>lined it with pitch</b> is because the mishna <b>is teaching the manner</b> in <b>which the matter</b> typically occurs, therefore Rava <b>teaches us</b> that cleansing the winepress is sufficient <b>specifically</b> if <b>he lined it with pitch, but</b> if <b>he trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it, cleansing</b> it <b>is not sufficient.</b>

### Part 4
This is <b>similar to</b> an incident involving <b>a certain man who came before Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> and <b>said to him: Give me a man who will purify my winepress</b> that I purchased from a gentile. Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to Rav: Go with him and see</b> to it <b>that you</b> conduct yourself in such a manner that will <b>not cause</b> people <b>to complain against me</b> in <b>the study hall.</b> Rav <b>went</b> with him and <b>saw that</b> the winepress <b>was very smooth</b> with pitch. Rav <b>said: Cleansing will certainly be sufficient for this,</b> because it does not absorb the wine. <b>While</b> Rav <b>was going and coming, he saw a crack underneath</b> his feet <b>and saw that it was full of wine.</b> He then <b>said: Cleansing is not sufficient for this; rather,</b> it requires <b>peeling. And this is what my uncle [<i>ḥavivi</i>]</b> meant when he <b>said to me: See</b> to it <b>that you do not cause</b> people <b>to complain against me</b> in <b>the study hall.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>the winepress and</b> its utensils, <b>the ladle and the funnel, which belong to gentiles, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>permits</b> them <b>by cleansing, and the Rabbis deem</b> them <b>forbidden. And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>concedes with regard to</b> earthenware <b>jugs belonging to gentiles that they are forbidden. And what is the difference between this</b> case <b>and that</b> case? <b>This</b> jug <b>contains</b> the wine <b>for storage</b> purposes, <b>and that</b> case, involving a ladle and a funnel, involves utensils that <b>do not contain it for storage</b> purposes but only temporarily. <b>And</b> if the winepress or its utensils are fashioned <b>of wood or stone,</b> one <b>must cleanse</b> them, <b>but if they were lined with pitch, they are forbidden,</b> and cleansing is not sufficient to render them permitted.

### Part 6
The Gemara raises an objection to the last clause of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that in the case of <b>a stone winepress that a gentile lined with pitch, one may cleanse it and it is pure?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The mishna</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the gentile <b>did not tread</b> on his grapes <b>in it,</b> whereas <b>the <i>baraita</i></b> is referring to a case <b>where he trod</b> on his grapes <b>in it.</b>

### Part 7
<b>The Master said</b> above: With regard to <b>the winepress and the ladle and the funnel that belong to gentiles, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>permits</b> them <b>by cleansing, and the Rabbis deem</b> them <b>forbidden.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that if the winepress is <b>of earthenware, even if one peeled off the pitch this</b> press <b>is forbidden? Rava said:</b> In <b>the last clause of the mishna we arrive at</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava taught:</b> If one has <b>a tank</b> of wine used by gentiles, he must <b>scald it</b> in order to render it permitted for use. <b>When Rava would dispatch</b> empty <b>kegs to Harpanya, he would turn them over,</b> placing them in their sacks <b>on their openings, and seal</b> the sacks <b>on their brims,</b> so that the gentile carriers would not be able to use them for wine. <b>He maintained</b> that with regard to <b>anything that</b> is used to <b>contain</b> wine <b>for storage, even</b> if the wine may be stored in it only <b>temporarily, the Sages decreed</b> that <b>it</b> is forbidden for use as though it had contained wine.

### Part 9
§ The Gemara asks with regard to the cleansing mentioned in the mishna: <b>How does one cleanse</b> a winepress, or utensils used by a gentile for wine? <b>Rav says:</b> One cleans it <b>with water. Rabba bar bar Ḥana says:</b> One cleans it <b>with ashes.</b> The Gemara asks: When <b>Rav says:</b> One cleans it <b>with water,</b> does he mean only <b>with water and not with ashes</b> as well? Furthermore, when <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says:</b> One cleans it <b>with ashes,</b> does he mean only <b>with ashes, and not with water</b> as well? <b>Rather,</b> their statements must be understood as follows:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC