
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua holds</b> that <b>we derive from</b> the case of <b>Moses</b> that one should first praise God in prayer and only afterward issue personal requests. <b>And Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that <b>we do not derive from Moses</b> how to act, since <b>Moses is different, as his might is great,</b> i.e., he knew how to pray to God in this order. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> <b>is not in accordance with the statement of this</b> Sage, who says that one should issue personal requests before praying, <b>nor</b> is it <b>in accordance with the statement of that</b> Sage, who says that personal requests should follow prayer. <b>Rather, a person requests his own needs in</b> the blessing ending: <b>Who listens to prayer.</b> Therefore, when Naḥum the Mede stated that this is the <i>halakha</i>, he was merely concurring with the opinion of the Rabbis.

### Part 2
With regard to the halakhic ruling, <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>a person requests his own needs</b> during the <i>Amida</i> prayer <b>in</b> the blessing ending: <b>Who listens to prayer. Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, says in the name of Rav: Although</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>a person requests his own needs in</b> the blessing ending: <b>Who listens to prayer,</b> that is not the only option. <b>Rather, if he wishes to recite at the conclusion of each and every blessing</b> personal requests that <b>reflect the nature of each and every blessing, he may recite</b> them.

### Part 3
Similarly, <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi says</b> that <b>Rav says: Although</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>a person requests his own needs in</b> the blessing ending: <b>Who listens to prayer, if he has a sick person in his house he recites</b> a special prayer for him <b>during the blessing of the sick. And if he is in need of sustenance, he recites</b> a request <b>during the blessing of the years.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: Although</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>a person requests his own needs in</b> the blessing ending: <b>Who listens to prayer; but if one wishes to recite</b> prayers and supplications <b>after</b> finishing <b>his</b> <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer, even</b> if his personal requests <b>are as</b> long as <b>the order</b> of the confession of <b>Yom Kippur, he may recite</b> them.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are the festivals of gentiles: Kalenda, Saturnalia, and Kratesis, and the day of the festival of their kings, and the birthday</b> of the king, <b>and</b> the anniversary of <b>the day of the death</b> of the king. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Every death that includes</b> public <b>burning</b> is a festival that <b>includes idol worship, and</b> any death <b>that does not include</b> public <b>burning</b> is <b>not</b> a festival that <b>includes idol worship. But</b> in the case of <b>the day of shaving his,</b> i.e., a gentile’s, <b>beard and his locks, and the day of</b> his <b>ascent from the sea, and the day that he left prison, and</b> also in the case of <b>a gentile who prepared</b> a wedding <b>feast for his son</b> and celebrates on that day, engaging in business <b>is prohibited only</b> on <b>that day and</b> with <b>that man.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rava says:</b> When are these festivals celebrated? <b>Kalenda</b> is celebrated during the <b>eight days after</b> the winter <b>solstice,</b> and <b>Saturnalia</b> is celebrated during the <b>eight days before</b> the winter <b>solstice. And your mnemonic</b> to remember which festival is that the one that occurs after the solstice is mentioned first in the mishna, and the festival that takes place before the solstice is mentioned after, as in the verse: <b>“You have hemmed me in behind and before,</b> and laid Your Hand upon me” (Psalms 139:5), where the word “before” appears after the term “behind.”

### Part 7
With regard to the dates of these festivals, <b>the Sages taught: When Adam the first</b> man <b>saw</b> that <b>the day was progressively diminishing,</b> as the days become shorter from the autumnal equinox until the winter solstice, he did not yet know that this is a normal phenomenon, and therefore he <b>said: Woe</b> is <b>me; perhaps because I sinned the world is becoming dark around me and</b> will ultimately <b>return to</b> the primordial state of <b>chaos and disorder. And this is the death that was sentenced upon me from Heaven,</b> as it is written: “And to dust shall you return” (Genesis 3:19). <b>He arose and spent eight days in fasting and in prayer.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Once he saw</b> that the <b>season of Tevet,</b> i.e., the winter solstice, had arrived, <b>and saw</b> that <b>the day was progressively lengthening</b> after the solstice, he <b>said:</b> Clearly, the days become shorter and then longer, and this <b>is the order of the world. He went and observed a festival</b> for <b>eight days. Upon the next year, he observed</b> both <b>these</b> eight days on which he had fasted on the previous year, <b>and these</b> eight days of his celebration, as <b>days of festivities. He,</b> Adam, <b>established</b> these festivals <b>for the sake of Heaven, but they,</b> the gentiles of later generations, <b>established them for the sake of idol worship.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that <b>the world was created in</b> the month of <b>Tishrei,</b> one can understand why Adam believed that the days were becoming shorter as part of his punishment, as <b>he saw the short days</b> of the winter and <b>had not yet seen the long days</b> of summer. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that <b>the world was created in</b> the month of <b>Nisan, he had</b> already <b>seen</b> the difference between <b>the short days and the long days,</b> as the days in the month of Nisan become progressively longer with the passage of time. The Gemara answers: Although Adam had experienced short days, <b>he had not seen days that were this short,</b> as in the days before the winter solstice.

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught:</b> On <b>the day that Adam the first</b> man <b>was created, when the sun set upon him he said: Woe</b> is <b>me, as because I sinned, the world is becoming dark around me, and the world will return to</b> the primordial state of <b>chaos and disorder. And this is the death that was sentenced upon me from Heaven. He spent all night fasting and crying, and Eve was crying opposite him. Once dawn broke, he said:</b> Evidently, the sun sets and night arrives, and <b>this is the order of the world. He arose and sacrificed a bull whose horns preceded its hoofs</b> in the order that they were created, <b>as it is stated: “And it shall please the Lord better than a bullock that has horns and hoofs”</b> (Psalms 69:32). This verse is referring to the one particular bull whose horns preceded its hoofs.

### Part 11
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b>bull that Adam the first</b> man <b>sacrificed had one horn in its forehead, as it is stated: “And it shall please the Lord better than a bullock that has horns [<i>makrin</i>] and hooves.”</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: Isn’t <b><i>makrin</i></b> plural, which <b>indicates two</b> horns? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: <i>Mikkeren</i> is written,</b> i.e., the letter <i>yod</i> is missing from the word, indicating that there was only one horn.

### Part 12
§ <b>Rav Mattana says:</b> Since <b>Rome established</b> the festival of <b>Kalenda</b> on a specific date, <b>and all of the nearby towns are ruled by</b> Rome, i.e., they pay their tax to Rome and provide its needs but do not themselves celebrate the festival, is it <b>prohibited or permitted</b> to engage in business transactions with the gentile residents of <b>those towns? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: It is prohibited</b> to engage in business during the time of the <b>Kalenda with everyone. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: It is prohibited</b> to engage in business <b>only with its worshippers,</b> whereas it is permitted to engage in business transactions with gentiles who do not celebrate the festival.

### Part 13
The Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Although they said</b> that <b>Rome</b> has <b>established</b> the festival of <b>Kalenda and all of the nearby towns are ruled by</b> Rome, <b>it is prohibited</b> to engage in business <b>only with its worshippers.</b>

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: With regard to the festivals <b>Saturnalia and Kratesis, and the day of the festival of their kings, and</b> the <b>day on which</b> the <b>king was crowned,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>before</b> the festival it is <b>prohibited</b> to engage in business transactions, whereas <b>after</b> the festival it is <b>permitted. But</b> in the case of <b>a gentile who prepared a feast for his son</b> and celebrates on that day, engaging in business <b>is prohibited only</b> on <b>that day</b> itself <b>and</b> with <b>that man.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ashi said: We learn</b> in the mishna <b>as well</b> in accordance with Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement that the prohibition applies only to gentiles who celebrate the festival, not to people who are ruled by them. <b>As</b> the mishna <b>teaches:</b> With regard to <b>the day of shaving his beard and his locks, and the day of his ascent from the sea, and the day that he left prison,</b> engaging in business <b>is prohibited only</b> on <b>that day and</b> with <b>that man.</b>

### Part 16
Rav Ashi explains the proof: <b>Granted,</b> the mishna specifies that the prohibition is limited to <b>that day</b> alone, in order <b>to exclude</b> the days <b>before and after it. But</b> when it states that the prohibition applies only to <b>that man, what does</b> the mishna <b>exclude?</b> Obviously the prohibition does not extend to all gentiles, as it is a personal festival. <b>Doesn’t</b> the mishna’s ruling serve <b>to exclude those who are ruled by him?</b> Therefore, <b>conclude from</b> the language of the mishna that a prohibition extends only to gentiles who celebrate the festival, not to those who are ruled by them.

### Part 17
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael says: Jews who are outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>are</b> considered to <b>engage in idol worship in purity,</b> i.e., unwittingly. <b>How</b> does this occur? In the case of <b>a gentile who prepared a feast for</b> the marriage of <b>his son, and invited all of the Jews in his town, even though they eat of their own</b> kosher food <b>and drink of their own</b> kosher beverages, <b>and their own attendant stands before them, the verse ascribes</b> guilt <b>to them as though they ate of</b> the <b>offerings to the dead,</b> i.e., idols, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And sacrifice to their gods, <b>and they call you, and you eat of their sacrifice”</b> (Exodus 34:15). Since Jews participate in a feast in which the gentile sacrifices offerings to his idol, it is as though they partook of the offering themselves.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that the verse is criticizing the Jews only <b>once they eat</b> from the sacrifice? <b>Rava said: If</b> that <b>is</b> what is meant, <b>let the verse say</b> only: <b>And you eat of their sacrifice. What</b> is meant by the additional phrase: <b>“And they call you”?</b> This indicates that the prohibition occurs <b>from the time of the call. Therefore,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC