
### Part 1
§ The Gemara cites another resolution of the apparent contradiction between the mishna, which rules that gentiles are suspected of bestiality, and the <i>baraita</i>, which permits an animal purchased from gentiles to be sacrificed as an offering. <b>Ravina said</b> that it <b>is not difficult; this</b> mishna issues its ruling with regard to the <i>halakha <b>ab initio</b></i><b>,</b> while <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring to the <i>halakha</i> <b>after the fact.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do you say that</b> there is <b>a difference</b> in this case <b>between <i>ab initio</i> and after the fact? As we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>A woman may not seclude herself with them because they are suspected of</b> engaging in <b>forbidden sexual intercourse. And</b> one can <b>raise a contradiction</b> from another mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 26b): With regard to <b>a woman who was imprisoned by gentiles,</b> if she was imprisoned <b>due to monetary matters she is permitted to her husband</b> even if he is a priest, as there is no concern that she was raped. If she was imprisoned <b>due to a capital</b> offense <b>she is forbidden to her husband</b> if he is a priest, as the captors would not restrain themselves from raping her. The first clause of the mishna in <i>Ketubot</i> rules that a woman who was imprisoned in seclusion with gentiles is not assumed to have engaged in intercourse with them. This apparently contradicts the statement of the mishna here, which rules that a woman may not seclude herself with gentiles.

### Part 3
The Gemara continues: <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from</b> here that there is <b>a difference for us between <i>ab initio</i>,</b> as in the mishna here, <b>and after the fact,</b> as in the mishna in <i>Ketubot</i>? The Gemara rejects this conclusion: <b>From where</b> can this be proven? <b>Perhaps I</b> could <b>actually say to you:</b> Generally, <b>even after the fact,</b> one <b>may not</b> assume that a woman who was secluded with a gentile did not engage in intercourse with him, <b>and here,</b> in the mishna in <i>Ketubot</i>, <b>this is the reason</b> that she is permitted to her husband even after having been imprisoned: <b>Since</b> her husband might not agree to pay if his wife was raped, the gentile <b>is fearful</b> of raping her <b>due to the</b> potential <b>loss of his money.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara adds: <b>Know</b> that this is the explanation, <b>as the latter clause</b> of that mishna <b>teaches:</b> If she was imprisoned <b>due to a capital</b> offense <b>she is forbidden to her husband.</b> Clearly, the difference is that in this case there is no incentive for the gentiles to leave her unharmed. The Gemara concludes: <b>And nothing more</b> needs discussion, as this is certainly the correct interpretation of that mishna.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Pedat said:</b> The contradiction between the mishna, which rules that gentiles are suspected of bestiality, and the <i>baraita</i>, which permits an animal purchased from gentiles to be sacrificed as an offering, is <b>not difficult; this</b> mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> while <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Para</i> 2:1) <b>with regard to the</b> red <b>heifer of purification: Rabbi Eliezer says</b> that <b>it may not be purchased from gentiles, and the Rabbis permit</b> it to be purchased from gentiles. Rabbi Pedat explains: <b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis <b>disagree with regard to this</b> issue, <b>that Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that <b>we are concerned that</b> a person might have engaged in <b>bestiality</b> with the animal, <b>and the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>we are not concerned that</b> a person engaged in <b>bestiality</b> with the animal?

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this conclusion: <b>From where</b> do you know that this is the case? <b>Perhaps everyone</b> agrees that <b>we are not concerned that</b> a person might have engaged in <b>bestiality</b> with the animal, <b>and here, this is the reasoning of Rabbi Eliezer:</b> He holds <b>in accordance with</b> a statement <b>that Rabbi Yehuda</b> says that <b>Rav says. As Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> If <b>one placed a bundle of sacks upon</b> a red heifer, <b>he has rendered it unfit</b> for purification, as a red heifer is fit only if it has not borne any burden, in accordance with the verse: “Upon which never came a yoke” (Numbers 19:2); <b>and in</b> the case of the <b>heifer</b> whose neck is broken, it is not rendered unfit <b>until you pull</b> a load <b>with it,</b> as the verse states: “And which has not drawn in the yoke” (Deuteronomy 21:3).

### Part 7
The Gemara elaborates: One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds:</b> A red heifer purchased from a gentile cannot be used for purification because <b>we are concerned</b> that it might have been used for labor, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds: We are not concerned</b> that the gentile used it for labor. Accordingly, the disagreement in that mishna does not relate to a concern with regard to bestiality. The Gemara responds: <b>No;</b> it cannot <b>enter your mind</b> that Rabbi Eliezer prohibits purchasing a red heifer from a gentile due to the concern that he might have placed sacks upon it, as <b>due to</b> the <b>slight convenience</b> of placing a bundle of sacks upon the heifer, the gentile will <b>not forfeit</b> the potential to earn <b>a great deal</b> of money which he can obtain by selling the heifer.

### Part 8
The Gemara counters: <b>So too, let us say: Due to</b> the <b>slight pleasure</b> of engaging in bestiality with an animal, a gentile <b>will not forfeit a great deal</b> of money which he can otherwise obtain by selling the heifer. The Gemara responds: <b>There,</b> with regard to bestiality, <b>his inclination overcomes him,</b> and he is apt to engage in bestiality with the heifer despite the fact that he knows it is to his disadvantage to do so.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>And perhaps everyone</b> agrees that <b>we are not concerned that</b> a person might have engaged in <b>bestiality</b> with the animal, <b>and here, this is the reason of Rabbi Eliezer, in accordance with that</b> which <b>Sheila taught, as Sheila taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Eliezer?</b> The verse states: <b>“Speak unto the children of Israel that they take to you</b> a red heifer” (Numbers 19:2). This teaches that <b>the children of Israel take</b> the red heifer, <b>but gentiles do not take</b> the red heifer.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: It should <b>not enter your mind</b> to say so, <b>as the latter clause</b> of that same <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: And similarly, Rabbi Eliezer would disqualify</b> an animal purchased from a gentile <b>in</b> the case of <b>all offerings.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>And if</b> it should <b>enter your mind</b> that Rabbi Eliezer’s reason is <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Sheila taught, granted, in</b> the case of the red <b>heifer</b> a term of <b>taking is written, but</b> is a term of <b>taking written with regard to all</b> other <b>offerings?</b> Since a term of taking does not appear in the context of other offerings, this cannot be Rabbi Eliezer’s reasoning. The Gemara suggests: <b>And perhaps the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC