
### Part 1
<b>by it, as it is written: “For, behold, the day comes, it burns as a furnace; and all the proud, and all that work wickedness, shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall set them ablaze, said the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch”</b> (Malachi 3:19). This verse is interpreted as follows: <b>Neither a root</b> shall remain for them <b>in this world, nor</b> will <b>a branch</b> grow for them <b>in the World-to-Come.</b> This teaches that the sun itself will burn and consume the wicked in the future.

### Part 2
And <b>the righteous will be healed by it, as it is written</b> in the next verse: <b>“But to you that fear My Name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in its wings”</b> (Malachi 3:20). <b>And moreover,</b> not only will they be healed by it, <b>but they will</b> even <b>be rejuvenated by it, as it is stated</b> in the continuation of that verse: <b>“And you shall go forth and leap as calves of the stall.”</b>

### Part 3
<b>Alternatively, just as</b> in the case of <b>fish of the sea, any</b> fish <b>that is bigger than another swallows the other, so too</b> in the case of <b>people, were it not for the fear of</b> the ruling <b>government, anyone who is bigger than another</b> would <b>swallow the other. And this is as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Avot</i> 3:2) that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy</b> High <b>Priest, says: One should pray for the</b> continued <b>welfare of the government, as were it not for the fear of the government,</b> every <b>man would swallow his neighbor alive.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Ḥinnana bar Pappa raises a contradiction</b> between the following verses. <b>It is written: “The Almighty, Whom we have not found out His excellent power”</b> (Job 37:23), which indicates that His power has not been seen. <b>And it is written</b> elsewhere: <b>“Great is our Lord, and mighty in power”</b> (Psalms 147:5), <b>and it is</b> also <b>written: “Your right hand, O Lord, glorious in power”</b> (Exodus 15:6), from which it may be inferred that His power is discernable. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult; here,</b> in the first verse, God’s strength is not seen <b>at a time of judgment,</b> where He acts mercifully, whereas <b>there,</b> in the other verses, they are referring <b>to a time of war,</b> when He wages war against His enemies and His power is seen.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, raises a contradiction</b> between the following verses. <b>It is written: “Fury is not in Me”</b> (Isaiah 27:4), <b>and it is written: “The Lord is a jealous and furious God”</b> (Nahum 1:2). The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult; here,</b> where it states that God has no fury, it is speaking <b>with regard to the Jewish people,</b> whereas <b>there,</b> where it says that God has fury, it is speaking <b>with regard to the nations of the world. Rav Ḥinnana bar Pappa says</b> in explanation of the verse: “Fury is not in Me; would that I were as the briers and thorns in flame! I would with one step burn it altogether” (Isaiah 27:4). <b>“Fury is not in Me,” as I have already taken an oath</b> that I will not destroy the Jewish people; <b>“would that I” had not taken this oath,</b> since then <b>I would be</b> active <b>“as the briers and thorns</b> in flame! I would with one step burn it altogether.”

### Part 6
<b>And this is</b> the same as that <b>which Rabbi Alexandri says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations”</b> (Zechariah 12:9)? <b>“I will seek” from whom?</b> Does God need to seek permission? Rather, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, says: I will seek</b> and search <b>in their records [<i>benigeni</i>]; if they have merit, I will redeem them, and if not, I will destroy them.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And this is</b> the same as that <b>which Rava says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Surely none shall put forth his hand to a ruinous heap, neither because of these things shall help come in one’s calamity [<i>befido</i>]”</b> (Job 30:24)? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, says to the Jewish people: When I judge the Jewish people, I do not judge them as</b> I judge <b>the nations of the world.</b> When judging the nations of the world, I punish them for all of their transgressions together, <b>as it is written: “A ruin, a ruin, a ruin, will I make it,</b> this also shall be no more” (Ezekiel 21:32). <b>Rather, I punish</b> the Jewish people <b>like the pecking [<i>kefid</i>] of a hen,</b> which picks up only a tiny amount each time it pecks.

### Part 8
<b>Alternatively, even if the Jewish people perform but a few mitzvot before Me, like the pecking of hens that peck in a dunghill, I</b> will <b>combine them to a large reckoning, as it is stated: “Though they peck [<i>befido</i>],”</b> i.e., perform mitzvot a little at a time, <b>“they will be saved [<i>lahen shua</i>]”</b> (Job 30:24). <b>Alternatively, in reward for</b> the manner in <b>which they cry out [<i>shua</i>]</b> and pray <b>before Me, I</b> will <b>save [<i>moshia</i>] them.</b> In other words, God punishes the Jewish people for each individual infraction, but He does not destroy them entirely in a moment of fury.

### Part 9
<b>And this is</b> the same as that <b>which Rabbi Abba says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And though I will redeem them, they have spoken lies against Me”</b> (Hosea 7:13)? <b>I said</b> that <b>I would redeem them through</b> taking away <b>their money in this world so that they should merit the World-to-Come, but they have spoken lies against Me,</b> by saying that I am angry and uninterested in them.

### Part 10
<b>And this is</b> the same as that <b>which Rav Pappi says in the name of Rava: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Though I have trained [<i>yissarti</i>] and strengthened their arms, yet they consider evil against Me”</b> (Hosea 7:15)? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, says: I said</b> that <b>I would visit them [<i>ayasserem</i>] with afflictions in this world</b> for their benefit, <b>so that their arms would be strengthened in the World-to-Come, but they consider</b> that which <b>I</b> have done as <b>evil.</b>

### Part 11
With regard to the afflictions of the Jewish people, the Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Abbahu would praise Rav Safra to the heretics</b> by saying <b>that he is a great man.</b> Therefore, <b>they remitted</b> Rav Safra’s obligation to pay <b>taxes for thirteen years,</b> as they relied upon Rabbi Abbahu’s word and wanted to reward a great man. <b>One day they found</b> Rav Safra and <b>said to him: It is written: “You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore, I will visit upon you all your iniquities”</b> (Amos 3:2). The meaning of this verse is unclear, as why would God punish specifically the Jewish people because He loves them? <b>One who has wrath [<i>siseya</i>],</b> does <b>he raise it against his beloved?</b> Rav Safra <b>was silent and did not say anything</b> in response <b>to them. They threw a scarf around his neck and tormented him,</b> by pulling and denigrating him.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Abbahu came</b> and <b>found them</b> doing this to Rav Safra. Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to them: Why are you tormenting him? They said to him: And didn’t you say to us that he is a great man? But he did not</b> even <b>know</b> how <b>to tell us the explanation of this verse.</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to them:</b> You can <b>say that I said</b> this praise of Rav Safra <b>to you</b> only <b>with regard to</b> the Oral Law and the statements of <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> but <b>did I say to you</b> that he is knowledgeable <b>with regard to the Bible?</b>

### Part 13
<b>They said to</b> Rabbi Abbahu: <b>What is different</b> about <b>you</b> Sages of Eretz Yisrael, <b>that you know</b> the Bible as well? Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to them: We, who are situated among you</b> heretics and are forced to debate the meaning of verses, <b>we impose upon ourselves</b> this obligation <b>and analyze</b> verses in depth. By contrast, <b>those</b> Sages of Babylonia, who are not forced to debate you, <b>do not analyze</b> the Bible in such depth.

### Part 14
The heretics <b>said to</b> Rabbi Abbahu: In that case, <b>you should tell us</b> the meaning of this verse. Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to them: I will relate a parable to you. To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a person who lends</b> money <b>to two people, one</b> of whom is <b>his beloved, and</b> the other <b>one</b> is <b>his enemy.</b> In the case of <b>his beloved, he collects</b> the debt <b>from him little</b> by <b>little,</b> whereas in the case of <b>his enemy he collects</b> the debt <b>from him all at once.</b> So too, with regard to the Jewish people, God punishes them for each transgression as it occurs, so that they should not receive one severe punishment on a single occasion.

### Part 15
§ The Gemara continues discussing the manner in which God metes out punishment. <b>Rabbi Abba Bar Kahana says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> as part of Abraham’s prayer to God, when God informed him that He was going to destroy Sodom: <b>“That be far [<i>ḥalila</i>] from You to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked”</b> (Genesis 18:25)? This is what <b>Abraham said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, it is a sacrilege [<i>ḥullin</i>] for You to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does God <b>not</b> act in this manner? <b>But isn’t it written: “And I will cut off from You the righteous and the wicked”</b> (Ezekiel 21:8)? The Gemara answers: There the verse is referring <b>to a righteous</b> person <b>who is not completely</b> righteous, and he will therefore be destroyed along with the wicked.

### Part 17
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> is it true that <b>one who is completely righteous cannot</b> be destroyed along with the wicked? <b>But isn’t it written</b> in a prophecy about the destruction of the Temple that God says to the destroyers: <b>“And begin at My Sanctuary [<i>mimmikdashi</i>]”</b> (Ezekiel 9:6); <b>and Rav Yosef teaches: Do not read</b> the word as <b>“<i>mimmikdashi</i>,”</b> but <b>rather</b> read it as <b><i>mimmekudashai</i>,</b> those sanctified to Me. <b>He explains: These are people who observed the Torah</b> in its entirety, <b>from</b> the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet <b><i>alef</i> through</b> its final letter <b><i>tav</i>.</b> These people observed every mitzva in the Torah, and yet they were destroyed along with the wicked. The Gemara answers the difficulty: <b>There too, since they had the power to protest</b> against the wicked and prevent them from sinning <b>and they did not protest, they are</b> considered <b>as righteous</b> people <b>who are not completely</b> righteous.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Pappa raises a contradiction</b> between the following verses. <b>It is written: “A God that has indignation every day”</b> (Psalms 7:12), and yet the world still exists, <b>and it is written: “Who can stand before His indignation?”</b> (Nahum 1:6). The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult; here,</b> where the verse states that no one can stand before His indignation, it is referring <b>to an individual,</b> whereas <b>there,</b> when it is written that God is indignant every day, it is referring <b>to the community,</b> which can withstand the indignation of God, due to its cumulative merits.

### Part 19
<b>The Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse: <b>A God that has indignation every day. And how</b> long does <b>His indignation</b> last? It lasts <b>a moment. And how</b> long is <b>a moment? One in 53,848</b> parts <b>of an hour,</b> a very small amount of time, <b>that is a moment.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And no entity can</b> precisely <b>determine that moment</b> when God is indignant, <b>except for Balaam the wicked, that it is written concerning him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC