
### Part 1
It does <b>not need to be said that</b> when he asks for the item <b>without specification one may sell</b> white wheat to him, <b>and</b> it does <b>not need to be said that</b> when he asks for it with <b>specification one may not sell it</b> to him, as he expressly stated that he will use it for idol worship. <b>Rather,</b> when the mishna says that he asks <b>without specification,</b> this is referring to a case <b>where</b> the gentile <b>says</b> that he wishes to buy <b>wheat,</b> in which case it is permitted to sell to him. If so, the case when he asks with <b>specification is</b> one <b>where he says</b> that he wants <b>white</b> wheat, which is an item used in idol worship, and the mishna teaches that it is prohibited to sell this to him.

### Part 2
<b>By inference,</b> this means <b>that</b> in the case of <b>a rooster,</b> referred to earlier in the mishna, <b>even</b> if the gentile requests <b>without specification,</b> i.e., without saying that he wants a white one, it is <b>not</b> permitted to sell it to him. This conclusion contradicts the opinion of Rabbi Zeira. The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>Say</b> in response that <b>actually, without specification</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the gentile <b>says</b> that he wants to purchase <b>white wheat,</b> and with <b>specification</b> is referring to a case <b>where he says</b> that he needs it <b>for idol worship.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And</b> as for the objection that this ruling is superfluous, in fact it <b>is necessary</b> for the mishna to state the <i>halakha</i> in a case where he <b>specified</b> that he would use the item for idol worship. The Gemara elaborates: It might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>this man does not</b> really <b>need</b> the wheat <b>for</b> his <b>idol worship. Rather, he is</b> deeply <b>attached to idol worship, and he thought</b> that <b>just as that man,</b> i.e., he himself, <b>is so attached</b> to it, <b>everyone</b> else is <b>also attached</b> to idol worship. Therefore, he reasoned: <b>I will say this,</b> that I intend to use the item for idol worship, <b>so that they will give</b> it <b>to me.</b> Consequently, it is necessary for the mishna to <b>teach us</b> that if he says that he intends to use the item for idol worship it is prohibited to sell it to him, as he might be telling the truth.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Ashi raised a dilemma:</b> If a gentile asks the merchants: <b>Who has a damaged white rooster, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether it is permitted <b>to sell him an unblemished white rooster? Do we say that from</b> the fact <b>that he says</b> that he wants <b>a damaged</b> rooster, it may be inferred that <b>he does not need it for idol worship,</b> as gentiles do not sacrifice defective animals, and therefore it is permitted? <b>Or perhaps he is</b> only <b>employing artifice.</b> In other words, he knows that a Jew will not sell him an undamaged white rooster upon request, and as it is unlikely that someone has a damaged white rooster to sell him, he hopes that he will receive an undamaged one. If so, it is prohibited to sell him a white rooster.

### Part 5
<b>If you say</b> that <b>this</b> gentile <b>is employing artifice,</b> and it is prohibited, in a case where he said: <b>Who has a white rooster, who has a white rooster; and they brought him a black</b> rooster <b>and he took it, or</b> in a case where <b>they bought him a red</b> one <b>and he took it, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether it is permitted <b>to sell him a white</b> rooster? <b>Do we say: Since they brought him a black</b> rooster <b>and he took it,</b> or they bought him <b>a red</b> one <b>and he took it,</b> evidently <b>he does not need</b> the rooster <b>for idol worship? Or perhaps,</b> here too <b>he is employing artifice?</b> The Gemara comments: These dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> It is prohibited to sell <b>even</b> a good <b>palm tree</b> and <i>ḥatzav</i> to gentiles. <b>Rav Ḥisda said to Avimei: It is learned</b> as a tradition <b>that</b> the tractate <b><i>Avoda Zara</i> of our forefather Abraham contained four hundred chapters, and we have learned</b> only <b>five</b> chapters in our tractate <i>Avoda Zara</i>, <b>and we do not</b> even <b>know</b> the meaning of <b>what we are saying.</b>

### Part 7
Avimei asked him: <b>And what</b> in the mishna here <b>poses a difficulty</b> for you? He replied: I do not understand the mishna <b>which teaches</b> the following: <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> It is <b>prohibited to sell even a good palm tree, <i>ḥatzav</i>, and <i>naklas</i> to gentiles.</b> It may be inferred from here that <b>it is a good palm tree that one does not sell</b> to gentiles, <b>but one may sell a bad palm tree. But didn’t we learn</b> in another mishna (19b) that <b>one may not sell to</b> gentiles anything that is <b>attached to the ground?</b> Avimei <b>said to him: What</b> is the meaning of: <b>A good palm tree?</b> It means the detached <b>fruit of a good palm tree. And similarly, Rav Huna says:</b> The mishna means the <b>fruit of a good palm tree.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains the meaning of other terms that appear in the mishna. <b><i>Ḥatzav</i></b> is a type of date known as <b><i>kashba</i>.</b> With regard to the meaning of <b><i>naklas</i>,</b> the Gemara relates: <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Yosef</b> said that it is referring to <b><i>koreyatei</i>. Abaye said to Rav Dimi: We learned</b> in the mishna <b><i>naklas</i>, and we did not know what it is, and</b> now <b>you have said</b> that it means <b><i>koreyatei</i>, and we do not know</b> what that is either. <b>How have you helped us?</b> Rav Dimi <b>said to him: I have</b> in fact <b>helped you, as when you go there,</b> to Eretz Yisrael, and <b>say to them <i>naklas</i>, and they do not know</b> what it means, <b>say to them <i>koreyatei</i>, and they</b> will <b>know</b> what it is, <b>and they will show</b> it <b>to you.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In <b>a place where</b> the residents <b>were accustomed to sell small domesticated animals to gentiles, one may sell</b> them. In <b>a place where they were not accustomed to sell</b> them, <b>one may not sell</b> them. <b>But in every place, one may not sell them large livestock, calves, or foals,</b> whether these animals are <b>whole or damaged.</b> The Sages prohibited these sales lest a Jew’s animal perform labor for the gentile on Shabbat in violation of an explicit Torah prohibition, as explained in the Gemara. <b>Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> the sale <b>of a damaged</b> animal because it is incapable of performing labor, <b>and ben Beteira permits</b> the sale <b>of a horse</b> for riding, because riding a horse on Shabbat is not prohibited by Torah law.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that one may not sell small domesticated animals to gentiles if it is not the accepted practice. The Gemara infers: That is <b>to say that there is no prohibition</b> involved; rather, <b>there is a custom</b> not to sell small domesticated animals. Therefore, <b>where the practice</b> is to <b>prohibit</b> the sale, that is what is <b>practiced,</b> and <b>where the practice</b> is to <b>permit the sale,</b> that is what is <b>practiced.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from the mishna on 22a: <b>One may not keep an animal in the inns of gentiles, because they are suspected of</b> engaging in <b>bestiality.</b> If so, it should be prohibited in all places to sell animals to gentiles, as one is thereby placing a stumbling block before the blind. <b>Rav says:</b> The <i>halakha</i> of the mishna there, with regard to keeping an animal in a gentile inn, is contingent on the <b><i>halakha</i></b> of the mishna here. If it is <b>a place where</b> the Sages <b>permitted one to sell</b> animals to gentiles, it must be that the gentiles of that location are not suspected of engaging in bestiality. Therefore, the Sages <b>permitted one to leave</b> the animal <b>in seclusion</b> with the gentile at the inn. Conversely, in <b>a place where</b> the Sages <b>prohibited one from leaving</b> the animal <b>in seclusion</b> with the gentile at the inn, because the gentiles there are suspected of engaging in bestiality, <b>they</b> also <b>prohibited one from selling</b> animals to gentiles there.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC