
### Part 1
The Gemara comments: <b>And according to Rava, who</b> explains that the mishna with regard to wine used for libations is in accordance with one opinion whereas the mishna with regard to tithes is in accordance with another opinion, and <b>he does not</b> hold that the case of wine used for a libation <b>is different, he interprets it as</b> a dispute between <b>three <i>tanna’im</i>.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: Once the wine descends into the collection vat, <b>that which is in the</b> collection <b>vat</b> is <b>prohibited, and the rest,</b> which did not yet descend into the collection vat, is <b>permitted. Rav Huna says:</b> The mishna <b>taught</b> that the rest of the wine is permitted <b>only</b> in a case <b>where he did not return</b> the <b>wicker basket [<i>gargutni</i>],</b> which is used to strain the wine on the way to the vat, <b>to the winepress. But</b> if <b>he returned</b> the <b>wicker basket to the winepress,</b> even the wine remaining in the winepress is <b>prohibited,</b> as the wine in the basket renders the wine in the winepress forbidden.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: With regard to the wine in the <b>wicker basket itself, in what</b> manner <b>is it rendered forbidden?</b> Apparently, it is rendered forbidden <b>by</b> the <b>stream</b> of liquid that flows from the basket into the vat below, thereby connecting the wine in the basket to the forbidden wine in the vat. If so, <b>conclude from</b> Rav Huna’s statement that an uninterrupted <b>stream</b> of liquid is considered <b>a connection.</b> The Gemara rejects the inference: The reason for Rav Huna’s statement could be different, <b>as Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> that if one fills a gentile’s flask through a funnel, the wine in the funnel is rendered forbidden in a case <b>where</b> the level of the wine in <b>his flask</b> rose and <b>reached</b> the funnel. <b>Here too,</b> Rav Huna is referring to a case <b>where</b> the level of the wine in <b>his</b> collection <b>vat</b> rose and <b>reached</b> the basket.

### Part 4
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> outstanding <b>child who learned</b> the tractate of <b><i>Avoda Zara</i> when</b> he was <b>six years</b> old. People <b>raised a dilemma to him: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is it permitted <b>to tread</b> on grapes <b>in the winepress</b> together <b>with the gentile?</b> The child <b>said to them:</b> One <b>may tread</b> on grapes <b>in the winepress</b> together <b>with the gentile,</b> in accordance with the ruling of the mishna. They asked the child: <b>But doesn’t</b> the gentile <b>render</b> the wine <b>a libation</b> by touching it <b>with his hands,</b> rendering it forbidden? If so, how may a Jew derive benefit from the wine by receiving payment for his work? The child replied: It is permitted in a case <b>where we tie his hands</b> so that he cannot pour the wine as a libation. The child was then asked: <b>But doesn’t</b> the gentile <b>render</b> the wine <b>a libation</b> by touching it <b>with</b> his <b>foot?</b> The child replied: <b>Rendering</b> wine <b>a libation</b> by touching it <b>with</b> one’s <b>foot is not considered rendering</b> it <b>a libation.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>There was a certain incident in Neharde’a</b> in <b>which a Jew and a gentile trod</b> on grapes and produced <b>a certain wine</b> together, <b>and Shmuel delayed</b> ruling on the matter for <b>three Festivals,</b> as the Sages gathered during the Festivals and presented Shmuel with the opportunity to clarify the matter with them. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that Shmuel delayed his ruling? <b>If we say</b> that Shmuel delayed ruling on the matter <b>because he thought</b> to himself:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC