
### Part 1
during <b>all</b> the <b>thirty days</b> that follow the wedding celebration, if the gentile invites a Jew to a feast, <b>whether he said</b> to the Jew that the feast is <b>due to the wedding celebration or whether he did not say to him</b> that the feast is <b>due to the wedding celebration,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to attend, as it is assumed the festivity is part of the wedding celebration. <b>From this</b> point <b>forward, if he said to him</b> that the feast is <b>due to the wedding celebration,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to participate, <b>but if he did not say to him</b> that the feast is <b>due to the wedding celebration,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to do so.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in a case <b>where he said to him</b> that the feast is <b>due to the wedding celebration, until when</b> is the feast assumed to be connected to idol worship? <b>Rav Pappa said: Until twelve months of the year</b> have passed since the wedding. The Gemara asks: <b>And initially,</b> before the wedding, <b>from when is it prohibited? Rav Pappa said in the name of Rava: From</b> the time <b>when they cast barley into the mortars [<i>ba’asintei</i>]</b> to prepare beer for the wedding.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And after the twelve months of the year</b> have passed since the wedding, is it always <b>permitted</b> to participate in a feast? <b>But Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rav Mesharshiyya, happened</b> to come <b>to the house of a certain gentile after twelve months of the year</b> had passed since his son’s wedding, <b>and he heard</b> the gentile <b>giving thanks</b> to his idol for the marriage of his son, <b>and he withdrew</b> from the feast <b>and did not eat</b> there. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rav Mesharshiyya, is different, as he is an important person</b> and therefore his presence caused the gentile to rejoice.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And Kratesis,</b> and the day of the festival of their kings. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the festival of <b>Kratesis? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> It commemorates <b>the day when Rome seized</b> control of <b>an empire.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Two festivals are <b>Kratesis and the day when Rome seized</b> control of <b>an empire?</b> This indi-cates that Kratesis and the day when Rome seized control of an empire are two separate festivals. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> On <b>two</b> separate occasions <b>Rome seized</b> control of <b>an empire. One</b> occurred <b>in the days of Queen Cleopatra,</b> when they conquered Egypt, <b>and one</b> happened much earlier, <b>when</b> Rome <b>seized</b> control <b>in the days of the Greeks.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara elaborates: <b>As when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael <b>he said: The Romans waged thirty-two battles with the Greeks but were unable to</b> defeat <b>them, until they formed a partnership with the Jewish people</b> and finally vanquished the Greeks. <b>And this is the condition that they stipulated with</b> the Jewish people: <b>If the kings</b> come <b>from among us, the governors [<i>hiparkhei</i>]</b> will come <b>from among you;</b> and <b>if the kings</b> come <b>from among you, the governors</b> will come <b>from among us.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And the Romans sent</b> the following message <b>to the Greeks: Until now, we</b> attempted to resolve our conflict <b>through</b> fighting <b>battles; now, let us</b> settle the matter <b>by</b> means of <b>judgment.</b> In the case of <b>a pearl and a precious stone, which</b> one <b>of them should serve as a base for the other?</b> The Greeks <b>sent them</b> in response: The <b>pearl</b> should serve as the base <b>for</b> the <b>precious stone,</b> which has a greater value.

### Part 7
The Romans further inquired: If there was <b>a precious stone and an onyx [<i>innakh</i>],</b> a particularly valuable precious stone, <b>which</b> one <b>of them should serve as a base for the other?</b> The Greeks answered: The <b>precious stone</b> should serve as the base <b>for</b> the <b>onyx.</b> Once again, the Romans asked: In the case of <b>an onyx and a Torah scroll, which</b> one <b>of them should be serve as a base for the other?</b> The Greeks responded: The <b>onyx</b> should serve as the base <b>for the Torah scroll.</b>

### Part 8
The Romans <b>sent</b> this response <b>to them: If</b> that is <b>so,</b> then you should submit to us, as <b>we have</b> the <b>Torah scroll with us, and the Jewish people</b> are <b>with us.</b> The Romans are akin to the precious stone, and they are allied with the Jewish people who are akin to the onyx, and they possess the Torah scroll. The Romans therefore <b>forced</b> the Greeks to surrender and took over their world dominance. For <b>twenty-six years</b> the Romans <b>stood faithfully with the Jewish people; from that</b> point <b>forward, they subjugated them.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Initially,</b> when the Romans acted faithfully, <b>what</b> verse <b>did they interpret, and ultimately,</b> when they subjugated the Jews, <b>what</b> verse <b>did they interpret? Initially, they interpreted</b> the verse where Esau said to Jacob upon their meeting: <b>“Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before you”</b> (Genesis 33:12). In this verse, Esau equates himself to Jacob, prefiguring the initial Roman treatment of the Jews. <b>And ultimately, they interpreted</b> the verse that recites Jacob’s response to Esau: <b>“Let my lord, I pray you, pass over before his servant”</b> (Genesis 33:14), demonstrating Jacob’s subjugation to Esau, and by extension that of the Jews to Rome.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: With regard to the <b>twenty-six years during which</b> the Romans <b>stood faithfully with the Jewish people, from where do we</b> know that this was the case? The Gemara cites a proof. <b>As Rav Kahana says: When Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, fell ill,</b> the Sages <b>sent</b> the following message <b>to him:</b> Our <b>teacher, tell us two or three statements that you</b> once <b>told us in the name of your father,</b> Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, as we do not remember the statements precisely.

### Part 11
Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, <b>said to them</b> the following statements that were passed down to him by his father: <b>One hundred and eighty years before the</b> Second <b>Temple was destroyed, the evil</b> Roman <b>Empire stretched forth over Israel</b> and ruled over them. <b>Eighty years before the Temple was destroyed,</b> the Sages <b>decreed impurity on the land of the nations and on glass vessels. Forty years before the Temple was destroyed, the Sanhedrin was exiled</b> from the Chamber of Hewn Stone <b>and sat in the store</b> near the Temple Mount.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is it necessary to know where the Sanhedrin would convene? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said:</b> It is necessary in order <b>to say that they no</b> longer <b>judged cases of fines.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Does it enter your mind</b> that at this point the Sanhedrin no longer judged <b>cases of fines? But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say</b> that <b>Rav says: Indeed [<i>beram</i>], that man will be remembered favorably, and Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava is his name, as had it not been for him the laws of fines would have been forgotten from</b> among <b>the Jewish people.</b> The Gemara challenges that assertion: <b>Would</b> the laws of fines actually <b>have been forgotten? Let</b> the scholars <b>study them,</b> so they will not be forgotten.

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> his intention was to say that <b>the laws of fines would have ceased</b> to be implemented <b>from</b> among <b>the Jewish people,</b> as they would not have been able to adjudicate cases involving these <i>halakhot</i> due to a lack of ordained judges. This is <b>because</b> at one time <b>the wicked kingdom</b> of Rome <b>issued decrees of religious persecution against the Jewish people</b> with the aim of abolishing the chain of ordination and the authority of the Sages. They said that <b>anyone who ordains</b> judges <b>will be killed, and anyone who is ordained will be killed, and the city in which they ordain</b> the judges <b>will be destroyed, and</b> the areas around <b>the boundary</b> of the city <b>in which they ordain</b> judges <b>will be uprooted.</b> These measures were intended to discourage the Sages from performing or receiving ordination due to fear for the welfare of the local population.

### Part 14
<b>What did</b> Rabbi <b>Yehuda ben Bava do? He went and sat between two large mountains, and between two large cities,</b> and <b>between two Shabbat boundaries: Between Usha and Shefaram,</b> i.e., in a desolate place that was not associated with any particular city so that he would not endanger anyone not directly involved, <b>and there he ordained five Elders,</b> namely: <b>Rabbi Meir, and Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon, and Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua. And Rav Avya adds</b> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya</b> was <b>also</b> among those ordained.

### Part 15
<b>When</b> their <b>enemies discovered them,</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava <b>said to</b> the newly ordained rabbis: <b>My sons, run</b> for your lives. <b>They said to him:</b> Our <b>teacher, and what will be with you?</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava was elderly and unable to run. He <b>said to them:</b> In any case, <b>I am cast before them like a stone that cannot be overturned;</b> even if you attempt to assist me I will not be able to escape due to my frailty, but if you do not escape without me you will also be killed. People <b>said</b> about this incident: The Roman soldiers <b>did not move from there until they had inserted three hundred iron spears [<i>lulniot</i>] into his body, making his body</b> appear <b>like a sieve</b> pierced with many holes. It can be inferred from this episode that there were ordained judges who could hear cases of fines for many years after the destruction of the Temple, in contrast to Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Avdimi’s statement.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says</b> in explanation: <b>Do not say</b> that after the Sanhedrin was exiled from the Chamber of Hewn Stone they no longer judged cases of <b>fines; rather,</b> emend the statement to say <b>that they no</b> longer <b>judged</b> cases of <b>capital law,</b> as a court does not have the authority to hear capital cases when the Sanhedrin is not sitting in the Chamber of Hewn Stone.

### Part 17
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> that the members of the Sanhedrin ceased to meet in their proper place and thereby ended the adjudication of capital cases? <b>Once they saw that the murderers were so numerous and they were not able to judge</b> them and punish them with death, <b>they said:</b> It is <b>better that we should be exiled</b> from the Chamber of Hewn Stone and move <b>from place to place, so that</b> offenders <b>will not be</b> deemed <b>liable</b> to receive the death penalty in a time period when the court does not carry out their sentences.

### Part 18
The Gemara explains why a court may not adjudicate capital cases once the Sanhedrin has left the Chamber of Hewn Stone. <b>As it is written: “And you shall do according to the tenor of the sentence, which they shall declare to you from that place”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:10). This verse <b>teaches that</b> it is <b>the place</b> where the Sanhedrin resides that <b>causes</b> the judgment to take place. In other words, if the Sanhedrin has abandoned its proper place, the Chamber of Hewn Stone, all courts must cease judging capital cases.

### Part 19
The Gemara returns to the earlier comment of Rabbi Yishmael in the name of his father Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, that the Roman Empire ruled over Israel one hundred and eighty years before the second Temple was destroyed. The Gemara asks: Did Rome rule over Israel for <b>one hundred and eighty</b> years before the destruction of the Temple <b>and no more? But didn’t Rabbi Yosei the Great,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta himself, <b>teach:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC