
### Part 1
<b>The bundle is separated.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara mentions other Romans who converted to Judaism. It relates: <b>Onkelos bar Kelonimos converted</b> to Judaism. The Roman <b>emperor sent a troop [<i>gunda</i>] of Roman</b> soldiers <b>after him</b> to seize Onkelos and bring him to the emperor. Onkelos <b>drew them</b> toward him <b>with verses</b> that he cited and learned with them, and <b>they converted.</b> The emperor <b>then sent another troop of Roman</b> soldiers <b>after him,</b> and <b>said to them: Do not say anything to him,</b> so that he cannot convince you with his arguments. The troops followed this instruction, and took Onkelos with them.

### Part 3
<b>When they were walking,</b> Onkelos <b>said to</b> the troop of soldiers: <b>I will say a mere statement to you: A minor official [<i>nifyora</i>] holds a torch before a high official [<i>apifyora</i>], the high official</b> holds a torch <b>for a duke [<i>dukasa</i>], a duke for the governor,</b> and <b>the governor for the ruler [<i>koma</i>]. Does the ruler hold a torch before</b> the common <b>people?</b> The soldiers <b>said to</b> Onkelos: <b>No.</b> Onkelos <b>said to them:</b> Yet <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, holds a torch before the Jewish people, as it is written: “And the Lord went before them by day</b> in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light” (Exodus 13:21). <b>They all converted.</b>

### Part 4
The emperor <b>then sent another troop</b> of soldiers <b>after him,</b> to bring Onkelos, and <b>said to them: Do not converse with him at all.</b> The troops followed this instruction, and took Onkelos with them. <b>While they grabbed him and were walking,</b> Onkelos <b>saw a <i>mezuza</i> that was placed on the doorway. He placed his hand upon it and said to</b> the soldiers: <b>What is this? They said to him: You tell us.</b>

### Part 5
Onkelos <b>said to them: The</b> standard <b>practice</b> throughout the <b>world</b> is that <b>a king</b> of <b>flesh and blood sits inside</b> his palace, <b>and his servants</b> stand <b>guard,</b> protecting <b>him outside; but</b> with regard to <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, His servants,</b> the Jewish people, sit <b>inside</b> their homes <b>and He guards over them outside. As it is stated: “The Lord shall guard your going out and your coming in, from now and forever”</b> (Psalms 121:8). Upon hearing this, those soldiers also <b>converted</b> to Judaism. After that, the emperor <b>sent no more</b> soldiers <b>after him.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara returns to its discussion of Antoninus: When the matriarch Rebecca was pregnant with Jacob and Esau, <b>“the Lord said to her: Two nations [<i>goyim</i>] are in your womb”</b> (Genesis 25:23). <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Do not read</b> it as <b><i>goyim</i>,</b> meaning nations; <b>rather</b> read it as <b><i>geyim</i>,</b> meaning proud ones. <b>This</b> verse was fulfilled in two prominent individuals who descended from Rebecca, <b>Antoninus and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>whose tables,</b> due to their wealth, <b>never lacked for lettuce, nor cucumbers, nor radish, neither in the summer nor in the rainy season,</b> despite the fact that these foods do not grow year round. The reason they ensured that these items were always present at their tables is <b>that the Master said: A radish breaks up food, lettuce stirs up food,</b> and <b>cucumbers expand the intestines.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the <b>school of Rabbi Yishmael: Why are they called cucumbers [<i>kishuin</i>]?</b> It is <b>because they are as harmful [<i>kashim</i>] to a person’s body as swords.</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement, that they are harmful to the body, is referring <b>to large</b> cucumbers, whereas <b>that</b> statement, explaining why they were always present on the tables of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Antoninus, is referring <b>to small ones.</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that according to Rabbi Meir <b>the birthday</b> of the king <b>and the day of the death</b> of the king are considered gentile festivals, whereas the Rabbis hold that only a death that includes public burning is considered a festival that includes idol worship. The Gemara comments: <b>By inference,</b> this means <b>that Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>there is no difference</b> whether it is <b>a death that includes</b> public <b>burning, and there is no difference</b> whether it is <b>a death that does not include</b> public <b>burning;</b> in either case, <b>they engage in idol worship on</b> that occasion. <b>Evidently,</b> Rabbi Meir holds that the <b>burning</b> performed at the death of the king <b>is not</b> an idolatrous <b>custom,</b> as it is not the cause of the prohibition. The Gemara continues: From here, one can conclude <b>by inference that the Rabbis hold</b> that the <b>burning</b> upon the death of the king <b>is</b> an idolatrous <b>custom.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>We burn</b> items <b>upon the</b> death of <b>kings</b> as an expression of grief, <b>and</b> this is <b>not of the ways of the Amorites,</b> but rather a Jewish custom? <b>And if</b> this <b>is</b> an idolatrous <b>custom, how could we</b> perform this public <b>burning? But isn’t it written: “And you shall not walk in their statutes”</b> (Leviticus 18:3)?

### Part 10
<b>Rather, everyone</b> agrees that the public <b>burning</b> itself <b>is not</b> an idolatrous <b>custom. Rather, it is</b> performed due to the great <b>importance</b> of the king who passed away. <b>And here,</b> in the mishna, <b>they disagree about this: Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>there is no difference</b> whether it is <b>a death that includes</b> public <b>burning and there is no difference</b> whether it is <b>a death that does not include</b> public <b>burning;</b> in either case, in practice <b>they engage in idol worship on</b> that occasion. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>a death that includes</b> public <b>burning</b> is <b>important to</b> the gentiles, <b>and</b> therefore <b>they engage in</b> idol <b>worship on</b> that occasion, <b>but</b> a death <b>that does not include</b> public <b>burning</b> is <b>not important</b> to them, <b>and they do not engage in</b> idol <b>worship on</b> that occasion.

### Part 11
Having mentioned this <i>baraita</i>, the Gemara returns to discuss <b>the</b> matter <b>itself.</b> The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>One burns</b> items <b>due to the</b> death of <b>kings</b> as an expression of grief, <b>and</b> this <b>is not subject to</b> the prohibition of imitating <b>the ways of the Amorites,</b> since it is a Jewish custom. <b>As it is stated</b> that Jeremiah prophesied to Zedekiah king of Judah: <b>“You shall die in peace; and with the burnings of your fathers, the former kings</b> that were before you, so shall they make a burning for you” (Jeremiah 34:5). <b>And just as one burns</b> items <b>upon</b> the death of <b>the kings, so too one burns</b> items <b>upon</b> the death of <b>the heads of the Sanhedrin.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And what</b> items <b>do they burn upon the</b> death of <b>kings?</b> They burn the kings’ <b>beds and their utensils,</b> so that no one else can make use of them. <b>And</b> there was <b>an incident in which Rabban Gamliel the Elder died, and upon</b> his death <b>Onkelos the convert burned seven thousand dinars</b> in valuable <b>Tyrian</b> coinage. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you state</b> in response to the question: <b>What do they burn upon</b> the death of kings, that they burn <b>their beds and their utensils?</b> Why, then, did Onkelos burn money? The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that Onkelos burned items that were valued <b>at seven thousand dinars</b> in <b>Tyrian</b> coinage.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> are <b>other items not</b> destroyed in order to accord honor to the deceased king, apart from his utensils? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>we detach</b> the hooves of livestock <b>upon the</b> death of <b>kings, and</b> this <b>is not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>the ways of the Amorites? Rav Pappa says:</b> That <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>the horse upon which</b> the king <b>rode.</b> Since that animal was designated as the king’s personal item, it is therefore rendered unusable for anyone else, like his personal utensils.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> did they <b>not</b> detach the hooves of the king’s <b>kosher animals,</b> which are not used by the king for riding? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>removing</b> the hooves of an animal would <b>entail</b> that it becomes <b>an animal with a wound that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>],</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to do so. <b>And when</b> doing so would <b>not entail</b> rendering it <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> it is <b>permitted. And what is</b> a way of <b>removing</b> hooves <b>that does not entail</b> rendering the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC