
### Part 1
<b>they are permitted,</b> as the gentile nullified their prohibited status. In the case of <b>a Jew who brought stones from</b> a pile dedicated to <b>Mercury and paved paths and streets with them, they are prohibited. And there is neither a carpenter [<i>naggar</i>] nor a son of a carpenter who can resolve this,</b> i.e., no one can resolve the difficulty inherent in this statement, not a Torah scholar, and not even a scholar who is the son of a scholar.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> As for <b>me, I am not a carpenter, nor am I</b> the <b>son of a carpenter, and</b> yet <b>I will resolve</b> the difficulty. <b>What is the difficulty</b> that Rabba bar Yirmeya finds in the <i>baraita</i>? The <i>baraita</i> is difficult because of the statement <b>of Rav Giddel,</b> that the prohibited status of offerings brought in idol worship can never be revoked. This is not difficult, as in order for idol worship to prohibit an offering <b>I require</b> the offering to be <b>like</b> those offerings sacrificed <b>inside</b> the Temple, <b>and there is no</b> a parallel offering of stones in the Temple.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Yosef bar Abba said: Rabba bar Yirmeya happened</b> to come <b>to our locale, and</b> when <b>he came he brought</b> the following <b><i>baraita</i> with him:</b> One <b>may remove worms</b> from a tree <b>and place manure</b> on a cut in a tree <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>but</b> one <b>may not remove worms or place manure</b> on a cut <b>during</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Both <b>here,</b> in the case of the Sabbatical Year, <b>and there,</b> in the case of the intermediate days of the Festival, one <b>may not prune</b> the trees. <b>But</b> one <b>may smear oil on the</b> previously <b>pruned</b> tree on the place where one pruned it in order to prevent the tree from being damaged, <b>both during</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival and during the Sabbatical</b> Year. <b>And there is neither a carpenter nor a son of a carpenter who can resolve this.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Ravina said:</b> As for <b>me, I am not a carpenter, nor am I</b> the <b>son of a carpenter, and</b> yet <b>I will resolve</b> the difficulty. <b>What is the difficulty</b> that Rabba bar Yirmeya finds in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If we say</b> that the difference <b>between</b> the intermediate days of the <b>Festival</b> and <b>the Sabbatical</b> Year poses <b>a difficulty to him,</b> this cannot be so. One cannot explain that Rabba bar Yirmeya is asking <b>what is different</b> about the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>that</b> one is <b>permitted</b> to remove worms and place manure on a cut, <b>and what is different</b> about the intermediate days of the <b>Festival that</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to do so, as this is not a valid question. <b>Are</b> they <b>comparable?</b> With regard to the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>the Merciful One prohibited</b> only agricultural <b>labor,</b> whereas other forms of <b>exertion</b> are <b>permitted.</b> With regard to the intermediate days of the <b>Festival, even</b> other forms of <b>exertion</b> are <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 6
Ravina suggests: <b>Rather,</b> perhaps the difference <b>between placing manure</b> and <b>pruning</b> poses <b>a difficulty to him. What is different</b> about <b>placing manure that</b> it is <b>permitted</b> during the Sabbatical Year, <b>and what is different</b> about <b>pruning that</b> it is <b>prohibited?</b> Ravina rejects this suggestion: This is also not a valid question. <b>Are</b> they <b>comparable?</b> The purpose of <b>placing manure</b> is to <b>preserve the tree, and</b> therefore it is <b>permitted,</b> whereas the purpose of <b>pruning</b> is to <b>enhance the tree, and</b> therefore it is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 7
Ravina suggests: <b>Rather,</b> perhaps the contradiction <b>between</b> the aforementioned <i>baraita</i> with regard to <b>placing manure</b> and another mishna with regard to <b>placing manure</b> poses <b>a difficulty to him, as</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches:</b> One <b>may remove worms</b> from a tree <b>and place manure</b> on a cut in a tree <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year. <b>And</b> one may <b>raise a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 2:4): One <b>may place manure on the saplings, and</b> one <b>may bind their</b> branches to the trunk so that they grow upright. <b>And</b> one <b>may lop off their</b> tops to promote their growth, <b>and make shelters for them</b> to shield them from the sun, <b>and water them.</b> All these actions are permitted <b>until Rosh HaShana</b> of the Sabbatical Year. One can infer that <b>until Rosh HaShana, yes,</b> one may place manure on the tree; but <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year itself one may <b>not</b> do so.

### Part 8
Ravina rejects this suggestion: <b>But perhaps</b> one can account for the apparent contradiction in <b>a similar</b> fashion to the explanation <b>of Rav Ukva bar Ḥama, as Rav Ukva bar Ḥama says: There are two</b> types of <b>hoeing [<i>kishkushei</i>].</b> The purpose of <b>one</b> type is <b>to enhance the tree’s</b> health, <b>and</b> it is therefore <b>prohibited. And</b> the purpose of <b>one</b> type is <b>to close up cracks</b> in the ground, which is <b>permitted,</b> as it is done only to prevent the trees from dying and not to enhance their growth. <b>So too,</b> one may suggest that <b>there are two</b> types of <b>placing manure: One</b> type whose purpose is <b>to preserve the trees, and</b> is therefore <b>permitted, and one</b> type whose purpose is <b>to enhance the trees, and</b> is therefore <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 9
Ravina suggests: <b>Rather,</b> perhaps the contradiction <b>between</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the <i>baraita</i> with regard to <b>smearing</b> oil and the <i>halakha</i> in another mishna with regard to <b>smearing</b> oil poses <b>a difficulty for him, as</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches:</b> One <b>may smear oil on the</b> previously <b>pruned</b> tree, on the place where one pruned it, <b>both during</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival and during the Sabbatical</b> Year. <b>And</b> one may <b>raise a contradiction</b> from the mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 2:5): One <b>may smear</b> oil on <b>the unripe figs</b> in the sixth year of the Sabbatical cycle in order to accelerate their ripening, <b>and</b> similarly one <b>may pierce</b> them <b>and fill</b> the cut <b>with oil</b> to facilitate their ripening <b>until Rosh HaShana.</b> One can infer that <b>until Rosh HaShana, yes,</b> one may smear; but <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year itself one may <b>not</b> do so.

### Part 10
Ravina rejects this suggestion: That is also not a valid question. <b>Are</b> they <b>comparable? Here,</b> the purpose of smearing oil on the place where the tree was pruned is to <b>preserve the tree, and</b> therefore it is <b>permitted. There,</b> the purpose of smearing oil on the unripe figs is to enhance and <b>enlarge the fruit and</b> is therefore <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Samma, son of Rav Ashi, said to Ravina:</b> The contradiction <b>between</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>smearing</b> oil <b>during</b> the intermediate days of the <b>Festival</b> and the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>placing manure during</b> the intermediate days of the <b>Festival</b> poses <b>a difficulty for</b> Rabba <b>bar Yirmeya. Since</b> the purpose of <b>this</b> action is to <b>preserve</b> the tree, <b>and</b> the purpose of <b>that</b> action is to <b>preserve</b> the tree, <b>what is different</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>that</b> it is <b>permitted, and what is different</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>that</b> it is <b>prohibited? This is</b> the reason <b>that</b> Rabba bar Yirmeya <b>said to him: There is neither a carpenter nor a son of a carpenter who can resolve this.</b>

### Part 12
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> In the case of an object of <b>idol worship that is worshipped by</b> means of <b>a stick,</b> e.g., by beating a stick on another object in order to produce noise, if one <b>broke a stick before it,</b> he is <b>liable.</b> If he <b>threw a stick before it,</b> he is <b>exempt. Abaye said to Rava: What is different</b> about the case where one <b>broke</b> a stick? In this case one is liable <b>because it is similar to slaughtering</b> an offering, which is a rite performed in the Temple; so <b>too,</b> in the case where one <b>threw</b> a stick, <b>it is similar to</b> the <b>sprinkling</b> of the blood on the altar. Rava <b>said to</b> Abaye: In order for a sacrificial rite to be similar to the sprinkling of blood, <b>I require</b> a form of <b>throwing</b> that <b>scatters</b> the offering, <b>and</b> that is <b>not</b> the case here.

### Part 13
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rava’s explanation from a <i>baraita</i>: One who <b>fed [<i>safat</i>]</b> an idol <b>excrement, or who poured a chamber pot of urine before</b> it <b>as a libation,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC