
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> The dyer <b>gives</b> the owner of the wool <b>the value of his wool.</b> Since the dyer deviated from the owner’s wishes, he is considered akin to a robber who acquires the stolen item by changing it. Therefore, like a robber he keeps the changed item and pays the owner its original value. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The dyer does not acquire the wool; rather, the owner of the wool must reimburse the dyer for his expenses, without losing out himself. <b>If</b> the value of <b>the enhancement,</b> i.e., the enhanced value of the wool, <b>exceeds the</b> dyer’s <b>expenses,</b> the owner of the wool <b>gives</b> the dyer <b>the expenses. And if the expenses exceed the enhancement, he gives him</b> the value of <b>the enhancement.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yosef turned his face away</b> to demonstrate his displeasure with Rav Huna’s comment. The Gemara explains why Rav Yosef was unhappy: <b>Granted,</b> his ruling that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa was necessary,</b> as it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that because this is a dispute between <b>an individual and</b> the <b>many,</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> should be <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of the <b>many,</b> not in accordance with Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa. Rav Huna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that in this case the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa despite the fact that he is <b>an individual.</b>

### Part 3
<b>But why do I</b> need the statement that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda?</b> It is <b>obvious</b> that this is the case, <b>as</b> there is a well-known principle <b>that</b> whenever there is <b>a dispute</b> in a mishna <b>and afterward</b> one opinion is presented as the ruling of <b>an unattributed</b> mishna, i.e., without attribution to a particular Sage or that the ruling is subject to debate, <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion presented in the <b>unattributed</b> mishna.

### Part 4
The Gemara adds that here the ruling of the unattributed mishna appears after the dispute, as the <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Meir appears <b>in</b> tractate <b><i>Bava Kamma</i>, and</b> the <b>unattributed mishna</b> appears <b>in <i>Bava Metzia</i>,</b> which is the next tractate in the order of the Mishna. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Metzia</i> 76a): <b>Whoever changes</b> the terms accepted by both parties <b>is at a disadvantage, and whoever reneges</b> on an agreement <b>is at a disadvantage.</b> This statement is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, who holds that a craftsman who deviates from his assignment is at a disadvantage, as he receives only the expense or the enhancement, whichever is worth less.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why did <b>Rav Huna</b> feel it necessary to state explicitly that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda? It was necessary <b>because</b> Rav Huna holds that <b>the Mishna is not sequential,</b> and therefore it is not clear that the mishna in <i>Bava Kamma</i> precedes the mishna in <i>Bava Metzia</i>. Consequently, <b>it can be said</b> that in fact this is a case of <b>an unattributed</b> mishna that is <b>taught first, and</b> only <b>afterward</b> appears the <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Meir. The Gemara challenges: <b>If that is so,</b> that the Mishna is not sequential, then in <b>every</b> case of <b>a dispute</b> that is <b>afterward</b> followed by <b>an unattributed</b> mishna, <b>let us say</b> that <b>the Mishna is not sequential.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>And Rav Huna?</b> How would he respond to this claim? He would say: <b>When do we not say</b> that the Mishna is <b>non-sequential?</b> The Mishna is considered sequential when both <i>mishnayot</i> appear <b>in one tractate,</b> but when they are <b>in two</b> different <b>tractates, we do say</b> that the Mishna is not sequential, and it is unclear which one was taught last. Therefore, in this case, as each mishna is found in a different tractate, one in <i>Bava Kamma</i> and the other in <i>Bava Metzia</i>, one cannot say for certain which was taught first. <b>And</b> how would <b>Rav Yosef</b> respond? He would say: <b>All of</b> tractate <b><i>Nezikin</i>,</b> i.e., <i>Bava Kamma</i>, <i>Bava Metzia</i>, and <i>Bava Batra</i>, <b>is</b> considered <b>one tractate,</b> and therefore its internal order of <i>mishnayot</i> is sequential.

### Part 7
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that Rav Yosef maintained that it was not necessary to say that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>because</b> his ruling <b>is taught amid</b> other <b>decided <i>halakhot</i>: Whoever changes</b> the terms accepted by both parties <b>is at a disadvantage, and whoever reneges</b> on an agreement <b>is at a disadvantage,</b> i.e., this statement is unrelated to the subject matter of the chapter in which it appears. Consequently, it is evidently the accepted <i>halakha</i> and therefore Rav Huna’s statement was unnecessary.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara discusses other <i>halakhot</i> that are in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa. <b>The Sages taught: A person may not say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>Does it seem that you will join me this evening?</b> This is prohibited, as the speaker is hinting that he would like to hire him for labor after the conclusion of Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: A person may say to another</b> on Shabbat: <b>Does it seem that you will join me this evening?</b> In this case, he is not asking him explicitly. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught:</b> In the case of <b>one who asks</b> a question <b>of a Sage</b> with regard to an issue of ritual impurity <b>and</b> the Sage <b>rules</b> that the item is <b>impure, he may not ask</b> the same question of another <b>Sage and</b> have him <b>rule</b> that it is <b>pure.</b> Similarly, in the case of one who asks <b>a Sage</b> a halakhic question <b>and he deems</b> it <b>forbidden, he may not ask</b> the question of another <b>Sage and</b> have him <b>deem</b> it <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 10
In a situation where <b>there were two</b> Sages sitting together and <b>one deems</b> an item <b>impure and</b> the other <b>one deems</b> it <b>pure,</b> or if <b>one deems</b> it <b>prohibited and</b> the other <b>one deems</b> it <b>permitted,</b> the questioner should proceed as follows: <b>If one of</b> the Sages <b>was superior to the other in wisdom and in number,</b> one should <b>follow his</b> ruling, <b>and if not,</b> he should <b>follow the one who rules stringently. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says:</b> If the uncertainty exists <b>with regard to a Torah law, follow the one who rules stringently;</b> if it exists <b>with regard to a rabbinic</b> law, <b>follow the one who rules leniently. Rav Yosef said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa.</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught: And</b> with regard to <b>all of</b> the people who are not deemed credible due to sins that they performed, even <b>when they retract</b> and repent from their evil ways, society <b>never accepts them;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If <b>they retract</b> their ways <b>in private,</b> society <b>does not accept them,</b> but if they repent <b>in public [<i>befarheseya</i>],</b> society <b>accepts them. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that there is another version of this discussion: If <b>they performed their</b> sinful <b>matters in private,</b> then when they repent society <b>accepts them.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC