
### Part 1
<b>From this</b> point <b>forward, it is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure and is not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>wine</b> used for <b>a libation. And</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a say: Even after three days, we are concerned with regard to exposure. What is the reason?</b> It is because at <b>times</b> it <b>occurs</b> that a snake <b>drinks</b> even sour wine.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara discusses the <i>halakha</i> of exposure with regard to various foods and beverages. <b>The Sages taught: Wine</b> that is still <b>fermenting is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure. And how long is its fermentation</b> process? It is <b>three days. Cress</b>-based dishes <b>are not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, but the residents of the Diaspora</b> are <b>accustomed to</b> treating <b>them</b> as <b>prohibited</b> if they were left exposed. <b>And we said</b> this <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the dishes <b>do not contain vinegar; but</b> if <b>they</b> do <b>contain vinegar,</b> the vinegar <b>repels</b> the snakes, and in such a situation even the inhabitants of the Diaspora do not treat them as prohibited.

### Part 3
The Gemara continues: <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a popular dip, <b>is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, but the residents of the Diaspora</b> are <b>accustomed to</b> treating <b>it</b> as <b>prohibited. Rav Menashei said: If</b> the <i>kutaḥ</i> <b>has indentations</b> in it, <b>we are concerned</b> that they are from a snake’s fangs, and it is therefore prohibited. <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Dripping water is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure</b> while it is being collected. <b>Rav Ashi said: And that</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only in a case <b>where</b> the dripping <b>occurs</b> one <b>drop</b> immediately <b>after</b> another <b>drop,</b> i.e., continuously, as the snake will not drink from it in that circumstance.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: The mouth of a fig is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this stated? It is stated <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer said: A person may eat grapes and figs at night, and he</b> need <b>not</b> have cause for <b>concern, as it is stated: “The Lord preserves the simple”</b> (Psalms 116:6). This verse teaches that one need not fear that harm might befall him when he engages in commonplace activities.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Safra says in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua Deroma: There are three kinds of</b> snake <b>venom:</b> Venom <b>of a young</b> snake, which <b>sinks</b> to the bottom when it is deposited in liquid; venom <b>of</b> a snake of <b>intermediate</b> age, i.e., a snake that is no longer young, which is <b>suspended</b> in the liquid; <b>and</b> venom <b>of an old</b> snake, which <b>floats</b> at the top. The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that as</b> a snake <b>ages, the strength of its</b> venom <b>becomes weaker? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>three</b> creatures <b>become stronger as they age,</b> and <b>they are: A fish, a snake, and a pig?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> physically <b>that</b> a snake <b>strengthens,</b> but the potency of <b>its venom diminishes.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> was it stated that the venom <b>of a young</b> snake <b>sinks?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a barrel that was uncovered, even though nine</b> people <b>drank from it and did not die,</b> the <b>tenth should not drink from it,</b> as the venom may have sunk to the bottom of the barrel. The Gemara relates that <b>there was an incident</b> in <b>which nine</b> people <b>drank from</b> an exposed barrel <b>and did not die, and a tenth</b> subsequently <b>drank</b> from it <b>and died. Rabbi Yirmeya says: This is</b> an example of venom that <b>sinks.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And similarly,</b> with regard to <b>a melon that was exposed, even though nine people ate from it and did not die,</b> the <b>tenth should not eat from it.</b> Again, <b>there was an incident</b> in which <b>nine</b> people <b>ate from</b> a melon <b>and did not die, and</b> the <b>tenth ate from it and died. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: This is</b> an example of venom that <b>sinks.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>water that was exposed, one may not pour it</b> out <b>in the public thoroughfare, nor settle</b> dust <b>with it</b> by sprinkling it in <b>the house, nor mix clay with it, nor give it to drink</b> to <b>his animal or the animal of another, nor wash his face, hands, or feet with it. Others say:</b> If the part that one is washing is <b>an area</b> of the body <b>that has a crevice</b> in it, it <b>is prohibited</b> to wash it with exposed water, as the venom may seep through the crevice; if the body part does <b>not have a crevice,</b> it <b>is permitted.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: The opinion introduced with the phrase: <b>Others</b> say, <b>is</b> identical to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i>. Both hold that one may not wash his face, hands, and feet with exposed water, as these body parts have crevices in them. The Gemara explains: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>the back of the hand and the back of the foot, and the upper part of the face,</b> i.e., the area of the cheekbones. According to the opinion introduced with the phrase: Others say, it is permitted to wash those parts of the body, as they are free of crevices. According to the first <i>tanna</i> it is prohibited, as they are part of the face, hands, and feet.

### Part 10
<b>The Master said</b> above concerning exposed water: <b>Nor give it to drink</b> to <b>his animal or the animal of another.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>But one may give</b> exposed water to <b>his own animal to drink?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught,</b> it is referring <b>to a cat,</b> as cats are less susceptible to snake venom. The Gemara challenges: <b>If that is so,</b> let him <b>also</b> give the water to the cat <b>of another.</b> The Gemara explains: The venom <b>weakens</b> the cat <b>of another.</b> The Gemara challenges: But doesn’t the venom <b>also weaken his</b> own cat? The Gemara explains: <b>It</b> will <b>later recover.</b> The Gemara challenges: The cat <b>of another</b> will <b>also recover later.</b> The Gemara explains: Although both will eventually recover, there are <b>times that</b> the owner <b>wishes to sell</b> the cat <b>and loses</b> potential profit <b>from</b> the cat’s current weakness.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira: There are three</b> kinds of prohibited <b>wines:</b> It is <b>prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit from wine</b> used for <b>a libation, and</b> the wine <b>imparts severe</b> ritual <b>impurity when</b> it has the volume of <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC