
### Part 1
<b>from hemorrhoids. Rabbi Ami instructed him, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi instructed him</b> that he <b>should bring seven seeds of ice plant</b> that are red like <b>a worm and bind them in the collar</b> of a shirt, <b>and</b> then he <b>should wrap a strip of hair around it, and dip</b> the bundle <b>in white naphtha and</b> he <b>should burn it and spread</b> the ashes <b>upon</b> the sores. <b>In the meantime,</b> he <b>should bring the kernel of a bramble [<i>asna</i>]</b> fruit and <b>place</b> its <b>crevice against</b> his own <b>crevice,</b> i.e., the anus.

### Part 2
The Gemara remarks: <b>And this matter</b> applies only to the <b>upper crevice,</b> which is located at the outer edge of the anus and can be treated with bramble fruit. <b>What</b> should one do if he is experiencing pain in the <b>lower crevice,</b> located deeper within the rectum? He <b>should bring the fat of a goat that has not</b> yet <b>opened,</b> i.e., given birth, <b>and</b> he <b>should melt</b> it <b>and</b> then he <b>should apply</b> it <b>to</b> the irritated area.

### Part 3
<b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> possible, he <b>should bring three pumpkin leaves that</b> were <b>dried in the shade and</b> he <b>should burn</b> them, <b>and</b> then he <b>should spread</b> the ashes <b>upon</b> the irritated area. <b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> possible, he <b>should bring snail shells</b> instead. <b>And if</b> this is also <b>not</b> possible, he should <b>bring oil</b> mixed with <b>wax [<i>kira</i>] and</b> he <b>should smear</b> it <b>upon worn flax</b> clothing <b>in summer, or</b> worn <b>cotton</b> clothing <b>in winter,</b> and place it upon the irritated area.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Abbahu suffered</b> from pain <b>in his ear. Rabbi Yoḥanan instructed him, and some say</b> that other Sages from <b>the study hall</b> instructed him, how to heal it. The Gemara asks: <b>What did they instruct him?</b> They told him to act in a fashion <b>similar to that which Abaye said: My mother told me</b> that the <b>kidney was created only for the ear,</b> i.e., it can be extremely beneficial to the ear. <b>And Rava said: Minyumi the physician said to me: All liquids are harmful to the ear except for the fluid of the kidneys.</b> Therefore, Rabbi Abbahu <b>should bring the kidney of a bald goat [<i>barḥa</i>] and tear it vertically and horizontally and</b> then <b>place it upon dimming coals. And</b> as for <b>those fluids that issue from it,</b> he <b>should apply them to his ear</b> while they are <b>neither cold nor hot, but tepid.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara adds: <b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> possible, he <b>should bring the fat of a large beetle and melt</b> it <b>and apply</b> it <b>to</b> the ear. <b>And if not,</b> he <b>should fill his ear with oil and prepare seven wicks</b> made <b>of alfalfa [<i>aspasta</i>] and bring dried garlic ends, and tie</b> the ends to the wicks <b>with a strip of hair at one end, and set</b> the wicks <b>aflame. And</b> he should <b>place the other end</b> of each wick <b>in</b> his <b>ear</b> one at a time, <b>and place his ear opposite the flame.</b> Parenthetically, the Gemara notes: <b>And he should be cautious of drafts</b> and avoid them, as they will harm his ear. The Gemara continues: <b>And</b> he should <b>take one</b> wick <b>and remove one</b> wick, i.e., replace each wick as it is consumed until all seven have been used.

### Part 6
The Gemara presents <b>another version</b> of this remedy: <b>And if not,</b> he <b>should bring seven wicks of wax tapers and smear them</b> with <b>alfalfa oil, and place one end</b> of each wick <b>in the flame and one end in his ear, and take one</b> wick <b>and remove one</b> wick. <b>And</b> again <b>he should be cautious of drafts.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And if</b> this is <b>not</b> possible, he <b>should bring fiber that was dried</b> but <b>not combed and place it in</b> his ear, <b>and</b> then <b>bring his ear opposite the flame. And he should be cautious of drafts. And if not,</b> he <b>should bring the tube of an aged reed</b> that is <b>one hundred years old,</b> i.e., that has been detached from the ground for a century, <b>and salt it</b> with <b>rock salt and</b> then <b>burn</b> it <b>and stick</b> it in his ear. The Gemara adds: <b>And your mnemonic</b> to remember these remedies is this: <b>Moist</b> cures are prescribed <b>for dry</b> afflictions, <b>and dry</b> cures are prescribed <b>for moist</b> afflictions.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara returns to the issue of medical treatment on Shabbat. <b>Rabba bar Zutra says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: One may raise</b> his <b>ears</b> to their appropriate position, i.e., set his dislocated jaw, <b>on Shabbat. Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda teaches:</b> This applies only if one raises it <b>by hand, but not by means of medicine. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> the opposite: One may raise his ears <b>by means of medicine, but not by hand. What is the reason</b> that one may not manually raise the ear? It is because doing so might <b>injure [<i>zareif</i> ]</b> the ear, which would constitute a violation of Torah law, whereas applying medicine is a violation of rabbinic law.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Zutra bar Toviyya says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> With regard to <b>an eye that rebelled,</b> i.e., which is apt to pop out of its socket, it <b>is permitted to apply blue eye shadow</b> to <b>it on Shabbat.</b> The Sages initially <b>concluded from this</b> that <b>this statement</b> applies only <b>where one had</b> already <b>ground the ingredients yesterday,</b> i.e., on Shabbat eve, <b>but</b> if he planned to <b>grind</b> them <b>on Shabbat, or</b> to <b>bring</b> them <b>through a public domain,</b> it would <b>not</b> be permitted, as this would constitute a desecration of Shabbat by Torah law. To dispel this notion, <b>one of the Sages, named Rabbi Ya’akov, said to</b> them: This matter <b>was explained to me by Rav Yehuda,</b> who said that <b>even</b> if <b>he</b> plans to <b>grind</b> the ingredients <b>on Shabbat and bring</b> it <b>through a public domain,</b> it <b>is permitted.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Yehuda permitted</b> someone <b>to apply blue eye shadow</b> to the <b>eye on Shabbat. Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda said to</b> the Sages: <b>One who adheres to</b> the ruling of <b>Yehuda desecrates Shabbat. Ultimately,</b> Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda himself <b>suffered</b> pain <b>in his eye. He sent</b> a message <b>to</b> Rav Yehuda, asking: Is it <b>permitted or prohibited</b> for me to treat my eye on Shabbat? Rav Yehuda <b>sent</b> back <b>to him: For everyone</b> else, it <b>is permitted; for you,</b> it <b>is prohibited,</b> as you treated my lenient ruling with disdain.

### Part 11
Rav Yehuda continues: <b>But was it of my</b> own accord that I issued this ruling? <b>It is</b> the ruling <b>of Mar Shmuel,</b> as demonstrated in the following incident: There was <b>a certain maidservant who was in the house of Mar Shmuel whose eye became infected on Shabbat. She screamed</b> in pain, <b>but there was no one who attended to her.</b> Eventually, <b>her eye popped</b> out of its socket. <b>The next day, Mar Shmuel went out and taught:</b> With regard to <b>an eye that rebelled,</b> it <b>is permitted to apply blue eye shadow to it on Shabbat. What is the reason</b> for this leniency, seeing as one may desecrate Shabbat only to treat life-threatening afflictions? The reason is <b>that the tendons [<i>shuraynei</i>] of the eye are dependent upon the valves of the heart.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> ailment of the eye, <b>for example,</b> is considered life-threatening? <b>Rav Yehuda said: For example,</b> any of the following: Abnormal <b>discharge;</b> the sensation of <b>pricking; blood</b> flow from the eye; excessive <b>tearing; and inflammation; and the onset of infection.</b> This list serves <b>to exclude the final</b> stages of a waning <b>infection</b> that is mostly healed, <b>and the opening of the eye,</b> i.e., treatment administered to improve one’s eyesight, <b>which</b> are <b>not</b> life-threatening and therefore one is not permitted to treat them on Shabbat.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> With regard to one who suffers from the sting of <b>a hornet, or the prick of a thorn [<i>silva</i>], or an abscess, or one whose eye pains him, or</b> one <b>overcome by a fever,</b> bathing in <b>a bathhouse is</b> a life-threatening <b>danger</b> for <b>all of these.</b> Additionally, eating <b>radish [<i>ḥamma</i>]</b> is good <b>for a fever [<i>ḥamma</i>], and</b> eating <b>beets [<i>silka</i>]</b> is good <b>for chills [<i>tzina</i>], but the reverse,</b> i.e., eating radish when one has chills or beets when one has a fever, poses <b>a danger.</b> Similarly, eating <b>hot</b> foods is good <b>for</b> the sting of <b>a scorpion, and cold</b> foods are good <b>for a hornet</b> sting, <b>but the reverse</b> poses <b>a danger. Hot</b> water is good <b>for a thorn</b> embedded in one’s skin, <b>and cold</b> water is good

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC