
### Part 1
<b>And it is stated below,</b> with regard to the bull sin offerings that are burned, the terms <b>skin, flesh, and dung,</b> in the verse: “But the skin of the bull, and all its flesh, with its head, and with its legs, and its innards, and its dung” (Leviticus 4:11). <b>Just as below</b> it is prepared for burning <b>by means of cutting</b> it into pieces but <b>not by means of flaying,</b> as derived by the verbal analogy, <b>so too here</b> it is prepared for burning <b>by means of cutting</b> it into pieces but <b>not by means of flaying.</b> Evidently, a <i>halakha</i> derived via a verbal analogy can then teach another <i>halakha</i> via a verbal analogy.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via a verbal analogy</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference? The Gemara answers: That question itself can be answered with <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And just as</b> a matter derived via <b>a juxtaposition, which cannot</b> then <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>either from</b> the statement <b>of Rava or from</b> the statement <b>of Ravina</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), with regard to a matter derived via <b>a verbal analogy, which</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference?

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: <b>This works out well according to the one who accepts</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa. But according to the one who does not accept</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa,</b> i.e., Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, <b>what is there to say?</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rather,</b> this can be derived through a different <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And just as</b> a matter derived via <b>a juxtaposition, which cannot</b> then <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>either from</b> the statement <b>of Rava or from</b> the statement <b>of Ravina</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), with regard to a matter derived via <b>a verbal analogy, which</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via another verbal analogy,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rami bar Ḥama</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference?

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via a verbal analogy</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a paradigm?</b> The question <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a juxtaposition?</b> The Gemara answers that this itself can be derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And just as</b> a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>a verbal analogy, which cannot be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa</b> (50a), with regard to a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, which <b>can be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via a juxtaposition?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>This works out well according to the one who accepts</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa. But according to the one who does not accept</b> the statement <b>of Rav Pappa,</b> i.e., Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, <b>what is there to say?</b> The Gemara comments: The question <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a verbal analogy?</b> The Gemara answers that this itself can be derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>And just as</b> a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>a verbal analogy, which cannot be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a verbal analogy,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rami bar Ḥama</b> (50a), with regard to a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, which <b>can be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via a verbal analogy?</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference? The Gemara answers that this itself can be derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>And just as</b> a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>a verbal analogy, which cannot be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, <b>as we have said,</b> with regard to a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, which <b>can be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference?

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: <b>And this is an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that is the <b>son of,</b> i.e., is derived from, another <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. The Gemara challenges this last statement: <b>It is</b> not the son of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, but the <b>grandson of an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, which cannot be used. The very fact that a matter derived via a verbal analogy can then teach its <i>halakha</i> via an <i>a fortiori</i> inference is itself derived from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, as the Gemara stated.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether a matter derived via an <i>a fortiori</i> inference can teach its <i>halakha</i> to another matter via an <i>a fortiori</i> inference can be derived via another <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>And just as</b> a matter derived via <b>a juxtaposition, which cannot be derived via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>either from</b> the statement <b>of Rava or from</b> the statement <b>of Ravina</b> (49b), can nevertheless <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), with regard to a <i>halakha</i> derived via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, which <b>can be derived</b> from another <i>halakha</i> derived <b>via a juxtaposition,</b> as proven <b>from</b> the statement <b>that the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> (50a), <b>is it not logical that it should teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference? The Gemara comments: <b>And this is an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that is the <b>son of</b> another <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a paradigm? Rabbi Yirmeya says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (69a–b): If a priest <b>pinched</b> the nape of a bird offering properly <b>and it was</b> then <b>found</b> to be a bird <b>with a wound that would have caused it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>],</b> which disqualifies it from being used as an offering and renders it prohibited for consumption by the priests, <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> An olive-bulk of its meat <b>does not render</b> one who swallows it <b>ritually impure</b> when it is <b>in the throat,</b> as is the <i>halakha</i> concerning a bird carcass, as the fact that it underwent pinching means that it is not in the category of a carcass. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Its status is like that of any other carcass of a kosher bird, and its meat <b>renders</b> one who swallows it <b>ritually impure</b> when it is <b>in the throat.</b>

### Part 13
The mishna continues: <b>Rabbi Meir said:</b> My opinion can be proved via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>And just as</b> with regard to <b>the carcass of an animal, which transmits impurity</b> to a person <b>through touching</b> it <b>and carrying</b> it, <b>its slaughter</b> nevertheless <b>purifies its <i>tereifa</i> from its impurity,</b> with regard to <b>the carcass of a bird,</b> which possesses less severe impurity, <b>as it does not transmit impurity through touching</b> it <b>and carrying</b> it, but only when it is in the throat, <b>is it not logical that its slaughter purifies its <i>tereifa</i> from its impurity?</b> And once it is established that slaughter purifies a bird that is a <i>tereifa</i>, it can be derived: <b>Just as we found with regard to</b> a bird’s <b>slaughter that it permits it for consumption</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC