
### Part 1
<b>this</b> statement, that the water of purification is nullified in a majority of water, is <b>his,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yehuda’s, own opinion, whereas <b>that</b> statement, in the <i>baraita</i>, that white wine is not nullified in a majority of water, is <b>his teacher’s</b> ruling, i.e., that of Rabban Gamliel, who is stringent with regard to a mixture of a substance in contact with the same type of substance. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says in the name of Rabban Gamliel: Blood does not nullify blood, spittle does not nullify spittle, and urine does not nullify urine.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rava says</b> there is a different resolution of the apparent contradiction between the mishna that states that water of purification is nullified in a majority of water of a ritual bath and Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion in the <i>baraita</i> with regard to white wine mixed with water: In the mishna, <b>we are dealing with a bucket whose internal</b> surface is <b>ritually pure, and</b> only <b>its external</b> surface is <b>impure.</b> The significance of this is <b>that by</b> Torah <b>law it suffices for</b> the water of the ritual bath to enter the bucket <b>in any amount</b> to purify its external surface, and therefore the water of purification in the bucket does not prevent the purification of the bucket at all.

### Part 3
Rava continues: <b>And it is the Sages who decreed with regard to</b> this case that the internal surface must be purified as well, <b>lest</b> the owner wish to <b>spare</b> the water of purification <b>and not</b> to <b>nullify</b> it from its sanctity. In that case he would wish to avoid allowing water from the ritual bath to enter the vessel, and might immerse it in a manner which would not allow even the full external surface to come in contact with the water. Therefore, the Sages required that one immerse the entire vessel. <b>But once there is a majority</b> of water in the bucket from the ritual bath, he does <b>not need</b> to enable any more water to enter the vessel, as by Torah law it is already pure.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rava says,</b> in summary of these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>The Sages said that</b> the status of an item in a mixture is determined <b>by the taste,</b> i.e., if the taste of one substance is noticeable in a mixture with another substance it is not nullified, <b>and the Sages said</b> that a prohibited item is nullified <b>by the majority, and the Sages</b> also <b>said</b> that the status of an item in a mixture is determined <b>by the appearance,</b> i.e., if the appearance of a substance is recognizable in a mixture it is not nullified. Rava elaborates: With regard to <b>a type</b> of food mixed <b>with</b> food <b>not</b> of <b>its</b> own <b>type,</b> the nullification is determined <b>by the taste.</b> In the case of <b>a type</b> of food mixed <b>with</b> food of <b>its</b> own <b>type,</b> the nullification is determined <b>by the majority.</b> In a case <b>where there is</b> a possibility to determine the status of an item based on <b>appearance,</b> the nullification is <b>by appearance.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara returns to its discussion of the opinion of Reish Lakish that prohibited items, such as <i>piggul</i>, <i>notar</i>, and ritually impure meat, nullify one another. The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> Reish Lakish <b>disagrees</b> with the statement <b>of Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar says: Just as</b> items used in the performance of <b>mitzvot do not nullify one another,</b> despite the fact that one is of greater volume than the other or imparts flavor to it, <b>so too,</b> items to which <b>prohibitions</b> apply <b>do not nullify one another.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara adds: <b>Whom did you hear who says</b> that items used in the performance of <b>mitzvot do not nullify one another? It is Hillel, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They said about Hillel the Elder that</b> when eating the Paschal offering, <i>matza</i>, and bitter herbs on the first night of Passover, <b>he would wrap them</b> all <b>at once and eat them</b> together, <b>because it is stated</b> with regard to the Paschal offering: <b>“They shall eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11), which indicates that these three foods should be eaten together. Hillel was not concerned that the taste of the bitter herbs would nullify the taste of the <i>matza</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC