
### Part 1
The Gemara suggests: <b>And if you wish, say</b> there is a different resolution: The sprinkling <b>outside is derived from</b> the sprinkling <b>inside, all at once.</b> There are not two comparisons here, one derived from the other, but rather a single, complex juxtaposition, from which all of the relevant <i>halakhot</i> are derived.

### Part 2
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that a matter derived via a juxtaposition and another principle <b>is not a juxtaposition, this is</b> the reason <b>that it is written</b> with regard to the offering brought on <i>Shavuot</i>: <b>“You shall bring out of your dwellings two wave loaves</b> of two-tenths of an ephah; they shall be of fine flour” (Leviticus 23:17).

### Part 3
<b>Since</b> apparently there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “You shall bring,”</b> as it already states: “And you shall present a new meal offering to the Lord” (Leviticus 23:16), <b>why</b> must <b>the verse state: “You shall bring”?</b> It states this to teach that <b>anything that you bring from another place</b> that is similar to this offering, i.e., the leavened bread that accompanies a thanks offering, <b>shall be</b> prepared <b>like this. Just as there,</b> with regard to the two loaves, they must be prepared from <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>for</b> each <b>loaf, so too here,</b> each of the ten loaves of leavened bread that accompany a thanks offering must be prepared from <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>for</b> each <b>loaf.</b>

### Part 4
<b>If</b> they are compared, why not say that <b>just as there,</b> with regard to the two loaves, the total amount of flour is <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the ten loaves that accompany a thanks offering, the total amount of flour for all ten should be <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah? To counter this comparison, <b>the verse states: “They shall be,”</b> to serve as a restriction and teach that only these two loaves amount to a total of two-tenths of an ephah, but the bread accompanying the thanks offering does not amount to two-tenths of an ephah.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues: The ten loaves accompanying a thanks offering must each be a tenth of an ephah, and this has been derived from two sources: A juxtaposition with the offering of <i>Shavuot</i> and another principle, which is that which the verse states concerning the thanks offering, that there must be ten leavened loaves. <b>And we have learned</b> that <b>ten</b>-tenths of an ephah is required <b>for</b> the ten loaves of <b>leavened bread. From where</b> is it derived that <b>ten</b>-tenths of an ephah are required <b>for</b> the <b><i>matza</i></b> which also accompanies a thanks offering? After stating that thirty <i>matzot</i> accompany a thanks offering, <b>the verse states: “With cakes of leavened bread”</b> (Leviticus 7:13), to juxtapose the <i>matza</i> with the leavened bread. This teaches that one must <b>bring <i>matza</i></b> of an amount <b>corresponding to</b> the <b>leavened bread.</b> In any event, this derivation can be employed according to the one who says that a matter derived via a juxtaposition and another principle is not a juxtaposition.

### Part 6
<b>But according to the one who says</b> that a matter derived via a juxtaposition and another principle <b>is a juxtaposition,</b> and therefore it cannot then teach its <i>halakha</i> via another juxtaposition, <b>what is there to say?</b> How can the measure of flour for the <i>matza</i> be derived from the measure of flour for the leavened bread? The Gemara answers: The first <i>halakha</i>, connecting the two loaves of <i>Shavuot</i> to the bread accompanying a thanks offering, is not derived via a juxtaposition, but rather via a superfluous word. The term <b>“You shall bring,”</b> written with regard to the two loaves, <b>is extra,</b> and is therefore considered as if it were written explicitly with regard to the leavened bread accompanying the thanks offering. Therefore, it is possible to derive the <i>halakha</i> concerning matza from the <i>halakha</i> concerning leavened bread via a juxtaposition.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The Paschal offering is eaten only</b> at night and it is eaten only until midnight. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who taught this mishna? <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>it is Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And they shall eat of the flesh on that night” (Exodus 12:8). <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says: It is stated here: “On that night,”</b> without stating when the night ends. <b>And it is stated there,</b> with regard to the plague that afflicted the firstborn Egyptians: <b>“And I will pass through the land of Egypt on that night</b> and I will strike every firstborn in the land of Egypt” (Exodus 12:12). With regard to the death of the firstborns the Torah states: “So said the Lord: At about midnight, I will go out into the midst of Egypt and every firstborn in Egypt shall die” (Exodus 11:4–5).

### Part 8
Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya continues: <b>Just as</b> in the verse <b>there,</b> the death of the firstborns occurred <b>until midnight,</b> as stated explicitly in the verse, <b>so too,</b> in the verse <b>here,</b> the mitzva to eat the Paschal offering continues <b>until midnight</b> but not beyond.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: <b>But isn’t it</b> already <b>stated:</b> “And so you shall eat it, with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, your staffs in your hands, <b>and you will eat it in haste,</b> for it is the Paschal offering for the Lord” (Exodus 12:11)? This verse indicates that the Paschal offering may be eaten <b>until the time of haste,</b> i.e., until dawn, as the Jewish people left Egypt hastily the next morning.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, why</b> must <b>the verse state: “On that night,”</b> with regard to eating the Paschal offering? The Gemara explains: This phrase is necessary, <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the Paschal offering is <b>like all the</b> other <b>offerings</b> in <b>that it should be eaten during the day,</b> on the day it is sacrificed. To counter this reasoning, <b>the verse states: “On</b> that <b>night,”</b> to emphasize that this particular offering <b>shall be eaten at night, but it shall not be eaten during the day.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>And from where</b> do you know <b>that</b> the mishna represents the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya, and</b> is stating that the Paschal offering must be eaten by midnight <b>by Torah law? Perhaps</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, and is stating that the Paschal offering must be eaten by midnight <b>by rabbinic law, and</b> the reason for the rabbinic decree was <b>to distance</b> one <b>from a sin.</b> Rav Yosef replied: <b>If so, what</b> does the mishna mean when it says: It is eaten <b>only until midnight?</b> With regard to the other offerings the mishna teaches: Until midnight, without specifying: Only. <b>Rather,</b> one must say that it is <b>like there,</b> with regard to the other <i>halakhot</i> of the Paschal offering stated in the mishna. <b>Just as there,</b> the requirements are <b>by Torah law, so too here,</b> with regard to the final time for eating the meat, the requirement is <b>also by Torah law.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC