
### Part 1
The <b>circling</b> around the altar by the High Priest is done <b>on foot,</b> i.e., empty-handed, as he was given the wine to pour only once he arrived at the southwest corner. <b>Rava said:</b> The language of the mishna <b>is also precise, as it teaches</b> that <b>he is given wine to pour, and</b> the mishna <b>does not teach</b> that <b>one tells him</b> to <b>pour</b> the wine, which would have indicated that the High Priest was already holding the wine as he circled the altar. The Gemara comments: <b>Conclude from</b> the language of the mishna that the High Priest was given the wine only once he arrived at the southwest corner of the altar.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All</b> those <b>who ascend</b> the ramp to <b>the altar ascend via</b> the <b>right</b> side of the ramp <b>and descend via</b> the <b>left</b> side; they <b>ascend via</b> the <b>east</b> side of the ramp <b>and descend via</b> the <b>west</b> side, <b>except for one who ascends for</b> one of <b>these three matters:</b> The wine libation, the water libation, and the sacrificial rite of a bird burnt offering. In these cases, one <b>ascends via</b> the <b>west</b> side of the ramp <b>and descends via</b> the <b>west</b> side; one <b>ascends via</b> the <b>right</b> side <b>and descends via</b> the <b>right</b> side.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: Does one who ascends via the west side of the ramp do so <b>via</b> the <b>right</b> side? Ascending via the west side of the ramp <b>is</b> the same as ascending <b>via</b> the <b>left. Ravina says:</b> Emend the <i>baraita</i> so that it <b>teaches</b> that he ascends via the <b>left</b> side. <b>Rava says: What</b> is the meaning of the <b>right</b> side mentioned in the latter clause of the <i>baraita</i>? It is the <b>right</b> side from the standpoint <b>of</b> the <b>altar,</b> facing south, in which case the altar’s west side is synonymous with its right side. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the <b>left</b> side mentioned in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i>? It is the <b>left</b> side from the standpoint <b>of a person</b> facing the altar.

### Part 4
The Gemara objects: <b>But let</b> the <i>baraita</i> be consistent and <b>teach</b> both <b>this</b> case <b>and that</b> case, i.e., the first clause and latter clause, from the standpoint <b>of the altar, or</b> let it teach both <b>this</b> case <b>and that</b> case from the standpoint <b>of a person</b> facing the altar. The Gemara concedes: This is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The sacrifice of <b>the bird sin offering, how was it performed?</b> The priest <b>would pinch</b> off <b>the</b> bird’s <b>head</b> by cutting <b>opposite its nape</b> with his thumbnail <b>and</b> would <b>not separate</b> the bird’s head from its body. <b>And he sprinkles from its blood on the wall of the altar</b> below the red line. <b>The remaining blood would be squeezed out</b> from the body of the bird <b>on the base</b> of the altar. <b>The altar has only its blood and the entire</b> bird goes <b>to the priests</b> for consumption.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to the bird sin offering: <b>“And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering</b> upon the side of the altar” (Leviticus 5:9). This teaches that the blood is sprinkled directly <b>from the body of the sin offering,</b> not with the priest’s finger or from a vessel. <b>How so?</b> The priest <b>holds the head and the body and sprinkles</b> its blood <b>on the wall of the altar. And</b> he does <b>not</b> sprinkle it <b>on the wall of the ramp, and not on the wall of</b> the <b>Sanctuary, and not on the wall of</b> the <b>Entrance Hall. And which</b> is this wall of the altar that the blood is sprinkled on? <b>This is the lower wall,</b> below the red line.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> suggests: <b>Or</b> perhaps the verse is referring <b>only</b> to <b>the upper wall,</b> above the red line. <b>And</b> this should be <b>a logical inference: Just as</b> with regard to <b>an animal</b> offering, <b>where</b> the blood of <b>a burnt offering</b> is applied <b>below</b> the red line (see 10b), nevertheless, the blood of <b>the sin offering</b> is applied <b>above</b> the red line (see Leviticus 4:30), with regard to <b>a bird</b> offering, <b>where</b> the blood of <b>the burnt offering</b> is sprinkled <b>above</b> the red line (see 65a), <b>is it not logical that</b> the blood of <b>its sin offering</b> is sprinkled <b>above</b> the red line?

### Part 8
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And the rest of the blood shall be squeezed out [<i>yimmatze</i>] at the base of the altar”</b> (Leviticus 5:9), which teaches that the priest sprinkles the blood on the <b>wall where its remaining</b> blood <b>drains to the base</b> of the altar. <b>And which</b> wall is this? <b>This is the lower wall.</b> The surrounding ledge of the altar is located one cubit above the red line, and any blood sprinkled above this ledge will not drip down to the base of the altar. The verse teaches that the blood is sprinkled on the wall of the altar from which it would drip down to the altar’s base unimpeded.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let</b> the priest <b>perform</b> the sprinkling of the blood <b>above,</b> as the <i>baraita</i> logically deduced, <b>and then perform</b> the squeezing <b>below</b> in fulfillment of the aforementioned verse. <b>Rava said: Is it written: He shall drain [<i>yematze</i>]? It is written: It shall be drained [<i>yimmatze</i>], which indicates</b> that the blood trickles down to the base of the altar <b>by itself.</b> Accordingly, the blood must be sprinkled on a part of the altar wall from which it can trickle down to the base of the altar.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Zutra bar Toviyya says</b> that <b>Rav says: How</b> does the priest <b>pinch</b> the nape of <b>a bird sin offering?</b> He holds the bird by its back in the palm of his hand and <b>holds its wings with two fingers,</b> i.e., the middle and index fingers, <b>and</b> its <b>two legs with</b> his next <b>two fingers,</b> i.e., the ring finger and pinky, leaving the head resting between his index finger and thumb, <b>and he stretches its neck over the width of his thumb and pinches</b> its nape with his thumbnail.

### Part 11
The Gemara cites a varying opinion: <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The bird</b> is not in the priest’s palm, but rather <b>on the outside</b> of his hand. The priest <b>holds its wings with two fingers and</b> its <b>two legs with two fingers.</b> Using his thumb, the priest bends its head into his palm <b>and stretches its neck over the width of his two fingers, and pinches</b> its nape. <b>And this</b> is the most <b>difficult</b> sacrificial <b>rite in the Temple</b> to perform.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>This is</b> the most difficult rite to perform, <b>and no other? But isn’t there</b> also the <b>removal of the handful</b> of the meal offering <b>and the handful</b> of the incense on Yom Kippur? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, say</b> that the pinching procedure was <b>a difficult</b> sacrificial <b>rite,</b> one <b>of the</b> most <b>difficult</b> sacrificial <b>rites in the Temple</b> to perform.

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The sacrifice of <b>the bird burnt offering, how was it performed?</b> The priest <b>ascended the ramp and turned to the surrounding ledge and came to</b> the <b>southeast corner</b> of the altar. He <b>would</b> then <b>pinch</b> off <b>the</b> bird’s <b>head</b> by cutting <b>at its nape</b> with his thumbnail <b>and separate</b> the bird’s head from its body, <b>and</b> would <b>squeeze out its blood on the wall of the altar. He took the head and neared the place of its pinching,</b> i.e., its nape, <b>to the altar</b> in order to squeeze the blood from the head. <b>He would</b> then <b>absorb</b> the remaining blood <b>with salt and throw</b> the head <b>onto the fire</b> on the altar.

### Part 14
<b>He</b> then <b>arrived at the body and removed the crop and the feather</b> attached to it <b>and the innards that emerge with them and he tossed them to the place of the ashes. He</b> then <b>ripped</b> the bird lengthwise <b>and did not separate</b> the two halves of the bird; <b>but if he separated</b> them, the offering is <b>valid.</b> He would then <b>absorb</b> the remaining blood <b>with salt and throw</b> the body of the bird <b>onto the fire</b> on the altar.

### Part 15
If <b>he neither removed the crop, nor the feather and the innards that emerge with them, nor absorbed</b> the blood <b>with salt,</b> with regard to <b>any</b> detail <b>that he changed in</b> the sacrificial rites <b>after he squeezed out its blood,</b> the offering is <b>valid.</b> If <b>he separated</b> the head from the body <b>in</b> sacrificing <b>the sin offering, or</b> if <b>he did not separate</b> the head from the body <b>in</b> sacrificing <b>the burnt offering,</b> the offering is <b>disqualified.</b> In a case where <b>he squeezed out the blood of the head and did not squeeze out the blood of the body, it is disqualified.</b> If he squeezed out the <b>blood of the body and did not squeeze out the blood of the head,</b> the offering is <b>valid.</b>

### Part 16
In the case of <b>a bird sin offering that</b> the priest <b>pinched not for its sake,</b> or if <b>he squeezed out its blood not for its sake,</b> or if he did so <b>for its sake and</b> then <b>not for its sake, or not for its sake and</b> then <b>for its sake,</b> it is <b>disqualified,</b> like all other sin offerings that are disqualified when performed not for their sake (see 2a). <b>A bird burnt offering</b> sacrificed not for its sake is <b>valid;</b> it is <b>just that it did not satisfy the obligation of the owner.</b>

### Part 17
With regard to <b>both a bird sin offering and a bird burnt offering where</b> the priest <b>pinched its nape or squeezed out its blood</b> with the intent <b>to partake of an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it, <b>or to burn an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>burns</b> it on the altar, <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area,</b> the offering is <b>disqualified.</b> But <b>there is no</b> liability to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> one who partakes of the offering. If his intent was to eat it or burn it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time,</b> the offering is <b><i>piggul</i> and</b> one is <b>liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> partaking of the offering, <b>provided that the permitting factor,</b> the blood, <b>was sacrificed in accordance with its mitzva.</b>

### Part 18
<b>How</b> is <b>the permitting factor sacrificed in accordance with its mitzva?</b> If one <b>pinched</b> the nape <b>in silence,</b> i.e., with no disqualifying intent, <b>and squeezed out</b> its <b>blood</b> with the intent to partake of the parts typically eaten or to burn the portions that are to be burned on the altar, <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time; or</b> in the case of one <b>who pinched</b> with the intent to partake of the offering or burn it on the altar <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time, and squeezed out</b> its <b>blood in silence; or</b> in the case of one <b>who pinched and squeezed out the blood</b> with the intent to partake of the offering or burn it on the altar <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time, that is</b> the case of a bird offering <b>where</b> the <b>permitting factor is sacrificed in accordance with its mitzva.</b>

### Part 19
<b>How</b> is <b>the permitting factor not sacrificed in accordance with its mitzva?</b> If the priest <b>pinched</b> the nape of the bird with the intent to partake of it or burn it <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area</b> and <b>squeezed out</b> its <b>blood</b> with the intent to partake of it or burn it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time, or</b> he <b>pinched</b> with the intent to partake of it or burn it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time and squeezed out</b> its <b>blood</b> with the intent to partake of it or burn it <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area, or</b> if the priest <b>pinched and squeezed out the blood</b> with the intent to partake of it or burn it <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC