
### Part 1
is apparent <b>from that which the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught,</b> discussed in the previous chapter (41a).

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via a juxtaposition</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> in another context <b>via a paradigm? Rabbi Yirmeya says:</b> It must be that it cannot, as, if it could, <b>let</b> the Torah <b>not write</b> the requirement to slaughter an offering in the <b>north</b> of the Temple courtyard <b>with regard to a guilt offering</b> (see Leviticus 14:13), <b>and</b> one can <b>derive</b> it <b>via a paradigm from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a sin offering,</b> since they are both offerings of the most sacred order. <b>For what <i>halakha</i> did</b> the verse <b>write it</b> with regard to a guilt offering as well? Is this <b>not to say that a matter derived via a juxtaposition cannot then teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> in another context <b>via a paradigm?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara questions this proof: <b>But according to your reasoning,</b> why not <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> that a guilt offering must be slaughtered in the north <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a burnt offering, via a paradigm? What is the reason</b> that this <i>halakha</i> <b>is not derived</b> from there? It must be <b>because it can be refuted</b> with the following claim: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a burnt offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that</b> the Torah teaches that <b>it is entirely</b> burned on the altar, which is not so with regard to a guilt offering. The Gemara now states its objection: In that case, the derivation from <b>a sin offering</b> via a paradigm <b>can also be refuted: What</b> is notable <b>about a sin offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that it atones for</b> those sins <b>liable for</b> punishment by <b><i>karet</i>,</b> which is not so with regard to a guilt offering. If so, there is no proof from here.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests an alternative paradigm: Although the requirement to slaughter <b>one</b> of these three offerings, i.e., a burnt offering, sin offering, or guilt offering, in the north <b>cannot be derived from</b> any <b>one</b> of the others, one can <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>one</b> of them <b>from</b> the other <b>two.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies: <b>From which</b> two could one <b>derive</b> the third? <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the requirement to slaughter the offering in the north with regard to <b>a burnt offering, and derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>a sin offering and a guilt offering.</b> The Gemara refutes this derivation: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about these</b> two offerings? They are notable <b>in that they atone</b> for transgressions, whereas a burnt offering does not atone for any sin.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the requirement to slaughter an offering in the north <b>with regard to a sin offering, and derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>these</b> others, the burnt offering and the guilt offering. The Gemara refutes this derivation: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about these</b> two offerings? They are notable <b>in that</b> they are brought only from <b>male</b> animals, whereas an individual’s sin offering is a female animal.

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the requirement to slaughter an offering in the north <b>with regard to a guilt offering, and derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>these</b> other two. The Gemara refutes this derivation: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about these</b> two offerings? They are notable <b>in that they are</b> brought <b>by a community just as</b> they are brought <b>by an individual,</b> whereas a guilt offering can be brought only by an individual.

### Part 8
The Gemara returns to its discussion of hermeneutical principles. <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via a verbal analogy</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via a juxtaposition? Rav Pappa says:</b> The verse states: <b>“And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings,</b> which one may offer to the Lord. <b>If</b> he sacrifices it <b>for a thanks offering,</b> then he shall offer with the thanks offering unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour soaked” (Leviticus 7:11–12). From this juxtaposition <b>we have learned that</b> the money to purchase <b>a thanks offering</b> can <b>come from</b> money used to redeem <b>the</b> second <b>tithe, since we find that</b> the money to purchase <b>a peace offering</b> can <b>come from</b> money used to redeem the second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that the money to purchase <b>peace offerings themselves</b> can come from money used to redeem the second tithe? <b>As it is written</b> with regard to peace offerings: “And you shall sacrifice peace offerings and shall eat <b>there”</b> (Deuteronomy 27:7). And it is written with regard to second tithe: “And you shall eat before the Lord your God, in the place which He shall choose to cause His name to dwell <b>there”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:23). The usage of the term “there” in both passages serves as a verbal analogy, and demonstrates that a <i>halakha</i> derived via a verbal analogy, that of a peace offering, can then teach a <i>halakha</i> via its juxtaposition to a thanks offering.

### Part 10
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, said to Ravina:</b> This is not a proof, because the <b>tithe of grain,</b> including the second tithe, <b>is merely non-sacred.</b> Therefore, it cannot be used to prove that in the realm of consecrated matters a <i>halakha</i> derived via a verbal analogy can teach a <i>halakha</i> via a juxtaposition.

### Part 11
Ravina <b>said to him:</b> Does the one who <b>said</b> that in the realm of consecrated matters a <i>halakha</i> derived via one of the hermeneutical principles cannot teach via another of those principles <b>say this</b> only when the <i>halakha</i> that is <b>derived</b> is in the realm of <b>consecrated</b> matters <b>and</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>teaches</b> is in the realm of <b>consecrated</b> matters as well? He holds that even if that which is derived is in the realm of consecrated matters it cannot teach its <i>halakha</i> via one of the hermeneutical principles. Therefore, since peace offerings are in the realm of consecrated matters, the <i>halakha</i> derived from the juxtaposition of thanks offerings to peace offerings serves as a source that a matter derived via a verbal analogy can teach its <i>halakha</i> to another matter via a juxtaposition.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether <b>a matter derived via a verbal analogy</b> can <b>teach</b> its <i>halakha</i> to another matter <b>via</b> another <b>verbal analogy? Rami bar Ḥama says: It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the types of bread that accompany a thanks offering: “If he sacrifices it for a thanks offering, then he shall sacrifice with the thanks offering unleavened loaves mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and loaves mingled with oil, of <b>fine flour cooked</b> with oil” (Leviticus 7:12). <b>We have derived</b> from here <b>that</b> the <b>poached</b> breads accompanying the thanks offering <b>come from fine flour.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <b>loaves</b> accompanying a thanks offering are also prepared with fine flour? <b>The verse states: “Loaves</b> mingled with oil, of fine flour cooked with oil” (Leviticus 7:12), and it also states in the same verse: “Unleavened <b>loaves</b> mingled with oil.” <b>From where</b> is it derived that the unleavened <b>wafers</b> accompanying a thanks offering are also prepared with fine flour? <b>The verse states: “Unleavened</b> cakes mingled with oil” (Leviticus 7:12), and the verse also states: <b>“Unleavened</b> wafers spread with oil.” The <i>baraita</i> derives via a verbal analogy that the unleavened loaves mingled with oil are prepared with fine flour, and then teaches the <i>halakha</i> concerning unleavened wafers using a verbal analogy from the <i>halakha</i> of unleavened loaves.

### Part 14
<b>Ravina said to</b> Rami bar Ḥama: <b>From where</b> do you know <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>learns</b> the verbal analogy of <b>“unleavened”</b> and <b>“unleavened” from loaves</b> of the thanks offering? <b>Perhaps</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>learns</b> the verbal analogy <b>from</b> the word “unleavened” stated with regard to meal offerings <b>baked in an oven,</b> about which the verse states explicitly that they are prepared with fine flour: “And when you bring a meal offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers spread with oil” (Leviticus 2:4). If so, there is no source that a <i>halakha</i> derived via a verbal analogy can teach a <i>halakha</i> via a verbal analogy.

### Part 15
<b>Rather, Rava says</b> that the source is from a different <i>baraita</i>, as <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the bull offering of a High Priest: “And the skin of the bull and all its flesh, with its head and with its legs, <b>and its innards, and its dung,</b> the whole bull <b>shall he carry out</b> of the camp to a pure place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn it on wood with fire” (Leviticus 4:11–12). This <b>teaches that he brings</b> the offering <b>out whole.</b>

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that he should burn it whole</b> as well. <b>It is stated here: “Its head and its legs,” and it is stated there,</b> with regard to a burnt offering: “And he shall cut it into its pieces; and the priest shall lay them, with <b>its head</b> and its fats, in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar. But the innards <b>and the legs</b> shall he wash with water” (Leviticus 1:12–13). <b>Just as there,</b> the burnt offering is burned <b>by means of cutting</b> the offering into pieces, as explicitly stated in the verse, <b>so too here,</b> it is burned <b>by means of cutting</b> the offering into pieces.

### Part 17
The Gemara clarifies: <b>If</b> these are compared, one could say that <b>just as there,</b> the burnt offering is prepared for being burned <b>by</b> first <b>flaying</b> it, <b>so too here,</b> the bull offering of a High Priest should <b>also</b> be prepared for being burned <b>by</b> first <b>flaying</b> it. To counter this reasoning, <b>the verse states: “And its innards and its dung”</b> (Leviticus 4:11). The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> biblical <b>derivation?</b> How do these words teach that there is no requirement to flay the animal? <b>Rav Pappa says: Just as the dung</b> remains <b>inside</b> the animal when the animal is burned, <b>so</b> the animal’s <b>flesh</b> remains <b>inside its skin.</b> In any event, the <i>halakha</i> that the bull offering of a High Priest is cut into pieces before it is burned is derived via a verbal analogy.

### Part 18
Rava continues: <b>And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> It <b>is stated here,</b> with regard to the bull and goat offered by the High Priest on Yom Kippur, the terms <b>skin, flesh, and dung,</b> in the verse: “And the bull of the sin offering, and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the Sanctuary, shall be carried out of the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skin, and their flesh, and their dung” (Leviticus 16:27).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC