### Part 1
It can be inferred <b>that</b> if one had intent <b>to eat and to eat</b> in a manner <b>similar to</b> a case of intent <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk <b>and to burn</b> half an olive-bulk; Abaye interjects: <b>And what are the circumstances</b> of such a case? It is a case <b>with two people,</b> i.e., where each one will consume half an olive-bulk. Abaye continues with the conclusion of his statement: Then the two halves <b>join together.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 2
<b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> If one <b>had intent to eat an olive-bulk in more than</b> the period of time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Do we equate</b> the consumption of offerings <b>to the consumption of the Most High,</b> i.e., the burning of offerings on the altar, for which there is no maximum allotted time? <b>Or do we equate it to the consumption of an ordinary</b> person, for whom consumption slower than this rate is not considered eating?

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna: If his intent was <b>to eat half an olive-bulk and to burn half an olive-bulk</b> not at the appropriate time or in the appropriate area, the offering is <b>fit because eating and burning do not join together.</b> One may infer that the <b>reason</b> the offering is fit is that he had intent <b>to eat and to burn</b> the offering. <b>But</b> if he had intent <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk at the normal rate <b>and to eat</b> half an olive-bulk in the time it takes to burn half an olive-bulk, the two would <b>join together. But</b> the <b>burning</b> of an olive-bulk of an offering can take <b>more than</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. It therefore seems that there is no upper limit on the time in which one is considered to have consumed an offering.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the mishna is referring to intent to burn half an olive-bulk <b>in a large fire,</b> which can consume it in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread. Accordingly, one may draw the inference only with regard to a case where his intent was to consume the halves of an olive-bulk within this time.

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: If one slaughtered the animal with intent <b>to eat half an olive-bulk and to burn half an olive-bulk</b> not at the appropriate time or in the appropriate area, the offering is <b>fit.</b> The Gemara infers: The <b>reason that</b> the two halves of an olive-bulk do not join together is because his intent was <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk <b>and to burn</b> half an olive-bulk. <b>But</b> if his intent was <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk of the meat <b>and to eat</b> half an olive-bulk of <b>an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not partake</b> of it, then the halves do <b>join together</b> and disqualify the offering, as both intentions concern eating.

### Part 6
The Gemara notes an apparent contradiction: <b>But the first clause</b> of the mishna <b>teaches:</b> If one’s intent was <b>to partake</b> of an item <b>whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it, beyond its designated time, his intent <b>joins together</b> to disqualify the offering. One can infer that only if his intent was to partake of an item <b>whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it, <b>does</b> his intent join together, but if his intent was to partake of an item <b>whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not</b> to partake of it, then it does <b>not</b> join together.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya says:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> latter clause? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who says: One can have intent</b> to shift an item’s consumption <b>from consumption by a person to consumption by</b> the <b>altar, or from consumption by</b> the <b>altar to consumption by a person. As we learned</b> in another mishna (35a): In the case of <b>one who slaughters the offering</b> with intent <b>to partake of an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not</b> to partake of it, <b>or to burn an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not burn</b> it on the altar, beyond its designated time or outside its designated area, the offering is <b>fit, and Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> it <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Abaye says: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the latter clause is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. And do not say</b> that one should infer from the mishna <b>that</b> if his intent was <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk of an item normally consumed <b>and to eat</b> half an olive-bulk of <b>an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not partake</b> of it, then the offering is disqualified. <b>Rather, say</b> that one infers <b>that</b> if his intent was <b>to eat</b> half an olive-bulk <b>and to eat</b> another half an olive-bulk, both halves from <b>an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it, then the halves join together to disqualify the offering.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>what</b> is this latter clause <b>teaching us? If it teaches us</b> that two half olive-bulks from <b>an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it, join together, one can already <b>learn</b> this <b>from the first clause</b> of the mishna: If one has intent to consume <b>half an olive-bulk outside</b> its designated area and <b>half an olive-bulk the next day,</b> the offering is <b>disqualified.</b> One can infer <b>that</b> if his intent was to eat the first <b>half an olive-bulk the next day,</b> the offering would be rendered <b><i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>But if</b> one will say that this term teaches its literal meaning, that intentions <b>to eat and to burn</b> two halves of an olive-bulk do not join together, one can already <b>learn</b> this <b>from the inference</b> drawn above <b>from the first clause</b> of the mishna, namely that intent <b>to partake</b> of <b>an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one <b>partakes</b> of it <b>does</b> disqualify the offering, but intent to partake of an item <b>whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not partake</b> of it does <b>not.</b> By extension, intent to consume half an olive-bulk of such an item does not join to disqualify the offering.

### Part 11
<b>Now,</b> consider the following: <b>And just as</b> if when one has intent <b>to partake</b> of an item normally eaten <b>and to partake of an item whose</b> typical <b>manner</b> is such that one does <b>not partake</b> of it, his intentions <b>do not join together,</b> even though both intentions concern consumption, <b>is it necessary</b> for the mishna to teach that intentions <b>to consume and to burn</b> do not join together? The last clause therefore seems unnecessary.

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: It <b>was necessary</b> for the mishna to explicitly address the case where one had intent <b>to eat and to burn,</b> as it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that it <b>is</b> only <b>there,</b> where one’s intentions are referring solely to consumption, that they do not join together, <b>since he has intent</b> to act in a way that is <b>not</b> consistent with <b>its</b> typical <b>manner</b> and consume an item not normally consumed. <b>But here, where</b> his intent is to both eat and burn the offering, such that <b>with regard to this</b> half he intends to act <b>in</b> a way consistent with <b>its</b> typical <b>manner, and with regard to that</b> half he intends to act <b>in</b> a way consistent with <b>its</b> typical <b>manner,</b> one might <b>say</b> that <b>they should join together.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that intentions to eat and to burn do not join together.

### Part 13
end of chapter

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>all</b> those <b>who are unfit</b> for Temple service <b>who slaughtered</b> an offering, <b>their slaughter is valid, as the slaughter</b> of an offering <b>is valid</b> <i>ab initio</i> when performed even <b>by non-priests, by women, by</b> Canaanite <b>slaves, and by ritually impure</b> individuals. <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even with</b> regard to <b>offerings of the most sacred order, provided that the ritually impure will not touch the flesh</b> of the slaughtered animal, thereby rendering it impure. <b>Therefore,</b> these unfit individuals can <b>disqualify</b> the offering <b>with</b> prohibited <b>intent,</b> e.g., if one of them intended to partake of the offering beyond its designated time or outside its designated area.