
### Part 1
<b>What, is it not</b> referring to the additional offerings <b>of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>? If so, the <i>baraita</i> is teaching that bulls, rams, and sheep, which are burnt offerings, precede the sin offerings of male goats. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> with regard to all these animals the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to gift</b> offerings. The Gemara interprets the <i>baraita</i> in accordance with this explanation: <b>Bulls precede rams, as</b> they require <b>a greater</b> quantity <b>of libations; and likewise rams</b> precede <b>sheep</b> for the same reason. <b>Sheep</b> precede <b>male goats,</b> although their libations are identical, <b>as</b> the portions of the sheep consumed on the altar are <b>greater;</b> the sheep’s <b>tail</b> is burned, whereas the goat’s tail is not.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i> which seems to contradict the principle that a sin offering always precedes a burnt offering: <b>The bull of</b> the <b>anointed priest,</b> i.e., the High Priest, which he sacrifices if he issues and then acts upon an erroneous halakhic ruling, <b>precedes</b> the <b>bull for an unwitting communal sin,</b> sacrificed if the Sanhedrin issues an erroneous halakhic ruling and the community then acts upon it. Similarly, the <b>bull for an unwitting communal sin precedes</b> the <b>bull</b> sacrificed as a burnt offering to atone <b>for</b> an unwitting communal sin involving <b>idol worship.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The <b>bull</b> sacrificed as atonement <b>for</b> communal <b>idol worship precedes</b> the <b>male goats</b> that atone <b>for idol worship,</b> i.e., the goat sacrificed together with the bull. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though</b> the <b>bull</b> that atones <b>for idol worship</b> is <b>a burnt offering, and</b> the <b>male goats</b> sacrificed as atonement <b>for idol worship</b> are <b>sin offerings.</b> This <i>baraita</i> seems to contradict the statement of the previous <i>baraita</i> that a sin offering always precedes a burnt offering.

### Part 4
The Gemara responds: <b>But</b> you can <b>say</b> that the opposite conclusion is derived <b>from the first clause</b> of that <i>baraita</i>, as at least the first clause supports the principle that sin offerings take precedence: The <b>bull for an unwitting communal sin,</b> which is a sin offering, <b>precedes</b> the <b>bull</b> sacrificed to atone <b>for</b> an unwitting communal sin involving <b>idol worship,</b> which is a burnt offering.

### Part 5
The Gemara dismisses this answer: <b>In any event, with regard to</b> offerings that are both of <b>one species</b> of animal, <b>we did not say</b> there is any doubt <b>that a sin offering takes precedence. When we say</b> there is a contradiction between the rulings of the <i>baraitot</i>, it is <b>with regard to</b> offerings of <b>two species.</b> According to the earlier <i>baraita</i>, even a bird sin offering precedes an animal burnt offering, whereas here <b>we find a burnt offering that precedes a sin offering.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>They say in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>in the name of Rava bar Mari:</b> The <b>sin offering</b> sacrificed to atone <b>for idol worship is</b> written <b>without an <i>alef</i></b> (see Numbers 15:24). <b>It is written <i>lamed</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>tet</i>, <i>tav</i>.</b> This indicates that it is different from other sin offerings in that it does not precede the burnt offering. <b>Ravina says</b> that the term <b>“according to the ordinance” is written with regard to</b> the offerings sacrificed to atone for idol-worship, in the verse: “The congregation shall offer one young bull…according to the ordinance, and one goat for a sin offering” (Numbers 15:24). This mention of an ordinance indicates that they must be sacrificed in the precise order stated by the verse.

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> explanation, the previous <i>baraita</i> can be explained in a similar manner: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to the <b>bulls</b> and other offerings <b>of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>, there is <b>also</b> no difficulty with regard to the burnt offering sheep taking precedence over the sin offering male goats, as the term <b>“according to their ordinance” is written concerning</b> these offerings as well (see Numbers 29:33).

### Part 8
<b>A dilemma</b> ensuing from the conclusion of the previous discussion <b>was raised before</b> the Sages: If there is <b>a bird sin offering, and an animal burnt offering, and</b> an animal <b>tithe</b> offering to be sacrificed, <b>which of them precedes</b> the others? If you say that <b>the bird sin offering should take precedence, there is</b> the animal <b>tithe</b> offering <b>that</b> generally <b>precedes it,</b> since it requires slaughtering, as stated by the mishna. If you say that the animal <b>tithe</b> offering <b>should take precedence, there is</b> the <b>animal burnt offering that precedes it,</b> as the burnt offering is an offering of the most sacred order. If you say that the <b>animal burnt offering should take precedence, there is the bird sin offering that precedes it,</b> as the Gemara previously concluded.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Here,</b> in Babylonia, <b>they explained</b> that the fact that the animal tithe offering is <b>a type of</b> offering that requires <b>slaughtering</b> is of <b>greater</b> importance than the other factors. Therefore, the animal tithe offering is sacrificed first, followed by the bird sin offering, and finally the animal burnt offering. <b>In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say:</b> The <b>animal burnt offering has an effect on the bird sin offering</b> sacrificed with it <b>and raises its</b> importance <b>above</b> that of the animal <b>tithe</b> offering. Therefore, the bird sin offering is sacrificed first, followed by the animal burnt offering, and finally the animal tithe offering.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>All the sin offerings</b> mandated <b>by the Torah take precedence over the guilt offerings,</b> as explained in the previous mishna (89a), <b>except for the guilt offering of a leper, because it comes to</b> render one <b>fit.</b> One who has been cured of leprosy must undergo a process through which he is rendered ritually pure before coming into contact with consecrated items. Although he must also bring a sin offering, his guilt offering is more central to that process of purification and therefore it takes precedence over the sin offering.

### Part 11
<b>All the guilt offerings</b> mandated <b>by the Torah come</b> as rams <b>in their second year, and come worth</b> two <b>silver shekels, except for the guilt offering of a nazirite and the guilt offering of a leper, as they come</b> from sheep <b>in their</b> first <b>year, and do not</b> need to <b>come worth</b> two <b>silver shekels,</b> as they have no fixed value.

### Part 12
<b>Just as</b> the more sacred offerings <b>precede</b> other offerings <b>with regard to their sacrifice,</b> as taught in the previous mishna (89a), <b>they</b> also <b>precede</b> the others <b>with regard to their consumption.</b> If one has <b>a peace offering from yesterday and a peace offering from today,</b> the peace offering <b>from yesterday precedes</b> the peace offering <b>from today.</b> If one has <b>a peace offering from yesterday</b> and <b>a sin offering or a guilt offering from today,</b> the <b>peace offering from yesterday precedes</b> the others; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> The <b>sin offering precedes</b> the peace offering, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that it is an offering of the most sacred order.</b> Likewise, the guilt offering precedes the peace offering, as it is also of the most sacred order.

### Part 13
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>all of</b> the offerings that are eaten, <b>the priests are permitted to alter</b> the manner of <b>their consumption</b> and eat them as they choose. Therefore, the priests are permitted <b>to eat them roasted, or boiled, or cooked,</b> and <b>to place in</b> the cooking pot <b>non-sacred spices or <i>teruma</i> spices.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon. Rabbi Meir says: One may not place <i>teruma</i> spices in it,</b> so <b>that he will not bring the <i>teruma</i> to</b> a state <b>of disqualification.</b> Consumption of consecrated foods is permitted only for a limited period, after which they are disqualified and burned. Adding <i>teruma</i> spices might cause those spices to be similarly disqualified.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: The <i>mishnayot</i> (89a) taught that a frequent offering precedes other offerings, and also that an offering of greater sanctity precedes others. If there is <b>a frequent</b> offering <b>and</b> an offering <b>of</b> greater <b>sanctity</b> to be sacrificed, <b>which of them precedes</b> the other? Does the <b>frequent</b> offering <b>take precedence, due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> it is <b>frequent, or perhaps</b> the offering <b>of</b> greater <b>sanctity takes precedence, as</b> it is <b>of</b> greater <b>sanctity?</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the ruling of the first mishna in this chapter, that the <b>daily offerings precede</b> the <b>additional offerings</b> because they are frequent.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC