
### Part 1
<b>And even Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says only</b> that a service vessel may be fashioned <b>of wood,</b> which is a somewhat significant material, <b>but</b> with regard to a service vessel fashioned <b>of earthenware,</b> he holds that this is <b>not</b> valid.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara relates an incident related to the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing. <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Yehuda was</b> initially <b>accustomed</b> to study Torah <b>before Rami bar Ḥama.</b> After some time, <b>he left him and went to</b> study before <b>Rav Sheshet. One day</b> Rami bar Ḥama <b>met him</b> and <b>said to him</b> colloquially: Did you assume, as many do, that when <b>the chief of taxes [<i>alkafta</i>] grasped me</b> by the hand, <b>the fragrance</b> of his hand <b>came to</b> my <b>hand?</b> Do you think that <b>because you went</b> away from me in order to study <b>before Rav Sheshet, have you become like Rav Sheshet</b> merely by association?

### Part 3
Rav Yitzḥak bar Yehuda <b>said to him:</b> It is <b>not due to that</b> reason that I went to study before Rav Sheshet, but for another reason. As for you, <b>Master, when I ask</b> with regard to any <b>matter,</b> Master <b>resolves</b> the question <b>for me through reasoning.</b> Consequently, <b>when I find a mishna</b> that opposes that reasoning, it <b>refutes</b> Master’s proposed resolution. As for <b>Rav Sheshet, when I ask of him</b> a question concerning any <b>matter,</b> he <b>resolves</b> the question <b>for me by</b> citing <b>a mishna.</b> Consequently, <b>when I also find a mishna, and</b> that mishna <b>refutes</b> the proposed resolution, <b>it is</b> a dispute between one <b>mishna and</b> another <b>mishna,</b> which does not necessarily refute the mishna that he cited.

### Part 4
Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him: Ask me</b> about <b>a matter, which I</b> will <b>resolve for you in accordance with a mishna.</b> Rav Yitzḥak bar Yehuda <b>asked him:</b> If one <b>cooked</b> a sin offering <b>in</b> only <b>part of a vessel, does</b> the entire vessel <b>require scouring and rinsing, or does it not require</b> scouring and rinsing? Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him:</b> The entire vessel <b>does not require</b> scouring and rinsing, <b>just as it is</b> taught concerning <b>sprinkling</b> the blood of a sin offering upon a garment. In the latter case, the mishna teaches (93b) that one must launder only the part of the garment on which the blood sprayed.

### Part 5
Rav Yitzḥak bar Yehuda replied: <b>But the <i>tanna</i> does not teach this</b> explicitly. Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him:</b> Nevertheless, <b>it stands to reason</b> that the scouring and rinsing of a vessel in which sacred meat was cooked should be <b>like</b> the laundering of <b>a garment,</b> as follows: <b>Just as a garment requires laundering only</b> in the <b>place</b> where <b>the blood</b> was sprayed, <b>so too,</b> it must be that <b>a vessel requires scouring and rinsing only in the place</b> where the meat underwent the process of <b>cooking.</b>

### Part 6
Rav Yitzḥak bar Yehuda <b>said to him: Are</b> the situations <b>comparable? Blood does not spread</b> and penetrate all parts of the garment, but in the case of <b>cooking,</b> the flavor of the meat <b>spreads</b> throughout the entire vessel. <b>Additionally,</b> your reasoning opposes that which <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:15): A certain <b>stringency</b> applies <b>to sprinkling</b> more <b>than</b> it applies to <b>scouring and rinsing; and</b> a certain <b>stringency</b> applies <b>to scouring and rinsing</b> more <b>than</b> it applies to <b>sprinkling.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The <b>stringency</b> that applies <b>to sprinkling</b> is <b>that</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the <b>sprinkling</b> of blood on a garment <b>applies to external sin offerings,</b> brought on the altar in the Temple courtyard, <b>and to internal sin offerings,</b> whose blood is sprinkled on the altar in the Sanctuary; <b>and</b> the <i>halakha</i> of blood sprayed onto a garment <b>applies</b> if it sprays <b>before</b> the required <b>sprinkling</b> of the offering’s blood on the altar; <b>which is not so in</b> the case of <b>scouring and rinsing.</b> Scouring and rinsing are required only for external sin offerings, whose meat is eaten and therefore cooked; and it applies only after the sprinkling of blood on the altar, after which the meat may be eaten.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The <b>stringency</b> that applies <b>to scouring and rinsing</b> is <b>that the scouring and rinsing</b> of vessels <b>is practiced both for offerings of the most sacred order and for offerings of lesser sanctity;</b> and even if one <b>cooked in</b> only <b>part of the vessel, the entire vessel requires scouring and rinsing, which is not so in</b> the case of errantly <b>sprinkling</b> blood onto a garment, for which one must launder only the place on which the blood sprayed.

### Part 9
Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him: If</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught, it is taught,</b> and I cannot take issue with it. The Gemara then clarifies: <b>And what is the reason</b> that an entire vessel requires scouring and rinsing even if one cooked the meat of an offering in only part of the vessel? The reason is that <b>the verse states: “And if it be cooked in a copper vessel,</b> it shall be scoured and rinsed in water” (Leviticus 6:21). From the phrase “in a copper vessel” it is derived that <b>even</b> if the meat is cooked <b>in</b> only <b>part of a vessel,</b> the entire vessel must be scoured and rinsed.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Whether</b> the meat is from <b>offerings of the most sacred order</b> or whether it is from offerings of lesser sanctity, the vessels in which it is cooked must be scoured and rinsed. The Gemara cites a related <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Sages taught:</b> The Torah introduces the mitzva of scouring and rinsing with the qualifying statement: “This is the law of the <b>sin offering”</b> (Leviticus 6:18). From this verse <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to scouring and rinsing applies to vessels in which <b>a sin offering</b> was cooked. <b>From where</b> do I derive that this <i>halakha</i> applies to vessels used for <b>all sacrificial</b> meat? <b>The verse states:</b> “Every male among the priests may eat of it; <b>it is most sacred”</b> (Leviticus 6:22), to teach that this <i>halakha</i> applies to vessels used for all of the sacrificial meat that the priests eat.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I</b> should <b>include</b> vessels used for cooking <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> the portion of the produce designated for the priest, as well, as it is also sacred and may be eaten only by a priest (see Leviticus 22:14). To counter this, <b>the verse states:</b> “Every male among the priests may eat <b>of it;</b> it is most sacred” (Leviticus 6:22). The emphatic qualifier “of it” <b>excludes <i>teruma</i>;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Shimon says: Offerings of the most sacred order require scouring and rinsing,</b> but <b>offerings of lesser sanctity do not require scouring and rinsing, as it is written: “Most sacred.”</b> Accordingly, with regard to <b>offerings of the most sacred order, yes,</b> scouring and rinsing is required; but for <b>offerings of lesser sanctity, no,</b> it is not required.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: The <i>baraita</i> explains Rabbi Shimon’s reasoning; <b>what is the reasoning of Rabbi Yehuda?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the qualifying term <b>“of it” was necessary to exclude <i>teruma</i>, by inference,</b> it must be <b>that</b> vessels used for <b>offerings of lesser sanctity require scouring and rinsing.</b> If even offerings of lesser sanctity are excluded from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, it would be self-evident that the vessel used for <i>teruma</i> is exempt from scouring and rinsing. Accordingly, the direct exclusion of <i>teruma</i> indicates that the vessels used for offerings of lesser sanctity are not excluded. <b>And Rabbi Shimon</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> The term <b>“of it”</b> teaches a different <i>halakha</i> and excludes a disqualified sin offering from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, <b>as we say</b> earlier in this chapter (93a).

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is it correct that with regard to a copper vessel used to cook <b><i>teruma</i>, it does not require rinsing and scouring? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Terumot</i> 8:16): With regard to <b>a pot in which</b> one <b>cooked meat,</b> one <b>may not cook milk in it; and if</b> one <b>cooked</b> milk in it, the meat absorbed in the pot renders the milk forbidden if it <b>imparts flavor</b> to it. Similarly, if one cooked <b><i>teruma</i></b> in a pot, one <b>may not cook non-sacred</b> food <b>in it; and if</b> one <b>cooked</b> non-sacred food in it, the absorbed <i>teruma</i> renders the mixture sacred if it <b>imparts flavor</b> to it. Therefore, a pot requires purging with boiling liquid in order to expel the flavor of <i>teruma</i> from it.

### Part 14
Three <i>amora’im</i> address the apparent inconsistency that while the Torah excludes vessels used for <i>teruma</i> from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, the <i>baraita</i> teaches that these vessels must be purged. <b>Abaye said:</b> When the verse excludes <i>teruma</i> from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, this <b>is necessary only for</b> that <b>which the Master said:</b> If one <b>cooked in</b> only <b>part of</b> the <b>vessel, the entire vessel requires scouring and rinsing.</b> By contrast, in <b>this</b> case, if <b><i>teruma</i></b> was cooked in only part of a vessel, one <b>must</b> perform scouring and rinsing <b>only</b> in <b>the place of</b> the <b>cooking,</b> and not in the whole vessel.

### Part 15
<b>Rava said:</b> When the verse excludes <i>teruma</i> from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, that <b>is necessary only for</b> that <b>which the Master said:</b> The verse specifies: “It shall be scoured and rinsed <b>in water”</b> (Leviticus 6:21), <b>but</b> the vessel is <b>not</b> to be scoured and rinsed <b>in wine.</b> It must be scoured and rinsed <b>“in water,” but not in diluted</b> wine. By contrast, in <b>this</b> case, i.e., the vessel in which <i>teruma</i> was cooked, it may be scoured and rinsed <b>even in wine, and even in diluted</b> wine.

### Part 16
<b>Rabba bar Ulla said:</b> When the verse excludes <i>teruma</i> from the <i>halakha</i> of scouring and rinsing, this <b>is necessary only for</b> that <b>which the Master said:</b> One must perform <b>scouring and rinsing with cold</b> water, in addition to purging a vessel of its absorbed flavors with boiling water. By contrast, in <b>this</b> case, i.e., with regard to the vessel in which <i>teruma</i> was cooked, one may cleanse the vessel <b>even</b> by performing only the purging <b>with boiling</b> water, which removes the residue of the forbidden food, and omitting the cold water processes entirely.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that <b>scouring and rinsing</b> are performed <b>with cold</b> water; <b>but according to the one who says</b> that <b>scouring</b> is done by purging <b>with hot</b> water, <b>and rinsing</b> is a different procedure performed <b>with cold</b> water, <b>what can be said?</b> According to this opinion, the verse is also referring to purging; and if the verse excludes vessels used for <i>teruma</i>, how does the <i>baraita</i> teach that such vessels much be purged? The Gemara answers: According to the opinion that differentiates scouring, which is done with boiling water, from rinsing, which is done with cold water, the Torah excludes vessels used for <i>teruma</i> only from <b>the additional rinsing</b> that the Torah requires after the scouring.

### Part 18
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Tarfon says:</b> If one <b>cooked</b> a sin offering in a copper vessel <b>from the beginning of the</b> pilgrimage <b>Festival,</b> one <b>may cook in it</b> for <b>the entire</b> pilgrimage <b>Festival;</b> he need not scour and rinse the vessel after every use. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> One may not continue using it in this manner; rather, one must perform <b>scouring and rinsing before</b> the end of the <b>period</b> during which <b>partaking</b> of the particular cooked offering is permitted. <b>Scouring</b> is <b>like the scouring of</b> the inside of <b>a cup,</b> the cleaning done when wine sticks to the cup, <b>and rinsing</b> is <b>like the rinsing of</b> the outside of <b>a cup. Scouring and rinsing</b> are both performed <b>with cold</b> water.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC