
### Part 1
<b>for</b> the matter <b>itself,</b> to teach that a peace offering may be eaten for only two days? The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse state: On the day he slaughters it shall it be eaten,</b> and the following day. <b>Why do I</b> need the verse to add the term <b>“that he sacrifices it”? Conclude from</b> the wording of the verse that <b>on the day that you slaughter</b> the offering <b>you sacrifice</b> the blood on the altar, but <b>on a day that you do not slaughter</b> the offering <b>you do not sacrifice</b> the blood on the altar.

### Part 2
The Gemara questions this proof: <b>But perhaps this</b> is what <b>the Merciful One is saying: If</b> the <b>blood is sacrificed today,</b> i.e., the day the offering was slaughtered, the <b>meat</b> may <b>be eaten today and tomorrow. If</b> the <b>blood is sacrificed tomorrow,</b> the <b>meat may be eaten tomorrow and the following day.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse state: On the day it is sacrificed it shall be eaten,</b> and the following day. <b>Why do I</b> need the verse to state: “That he sacrifices <b>his offering”? Conclude from</b> the wording of the verse that <b>on the day that you slaughter</b> the offering <b>you sacrifice</b> the blood on the altar, but <b>on a day that you do not slaughter</b> the offering <b>you do not sacrifice</b> the blood on the altar.

### Part 3
§ <b>It was stated:</b> With regard to <b>one who</b> slaughters a peace offer-ing and <b>intends</b> to eat it <b>on the evening</b> preceding the <b>third</b> day, <b>Ḥizkiyya says:</b> The offering is <b>valid,</b> and it is not disqualified due to his intention to eat it after its designated time [<i>piggul</i>]. And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>disqualified.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Ḥizkiyya says</b> that the offering is <b>valid because</b> on the evening preceding the third day, the peace offering has <b>not</b> yet <b>been removed</b> from its previous status and designated <b>for burning.</b> A peace offering is not burned until the third morning, as the verse states: “It shall be eaten the same day you offer it, and on the following day; and if anything remain until the third day, it shall be burned with fire” (Leviticus 19:6). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> it is <b>disqualified, because it has been rejected from</b> being <b>eaten.</b>

### Part 4
These two <i>amora’im</i> have the same dispute concerning a similar matter: With regard to <b>one who eats</b> a peace offering <b>on the evening</b> preceding the <b>third</b> day, <b>Ḥizkiyya says:</b> He is <b>exempt</b> from <i>karet</i>, <b>because</b> the offering has <b>not</b> yet <b>been removed</b> from its previous status and designated <b>for burning.</b> And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> He is <b>liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i>, <b>because it has been rejected from</b> being <b>eaten.</b>

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> With regard to <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>that may be eaten for one day,</b> if one <b>intends to</b> present <b>their blood after sunset, or</b> if one intends <b>to</b> eat <b>their meat or to</b> sacrifice <b>their sacrificial portions after the first rays of dawn,</b> the offering is considered to be <i>piggul</i> and is disqualified. With regard to <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>that may be eaten for two days and one night,</b> if one <b>intends to</b> present <b>their blood after sunset, or</b> if one intends <b>to</b> sacrifice <b>their sacrificial portions after the first rays of dawn, or</b> if one intends <b>to</b> eat <b>their meat after sunset</b> following the second <b>of</b> the <b>two days,</b> the offering is considered to be <i>piggul</i> and is disqualified.

### Part 6
The Gemara cites another <i>baraita</i> on this topic. <b>The Sages taught:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that peace offerings, which may be eaten for two days, <b>may</b> also <b>be eaten on the evening</b> preceding the <b>third</b> day. <b>And this</b> is the conclusion of <b>a logical inference:</b> Other <b>offerings,</b> e.g., thanks offerings, <b>are eaten for one day, and</b> peace <b>offerings are eaten for two days. Just as</b> with regard to <b>offerings that are eaten for one day,</b> the <b>night follows</b> the previous day, i.e., the offering may be eaten during the day and the subsequent night, <b>so too,</b> with regard to peace <b>offerings that are eaten for two days,</b> say that the <b>night follows</b> the day, and rule that they may be eaten on the night after the second day.

### Part 7
To counter this logic, <b>the verse states:</b> “And when you sacrifice a peace offering to God, you shall sacrifice it of your own will. It shall be eaten the same day you sacrifice it, and on the next day; <b>and if any remains until</b> the third <b>day,</b> it shall be burned with fire” (Leviticus 19:5–6). This teaches that <b>it may be eaten while</b> it is still <b>daytime,</b> i.e., during the second day, <b>but it may not be eaten on the evening</b> preceding the <b>third</b> day.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If a peace offering may not be eaten beyond the second day, one <b>might</b> have thought that it should <b>be burned immediately</b> after the conclusion of the second day, <b>and this</b> too is the conclusion of <b>a logical inference:</b> Other <b>offerings are eaten for one day, and</b> peace <b>offerings are eaten for two days. Just as</b> with regard to <b>offerings that are eaten for one day, immediately</b> after the conclusion of their permitted time <b>for eating</b> should their <b>burning</b> commence, on the morning of the second day, <b>so too,</b> with regard to peace <b>offerings that are eaten for two days</b> say that <b>immediately</b> after the conclusion of their permitted time <b>for eating</b> should their <b>burning</b> commence, at night after the second day.

### Part 9
To counter this logic, <b>the verse states:</b> “And if any remains of the flesh of the sacrifice <b>on the third day, it shall be burned with fire”</b> (Leviticus 7:17), meaning: <b>You</b> must <b>burn it during the day, but you may not burn it during the night.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The firstborn</b> offering, <b>the</b> animal <b>tithe</b> offering, <b>and the Paschal offering are offerings of lesser sanctity. Their slaughter is anywhere in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard, and their blood requires one placement, provided that</b> the priest <b>places it</b> so that the blood goes <b>on the base</b> of the altar.

### Part 11
The <i>halakha</i> <b>differs with regard to their consumption. The firstborn</b> offering <b>is eaten by the priests, and the</b> animal <b>tithe</b> offer-ing is eaten <b>by any person,</b> i.e., any ritually pure Jew. <b>And they are eaten throughout the city</b> of Jerusalem, prepared <b>in any</b> manner of <b>food</b> preparation, <b>for two days and one night. The Paschal offering is eaten only at night, and it is eaten only until midnight, and it is eaten only by its registrants,</b> i.e., those who registered in advance to partake of the offering, <b>and it is eaten only roasted,</b> not prepared in any other manner.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that the blood of these offerings is placed, not poured, so that it goes on the base of the altar? <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>it is Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says:</b> The verse states: “But the firstborn of an ox, or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat, you shall not redeem; they are sacred; you shall sprinkle their blood upon the altar and you shall burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a pleasing aroma to the Lord” (Numbers 18:17). <b>It is not stated: Its fat, but</b> rather: <b>“Their fat.”</b> Similarly, <b>it is not stated: Its blood, but</b> rather: <b>“Their blood.”</b> This <b>teaches with regard to a firstborn</b> offering, which is mentioned explicitly in the verse, <b>and</b> an animal <b>tithe</b> offering, <b>and a Paschal offering,</b> which are similar in their sanctity to a firstborn offering, <b>that they</b> all <b>require placement of their blood and</b> the burning of their <b>sacrificial portions on the altar.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that their blood must be placed so that it goes <b>on the base</b> of the altar? <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> This is <b>derived</b> by way of a verbal analogy, with the meaning of the word <b>“sprinkling”</b> stated here derived <b>from</b> the meaning of the word <b>“sprinkling”</b> stated with regard to <b>a burnt offering.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC