
### Part 1
<b>the meal offering of priests,</b> from which no handful of flour is removed and which is burned in its entirety (see Leviticus 6:16); <b>the meal offering of</b> the <b>anointed priest,</b> which is sacrificed by the High Priest each day, half in the morning and half in the evening; <b>the blood,</b> which permits all the offerings; <b>and the libations that are brought by themselves</b> as a separate offering and do not accompany an animal offering; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> The same <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even</b> with regard to libations <b>that are brought with an animal</b> offering.

### Part 2
With regard to <b>the <i>log</i> of oil</b> that accompanies the guilt offering <b>of</b> a recovered <b>leper, Rabbi Shimon says: One is not liable for</b> consuming <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> because it is not permitted by any other item. <b>And Rabbi Meir says: One is liable for</b> consuming <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>, as the blood of the guilt offering</b> of the leper <b>permits its</b> use, as only after the blood’s sacrifice is the oil sprinkled and given to the priests. <b>And</b> the principle is: With regard to <b>any</b> item <b>that has permitting factors, either for</b> consumption by <b>a person or for</b> burning on <b>the altar, one is liable for</b> eating <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 3
The mishna elaborates: <b>The burnt offering, its blood permits its flesh to</b> be burned on <b>the altar and its hide to</b> be used by <b>the priests. The bird burnt offering, its blood permits its flesh</b> and its skin <b>to</b> be burned on <b>the altar. The bird sin offering, its blood permits its meat for</b> consumption by <b>the priests. Bulls that are burned,</b> e.g., the bull for an unwitting communal sin, <b>and goats that are burned,</b> e.g., the goats sacrificed for an unwitting communal sin of idol worship, <b>their blood permits their sacrificial portions to be sacrificed</b> on the altar.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> Those bulls and goats are not subject to <i>piggul</i> because their blood is presented in the Sanctuary, and in the case of <b>any</b> offering <b>whose</b> blood <b>is not</b> presented <b>on the external altar like</b> that of <b>a peace offering,</b> with regard to which the <i>halakha</i> of <i>piggul</i> was stated in the Torah, <b>one is not liable for</b> eating <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Ulla says:</b> With regard to <b>a handful</b> of a meal offering that is <b><i>piggul</i> that was offered up on the altar, its <i>piggul</i></b> status <b>has left it.</b> His reasoning is as follows: <b>If</b> this handful <b>brings other</b> items <b>to</b> a status of <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> with regard to <b>itself</b> is it <b>not all the more so?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Ulla <b>saying?</b> This consideration does not explain why the status of <i>piggul</i> should leave the handful. The Gemara answers that <b>this</b> is what <b>he is saying: If</b> the handful <b>is not accepted,</b> i.e., if its sacrifice is disqualified, <b>how can it bring other</b> items <b>to</b> a status of <b><i>piggul</i>?</b> A meal offering is considered <i>piggul</i> only if its handful is properly sacrificed.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Ulla <b>teaching us? If</b> he is teaching us <b>that one is not liable for</b> eating the handful <b>due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>, we learn</b> this in the mishna: <b>These are</b> the <b>items for which one is not liable due to <i>piggul</i>: The handful, the incense, the frankincense, the meal offering of priests, the meal offering of</b> the <b>anointed priest, the meal offering</b> brought with the <b>libations</b> that accompany animal offerings, <b>and the blood.</b> If so, one is not liable for eating the handful even if it was not offered up on the altar.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> Ulla is teaching <b>that if</b> items with <i>piggul</i> status <b>ascended</b> the altar, <b>they shall not descend.</b> But this too, <b>we learn</b> in a mishna (84a): With regard to sacrificial flesh <b>that</b> is <b>left</b> overnight, <b>or that emerges</b> from the Temple courtyard, <b>or that is ritually impure, or</b> an offering <b>that was slaughtered</b> with the intention of eating the meat <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time or outside its</b> designated <b>area,</b> thereby acquiring the status of <i>piggul</i>, <b>if</b> any one of these <b>ascended</b> the altar <b>they shall not descend.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> Ulla is teaching <b>that if</b> items with <i>piggul</i> status <b>descended</b> from the altar after having been brought up there, <b>they ascend</b> once again. But <b>we also learn</b> in that same mishna (84b) that <b>this</b> is not so: <b>Just as if they ascended</b> the altar, <b>they shall not descend, so</b> too, <b>if they descended</b> from the altar <b>they shall not ascend.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> Ulla’s ruling is <b>necessary</b> in a case <b>where the fire has</b> already <b>taken hold of it,</b> i.e., the handful began to burn before it came down from the altar. Ulla teaches that in such a case the priests should return the handful to the altar, as its <i>piggul</i> status has already left it.

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: But <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>too, Ulla</b> already <b>said it</b> on <b>another occasion. As Ulla says:</b> The mishna <b>taught</b> that items that descended from the altar shall not ascend again <b>only where the fire has not taken hold of them, but where the fire has</b> already <b>taken hold of them, they shall ascend.</b> The Gemara explains: Even so, there is a novelty in Ulla’s ruling: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>this matter</b> applies only

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC