
### Part 1
<b>And if</b> he is <b>not</b> a leper, <b>this</b> animal that is brought for <b>a guilt offering</b> shall be <b>a voluntary peace offering,</b> because their sacrificial rites are equivalent. <b>And that</b> uncertain <b>guilt offering requires slaughter in the north</b> of the Temple courtyard as a guilt offering, <b>and placement</b> of the blood on the right <b>thumb</b> and <b>big toe</b> and right ear of the leper, as described in Leviticus 14:14, <b>and</b> it requires <b>placing hands</b> on the head of the animal, <b>and</b> the accompanying wine <b>libations and waving of</b> the <b>breast and thigh</b> like a peace offering.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> lastly, <b>it is eaten</b> by males of the priesthood <b>on</b> the <b>day</b> it is sacrificed <b>and</b> the following <b>night,</b> in the Temple courtyard, like a guilt offering, not for two days and one night in the manner of a peace offering. This indicates that Rabbi Shimon permits one to bring sacrificial animals to the status of unfitness even <i>ab initio</i>, not only when the animals became intermingled. The Gemara answers that <b>the remedy of a man is different</b> from the case discussed by Rabba. Since this person has no way of purifying himself from his leprosy other than by bringing the offering, the concern of reducing the time available for its consumption is disregarded.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks a question with regard to the resolution suggested by Rabbi Shimon of bringing the offerings and stating a stipulation. This <b>works out well</b> with regard to the <b>guilt offering,</b> but with regard to the <b><i>log</i></b> of oil <b>what can be said?</b> A <i>log</i> of oil does not accompany a peace offering. The Gemara explains <b>that</b> the individual bringing the offering <b>says:</b> If I am not a leper, then <b>this <i>log</i> shall be a gift</b> to the Temple, as one can dedicate oil to the Temple. The Gemara questions this resolution: <b>But perhaps he is not</b> in fact <b>a leper, and</b> if so, it is <b>required</b> that a priest <b>remove a handful</b> of the donated oil and sacrifice a handful of it on the altar before the rest of the oil may be consumed by the priests, as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to oil brought as an offering. The Gemara explains that this is referring to a case <b>where</b> the priest already <b>removed a handful.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara further questions: <b>But perhaps he is</b> in fact <b>a leper, and he requires the placement of seven</b> sprinklings of oil before the Lord (see Leviticus 14:15–16). The Gemara answers <b>that</b> the priest does <b>place</b> these sprinklings.

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a difficulty: How can the priest sprinkle the oil? <b>But it is lacking,</b> as a handful has been removed from the oil, and one sprinkles only from a whole <i>log</i>. The Gemara explains <b>that</b> after the handful is removed the priest <b>brings a little</b> more oil to the container <b>and fills it</b> up to a <i>log</i>. This is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 14:10): In a case where <b>the <i>log</i> lacked</b> a full measure, then <b>if</b> it became lacking <b>before</b> the priest <b>poured</b> from it into his palm in order to place it on the right thumb and big toe of the leper, <b>he shall fill it.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara poses yet another question: <b>But</b> if he is not a leper, and that <i>log</i> of oil is a gift, that handful removed from the oil <b>requires burning</b> on the altar for the remainder of the oil to be permitted to the priests. The Gemara explains <b>that</b> the priest does in fact <b>burn</b> the handful.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>When</b> does the priest burn the handful? <b>If</b> he does so <b>after the placement of seven</b> sprinklings for the leper’s purification, in such a case the <i>log</i> will be lacking due to the sprinklings. That which remains <b>is</b> akin to the <b>remainder</b> of a meal offering <b>that was lacking between</b> the <b>removal of</b> the <b>handful and</b> the <b>burning, and one may not burn the handful for that</b> remainder. Similar to a gift of oil, in a meal offering a handful is removed from the offering and then sacrificed on the altar. If after the handful is removed but before it is sacrificed some of the remainder of the meal offering is separated, the handful may not be sacrificed. The same should apply if some of the oil was sprinkled after the handful was removed.

### Part 8
<b>If,</b> alternatively, the priest burns the handful <b>before the placement of seven</b> sprinklings, once he has burned the handful he may no longer perform the sprinklings, in accordance with the principle: <b>Whatever is partly</b> burned <b>in the fire</b> on the altar <b>is subject to</b> the prohibition of: <b>You may not make as an offering</b> (see Leviticus 2:11). This principle states that if part of an item, such as the blood of an animal offering or the handful of a meal offering, has been sacrificed, one who sacrifices any other part of it that is not designated for sacrifice has violated a prohibition. The sprinkling of the oil is equivalent to sacrifice in this regard.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi, says that</b> the priest does not sprinkle the oil as a definite rite but stipulates that if the man is not a leper he is sprinkling it in a manner analogous to other items that one <b>burns for the sake of wood,</b> i.e., as fuel for the altar and not as a sacrificial rite. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The verse states: “No meal offering that you shall bring to the Lord shall be made with leaven; for you shall make no leaven, nor any honey, smoke from it as an offering made by fire to the Lord. As an offering of first fruits you may bring them to the Lord; but they shall not come up for a pleasing aroma on the altar” (Leviticus 2:11–12). This verse indicates that <b>you may not offer up</b> leaven and honey <b>as a pleasing aroma,</b> an offering. <b>But you may offer up</b> leaven and honey and other substances

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC