
### Part 1
<b>and</b> their blood is placed on the <b>corner</b> of the altar; <b>and</b> the blood is placed with a priest’s <b>finger; and</b> the blood is placed on <b>the edge of</b> the corner of the altar; <b>and</b> parts of each are consumed in <b>flames</b> upon the altar. None of these apply to bird sin offerings.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises an objection: <b>On the contrary, the bird sin offering should have been included</b> and likened to the eaten animal sin offerings, <b>as</b> the blood of bird sin offerings is presented on the <b>outer</b> altar <b>like</b> an animal sin offering that is eaten, <b>and</b> the bird sin offering has portions set aside for <b>eating, like it.</b> The Gemara rejects the reasoning for including bird offerings: <b>Those</b> features that are common to internal sin offerings and eaten animal sin offerings <b>are more numerous</b> than the features common to bird sin offerings and eaten animal sin offerings.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> There is another way to prove that the blood of a bird sin offering is not required to be laundered out if it is sprayed on a garment. With regard to laundering, <b>the verse states:</b> “The priest that offers it for sin <b>shall eat it”</b> (Leviticus 6:19); the obligation described applies <b>to it,</b> i.e., the eaten animal sin offering, <b>and not to another</b> similar sin offering. Consequently, <b>the verse is excluding</b> a case <b>within</b> the broad category of <b>eaten</b> sin offerings, and one is not required to launder out the blood of a bird sin offering.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if the exclusion of bird offerings is derived from this verse, then <b>why do I</b> need the derivation from the verse: <b>“This</b> is the law of the sin offering”? The Gemara answers: <b>If not</b> for the derivation from <b>“this,” I would say</b> that the term <b>“shall eat it”</b> is simply <b>the manner</b> of speech <b>of the verse,</b> so that it does not indicate any exclusion. Therefore, the word “this” <b>teaches us</b> that a sin offering is excluded, and the term “shall eat it,” demonstrates that the excluded sin offering is one that is eaten.

### Part 5
<b>Rabba said</b> that there is a different explanation. Internal sin offerings cannot be excluded from the requirement of laundering sprayed garments, as the verse speaks specifically of internal sin offerings, as <b>the verse states: “It shall be sprinkled”</b> (Leviticus 6:20). <b>The verse is speaking of</b> sin offerings that require <b>sprinklings,</b> and sprinkling is mentioned specifically with regard to internal sin offerings (see Leviticus 4:6), unlike eaten animal sin offerings, with regard to which the Torah uses a term of placing to describe the presenting of its blood (see Leviticus 4:25).

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty: Can one say that the passage about laundering applies specifically to internal sin offerings? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the mishna: <b>Although the verse is speaking only of</b> sin offerings <b>that are eaten,</b> indicating that the passage certainly applies to sin offerings that are eaten? The Gemara answers: The mishna’s statement pertains <b>to the matter of scouring and rinsing</b> copper vessels in which a sin offering was cooked (see Leviticus 6:21), which is relevant only to sin offerings that are eaten. <b>But in the matter of laundering:</b> “You shall launder that on which <b>it shall be sprinkled”</b> (Leviticus 6:20) <b>is written,</b> and the term “it shall be sprinkled” indicates only internal sin offerings. By contrast, eaten sin offerings are included only through the amplification in the verse: “The law of the sin offering” (Leviticus 6:18).

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that the verses prescribing laundering are primarily discussing internal sin offerings, and eaten sin offerings are included only through a derivation, then with regard to the statement in the mishna: <b>Both</b> the sin offerings <b>that are eaten and the internal</b> sin offerings, is this statement not misleading? Rather, the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> stated: <b>Both the internal</b> sin offerings <b>and</b> the sin offerings <b>that are eaten,</b> first mentioning the offerings most clearly indicated in the verse. The Gemara answers: <b>Teach</b> it as: <b>Both the internal</b> sin offerings <b>and the</b> sin offerings <b>that are eaten.</b>

### Part 8
<b>If so,</b> that the requirement of laundering applies to those sin offerings with regard to which the Torah uses the term sprinkling, the blood of <b>a bird sin offering</b> should require laundering <b>as well,</b> as sprinkling is also mentioned with regard to it (see Leviticus 5:9). The Gemara answers: <b>The Merciful One excludes</b> bird offerings by stating: <b>“This</b> is the law of the sin offering.” The Gemara challenges: <b>If so,</b> that the function of this verse is to be understood as a restriction, <b>an external</b> sin offering <b>also</b> should <b>not</b> require laundering. The Gemara responds: <b>The Merciful One amplified</b> the <i>halakha</i> to include external sin offerings by stating: <b>“The law of.”</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> that convinced you to exclude bird offerings and include external sin offerings? The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that the eaten <b>animal sin offering should have been included, as</b> the eaten animal sin offering resembles the internal sin offering in several respects: Each is a large <b>animal;</b> each is subject to <b>slaughter on the north</b> side of the courtyard; <b>and</b> the blood of each requires <b>collection in a vessel; and</b> their blood is placed on the <b>corner</b> of the altar; <b>and</b> the blood is placed with a priest’s <b>finger; and</b> the blood is placed on <b>the edge of</b> the corner of the altar; <b>and</b> parts of each are consumed in <b>flames</b> upon the altar. None of these apply to bird sin offerings.

### Part 10
The Gemara raises an objection: <b>On the contrary,</b> the <b>bird sin offering should have been included</b> in the requirement for laundering, <b>as</b> the offering of the blood of the bird sin offering is termed <b>sprinkling,</b> just <b>like it</b> is in the case of the internal sin offering. The Gemara answers: <b>Those</b> features common to internal sin offerings and eaten animal sin offerings <b>are more numerous</b> than the features common to internal sin offerings and bird sin offerings.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara indicated that the blood of the bird sin offering is not received in a vessel, unlike that of animal sin offerings. With regard to this <i>halakha</i>, <b>Rabbi Avin asks:</b> When the blood of an eaten animal sin offering is brought into the Sanctuary in a vessel, this disqualifies it. In the case of <b>a bird sin offering,</b> which is killed by pinching the nape of its neck, <b>whose blood</b> a priest <b>brought inside</b> the Sanctuary <b>in its neck, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is <b>its neck comparable to a service vessel,</b> since it is from its neck that the blood is presented, <b>and</b> therefore it is <b>disqualified</b> if brought into the Sanctuary this way?

### Part 12
<b>Or perhaps</b> is its neck <b>comparable to the neck of</b> a large <b>animal</b> offering, about which <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“Of whose blood</b> is brought into the Tent of Meeting” (Leviticus 6:23), which teaches that its blood is disqualified when brought inside in a service vessel, <b>but</b> the blood is <b>not</b> disqualified when the animal’s <b>flesh</b> is brought inside. What is the status of the bird’s neck? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: If, after its nape is pinched, a bird sin offering <b>convulsed and</b> consequently <b>entered inside</b> the Sanctuary <b>and</b> then it <b>returned</b> to the courtyard, it remains <b>valid;</b> its blood may be sprinkled and its meat eaten. It can be inferred that the bird offering remains valid if it has entered on its own, <b>but</b> if a priest has <b>brought it in,</b> it is <b>disqualified</b> because of the blood in its neck.

### Part 13
The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>But according to your reasoning,</b> one might draw a faulty inference from the <i>halakha</i> of a convulsing offering, as follows. <b>With regard to</b> an animal <b>offering of the most sacred order,</b> about <b>which it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If, after being slaughtered appropriately on the north side of the courtyard, the animal <b>convulsed, and</b> consequently it <b>went out to the south</b> side of the courtyard <b>and</b> then <b>returned</b> to the north side, it remains <b>valid;</b> should it be inferred: <b>But</b> if a priest <b>took it out</b> to the south side it becomes <b>disqualified?</b> The sacrifice is certainly not disqualified by being taken to the south side of the courtyard, and the inference is incorrect.

### Part 14
<b>Rather,</b> it must be assumed that <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that of the convulsing animal that moved from the northern side to the southern side, is taught for another purpose. It <b>was necessary for</b> the <i>baraita</i> to teach this <i>halakha</i> in order to establish a contrast with an animal that <b>went out to the outside</b> beyond the courtyard, which is disqualified even if it goes out by itself. <b>Here, too,</b> with regard to the bird sin offering, the <i>halakha</i> of the convulsing animal that moved into the Sanctuary is taught for another purpose. This <i>halakha</i> <b>was necessary for</b> establishing a contrast with a bird offering that <b>went out to the outside</b> beyond the courtyard, which is disqualified even if it goes out by itself. Accordingly, this may not be used to resolve Rabbi Avin’s dilemma.

### Part 15
§ <b>Rabbi Avin asks</b> another question about the blood of a bird offering, which is sprinkled directly from the body of the bird and not collected in a service vessel. With regard to the blood of a large animal, which spills on the floor before it is received in a service vessel, it becomes disqualified for presentation (see 25a), but if it spills after it is received in a vessel, it may be collected from the floor and presented (see 32a). If the blood of a bird offering <b>spilled onto the floor and</b> the priest <b>collected it</b> from the floor in order to sprinkle it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 16
Is it simply that <b>the Merciful One did not require a service vessel</b> for the collection of the bird’s blood, <b>and therefore</b> a priest <b>may collect it</b> from the floor <b>and</b> it remains <b>fit</b> for sprinkling on the altar? <b>Or perhaps the Merciful One rendered a service vessel unfit for</b> sprinkling <b>it</b> in any case, and the blood must be sprinkled directly from the bird’s body, <b>and therefore,</b> if it spills on the floor and the priest <b>collects it,</b> it is <b>unfit</b> for sprinkling.

### Part 17
<b>Rava said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, deduced from a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the blood of a bird sin offering would require laundering</b> if sprayed on a garment. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This</b> is the law of the sin offering” (Leviticus 6:18), which excludes the bird sin offering. <b>But if it enters your mind</b> that <b>the Merciful One rendered</b> a vessel <b>unfit for</b> sprinkling the blood of a bird, this interpretation is unnecessary. <b>I will deduce</b> the <i>halakha</i> that a bird’s blood does not require laundering <b>because</b> the blood <b>becomes disqualified</b> even by merely passing <b>into the airspace of a vessel.</b> Consequently, the blood is disqualified when coming into the airspace of the garment, which is considered a vessel, and, as disqualified blood, it does not subsequently require laundering.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> provides no decisive proof, as even if a bird’s blood is disqualified by passing into the airspace of a vessel, the word “this” must still be interpreted to exclude the blood of a bird sin offering from the requirement of laundering. The interpretation of the verse accounts for cases in which the blood reaches the vessel without first passing into its airspace, as <b>in</b> a case when the priest <b>affixes a vessel to</b> the bird’s <b>neck.</b> Consequently, no resolution can be derived for Rav Avin’s question.

### Part 19
§ The Gemara returns to the primary subject of the mishna, the requirement of laundering garments from the sprayed blood of a sin offering. <b>Levi asked</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: If the blood of an offering <b>sprayed from</b> one <b>garment to</b> another <b>garment, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>By</b> contact with the <b>first garment,</b> is the blood thereby <b>dismissed</b> with regard to the requirement <b>of laundering,</b> such that a subsequent garment would not require laundering? <b>Or perhaps not.</b>

### Part 20
Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: This</b> is an excellent <b>question;</b> and the answer is: The garment <b>requires laundering whichever</b> way <b>you</b> look at it. <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that with regard to blood that sprayed onto a garment the priest <b>may collect it and</b> it is still <b>fit</b> for presentation on the altar, then <b>this</b> blood is also <b>fit.</b> Consequently, even the second garment must be laundered. <b>And if</b> you say that with regard to blood that sprayed onto a garment if <b>he collects it, it is unfit</b> for presentation, <b>I hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says:</b> If the offering <b>had a period of fitness and</b> then <b>was disqualified, its blood requires laundering.</b> Accordingly, since the blood upon the second garment was initially collected in a service vessel, it too had a period of fitness.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC