
### Part 1
It is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> where Rabbi Shimon holds an acute mourner may not send a Paschal offering, since acute mourning at night is by Torah law, it is referring to a case <b>where his</b> relative <b>died on the fourteenth</b> day of Nisan <b>and he buried him on the fourteenth</b> itself. <b>There,</b> the ruling in the mishna in tractate <i>Pesaḥim</i>, which teaches that an acute mourner immerses and partakes of the Paschal offering in the evening, since acute mourning at night is by rabbinic law, is referring to a case <b>where his</b> relative <b>died on the thirteenth</b> day of Nisan <b>and he buried him on the fourteenth</b> of Nisan.

### Part 2
Rav Mari explains: In a case where <b>his</b> relative <b>died on the fourteenth</b> day of Nisan <b>and he buried him on the fourteenth</b> itself, his acute mourning is due to <b>the day of death</b> and is therefore by Torah law. Consequently, it <b>takes hold of its</b> following <b>night by Torah law,</b> and the mitzva of the Paschal offering does not override it. By contrast, in a case where <b>his</b> relative <b>died on the thirteenth</b> day of Nisan <b>and he buried him on the fourteenth</b> of Nisan, the fourteenth is only <b>the day of burial,</b> and his acute mourning is therefore <b>by rabbinic law.</b> Consequently, <b>it takes hold of its</b> following <b>night only by rabbinic law,</b> and the mitzva of the Paschal offering overrides it.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi said to Rav Mari: But</b> if so, it is difficult to understand <b>that which</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: Rabbi Shimon said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda: <b>Know</b> that this so, <b>as</b> the Sages <b>said: An acute mourner immerses</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan <b>and partakes of his Paschal offering</b> in the evening, <b>but</b> he may <b>not</b> partake <b>of</b> other <b>sacrificial</b> meat. According to your explanation of this statement, <b>let</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>say to</b> Rabbi Shimon that this is no proof: <b>I am telling you</b> a <i>halakha</i> about <b>the day of death,</b> when acute mourning is <b>by Torah law, and you tell me</b> that you have a proof from a mishna that deals with <b>the day of burial,</b> when acute mourning is <b>by rabbinic law.</b> The Gemara concludes: This indeed poses <b>a difficulty</b> for Rav Mari.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said</b> a different resolution to the contradiction between the statements of Rabbi Shimon: It is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> where Rabbi Shimon holds that an acute mourner may not send a Paschal offering, it is referring to a case <b>where</b> his relative <b>died before midday</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan. <b>There,</b> the ruling in the mishna in tractate <i>Pesaḥim</i>, which teaches that an acute mourner immerses and partakes of the Paschal offering in the evening, it is a case <b>where</b> his relative <b>died after midday</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan. When his relative died <b>before midday,</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>he was not</b> ever <b>fit for</b> bringing <b>a Paschal offering</b> since the obligation begins at midday, the status of <b>acute mourning applies to him,</b> and it is prohibited for him to bring a Paschal offering. But if his relative dies <b>after midday, when he is</b> already <b>fit for</b> bringing <b>a Paschal offering,</b> the status of <b>acute mourning does not apply to him</b> with regard to this matter, so he may immerse and partake of the Paschal offering in the evening.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: <b>And from where do you say that</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>is different</b> depending on <b>whether</b> his relative died <b>before midday</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan or <b>whether</b> he died <b>after midday? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states with regard to a priest: “And for his sister a virgin, that is near unto him, that has had no husband, <b>for her may he become impure”</b> (Leviticus 21:3). From here it is derived that it is <b>a mitzva</b> for a priest to become impure in order to bury his deceased relatives, and if he <b>did not want</b> to do so, others must <b>render him impure against his will. And an incident</b> occurred <b>involving Yosef the priest, where his wife died on Passover eve, and he did not want to become impure,</b> as he wanted to offer the Paschal offering; <b>and his brethren the priests voted and rendered him impure against his will.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> the Sages <b>raise a contradiction</b> from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> with regard to a nazirite: “He shall not become impure for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, <b>or for his sister</b> when they die; because his consecration unto God is upon his head” (Numbers 6:7)? If a nazirite <b>went to slaughter his Paschal offering or to circumcise his son,</b> mitzvot for which failure to fulfill them is punishable by <i>karet</i>, <b>and he heard that</b> a relative <b>of his died,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that he should <b>become impure</b> in order to bury his relative even if this will result in his not bringing the Paschal offering. <b>You</b> rather <b>say,</b> based on this verse, that <b>“he shall not become impure.”</b>

### Part 7
One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>just as he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>his sister, so too he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>a corpse with no one to bury it [<i>met mitzva</i>]. The verse states: “Or for his sister,”</b> teaching that <b>it is</b> only <b>to</b> bury <b>his sister that he may not become impure, but he does become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>.</b>

### Part 8
In the first <i>baraita</i>, contracting impurity from a dead relative is obligatory, and in the second <i>baraita</i> it is forbidden. Do you <b>not learn from</b> this contradiction that there must be a distinction between the cases? <b>Here,</b> in the first <i>baraita</i> concerning a priest, it must be referring to a case where the relative died <b>before midday,</b> so he was obligated to become impure before the obligation for the Paschal offering took effect. <b>There,</b> in the second <i>baraita</i> concerning a nazirite, it must be referring to a case where the relative died <b>after midday.</b> This distinction, between death before and after midday, also applies to acute mourning.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this explanation: <b>From where</b> do you infer that this is the resolution to the contradiction? <b>Actually, perhaps I will say to you:</b> Both <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are discussing deaths that occurred <b>after midday. And this</b> <i>baraita</i>, about a nazirite, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, and that</b> <i>baraita</i>, about Yosef the priest, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states with regard to a priest: “And for his sister a virgin, that is near unto him, that has had no husband, <b>for her may he become impure”</b> (Leviticus 21:3). This is <b>optional,</b> i.e., a priest is not obligated to become impure to bury his sister; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> It is <b>mandatory.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: This should <b>not enter your mind, because</b> it is <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> who <b>teaches the first clause of</b> the <i>baraita</i> about a nazirite. <b>As it is taught</b> in the full version of that <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states: “All the days that he consecrates himself unto the Lord he shall not come near to a dead body. He shall not become impure for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister when they die; because his consecration unto God is upon his head” (Numbers 6:7). <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The term <b>“body [<i>nefesh</i>]”</b> is referring to <b>relatives.</b> The term <b>“dead [<i>met</i>]”</b> is referring to <b>non-relatives.</b>

### Part 11
The verse specifies: <b>“For his father,”</b> even though his father is included among his relatives, to teach that <b>he may not become impure</b> to bury his father, <b>but he does become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>.</b> The verse states: <b>“For his mother,”</b> to teach that even if <b>he was a priest and he was a nazirite,</b> and therefore doubly prohibited from becoming impure, nevertheless, <b>he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>his mother but he does become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>.</b> The verse states: <b>“For his brother,”</b> to teach <b>that</b> even <b>if he was a High Priest,</b> who may not become impure even for his relatives, <b>and he</b> was also <b>a nazirite,</b> nevertheless, <b>he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>his brother but he does become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>.</b>

### Part 12
<b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Or for his sister”?</b> If a nazirite <b>went to slaughter his Paschal offering or to circumcise his son, and he heard that</b> a relative <b>of his died,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that he should <b>become impure. You</b> rather <b>say</b> that <b>he may not become impure.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>just as he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>his sister, so too he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>. The verse states: “Or for his sister,”</b> to teach that <b>he may not become impure to</b> bury <b>his sister but he does become impure to</b> bury <b>a <i>met mitzva</i>.</b> Consequently, the statement of the <i>baraita</i> concerning a nazirite represents the opinion of Rabbi Akiva.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC