
### Part 1
The Gemara responds: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>this matter,</b> sanctification of the hands and feet, applies only to <b>a rite that is indispensable</b> for effecting <b>atonement,</b> e.g., sprinkling the blood on the altar; <b>but a rite that is not indispensable</b> for effecting <b>atonement,</b> e.g., placing the fats and sacrificial portions of the offering on the altar, does <b>not</b> require prior sanctification of the hands and feet, therefore this verse <b>teaches us</b> that even such rites require sanctification of the hands and feet.

### Part 2
§ <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Ilfa raises a dilemma: According to the statement of</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>who says</b> that the disqualification of being <b>left overnight is not determinative with regard to sanctification of</b> the <b>hands and feet, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the water</b> in the <b>Basin? Is it disqualified</b> by being left overnight? <b>Do we say: For what</b> purpose is <b>this</b> water? It is <b>for the sanctification of</b> the <b>hands and feet,</b> and since <b>sanctification of</b> the <b>hands and feet itself is not disqualified</b> by being <b>left overnight,</b> the <i>halakha</i> should be the same concerning the water. <b>Or perhaps, since</b> the water <b>is sanctified in a service vessel,</b> i.e., the Basin, <b>it is disqualified</b> by being left overnight, like all other items sanctified in service vessels.

### Part 3
<b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said: <b>Rabbi Yirmeya says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Ilfa then resolved</b> the dilemma: Just <b>as</b> there is <b>a dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, <b>with regard to that</b> issue, i.e., whether sanctification of the hands and feet is disqualified overnight, <b>so</b> too there is <b>a dispute</b> between the two <b>with regard to this</b> issue, i.e., the water in the Basin. Accordingly, Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, holds that the water is not disqualified by being left overnight.

### Part 4
Ravin continued: <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Bisna said before</b> Rabbi Yirmeya: <b>My teacher,</b> do <b>you say so? But this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Ilfa:</b> With regard to <b>a Basin that they did not sink</b> into its pit <b>at night,</b> which would have prevented the water from being disqualified by being left overnight, a priest <b>sanctifies</b> his hands and feet <b>from it for the service of</b> that <b>night, and the next day he does not sanctify</b> his hands and feet from it.

### Part 5
<b>And we discussed it:</b> When Ilfa said that <b>the next day he does not sanctify</b> his hands and feet from it, did he mean <b>that he does not require sanctification</b> the next day, since sanctification is not disqualified overnight? <b>Or perhaps</b> Ilfa meant that it is prohibited to sanctify one’s hands and feet from the Basin since the water <b>was disqualified by</b> being <b>left overnight? And</b> Rabbi Asi <b>did not resolve</b> the issue <b>for us. But</b> you, <b>Master, are resolving</b> the issue by claiming that Ilfa ruled explicitly with regard to the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon.

### Part 6
The Gemara attempts to resolve the issue: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (<i>Yoma</i> 37a): The High Priest <b>ben Katin made twelve spigots for the Basin</b> so that several priests could sanctify their hands and feet at once. <b>He also made a mechanism [<i>mukhani</i>] for</b> sinking <b>the Basin</b> into water during the night so <b>that its water would not be disqualified by</b> being <b>left overnight. What, is it not</b> that this mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon?</b> If so, he holds that water of the Basin is disqualified by being left overnight. The Gemara responds: <b>No, it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that the first clause</b> of the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon,</b> one should infer that <b>the latter clause is also</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara elaborates: <b>As the first clause teaches</b> (<i>Yoma</i> 35b): At one point during the Yom Kippur service, the High Priest would <b>come</b> and stand <b>next to his bull, and</b> his <b>bull was standing between the Entrance Hall and the altar</b> with <b>its head to the south and its face to the west. And the priest stands to the east</b> of the bull, <b>and his face</b> points <b>to the west.</b> This is where he would slaughter the bull. <b>Whom have you heard who says</b> that <b>between the Entrance Hall and the altar</b> is considered part of the <b>north</b> of the courtyard, where it is permitted to slaughter offerings of the most sacred order? It is <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 9
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is</b> the <b>north?</b> It is the area <b>from the northern wall of the altar until the northern wall of the Temple courtyard. And opposite the entire altar</b> is considered the <b>north;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, adds even</b> the area <b>between the Entrance Hall and the altar</b> to the area that is considered north. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>adds</b> that <b>even</b> the areas to the north in <b>the place where the priests walk, and</b> the areas to the north in <b>the place where the Israelites walk. But all concede that</b> the area <b>from</b> the Chamber of <b>the Knives [<i>haḥalifot</i>] and inward,</b> which is an area to the side, is <b>unfit</b> for slaughtering offerings of the most sacred order, as it is not visible from the altar.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>And</b> must <b>you understand</b> that the first clause of the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, and not</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>Now,</b> does <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>add</b> only <b>to</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> but <b>not add to</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon?</b> The area deemed north according to Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, is included in the area deemed north by Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. Accordingly, since the first clause of the mishna can also be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, perhaps the mishna offers no proof at all with regard to the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon.

### Part 11
The Gemara reformulates its suggestion: <b>This is what we are saying: If it enters your mind</b> to say that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, then <b>let him stand</b> the bull <b>in the place where the priests walk and in the place where the Israelites walk,</b> since Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that those areas are also considered north. Why is the bull placed specifically between the Entrance Hall and the altar?

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Rather, what</b> shall you say? Will you say that the mishna <b>is</b> only in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon?</b> But if so, <b>let him stand</b> the bull anywhere <b>from the north wall of the altar to the north wall of the Temple courtyard,</b> as everyone agrees that this area is considered north. <b>Rather, what have you to say</b> to explain why the bull is positioned specifically between the Entrance Hall and the altar? It is <b>due to the weakness of</b> the <b>High Priest,</b> so that he need not exert himself and walk long distances on Yom Kippur. <b>Here too,</b> the mishna may be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, and <b>due to the weakness of</b> the <b>High Priest</b> the bull is positioned there.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If a priest <b>sanctified his hands and feet</b> in preparation <b>for the removal of the ashes,</b> the first service performed every day in the Temple, which was performed before dawn, then <b>the next day,</b> i.e., after dawn, <b>he does not need to sanctify</b> them again, <b>as he already sanctified</b> them <b>at the beginning of</b> the day’s <b>service.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this statement? <b>If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>doesn’t he say</b> that being <b>left overnight disqualifies</b> sanctification of the hands and feet? If so, one should be required to sanctify them again after dawn. And <b>if</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, doesn’t he say</b> that if the priest sanctified his hands and feet at the beginning of the service, <b>he does not need to sanctify</b> them again <b>even</b> if he continues to perform rites <b>for the next ten days?</b> Why, then, does Rabbi Yoḥanan state only that one who sanctified his hands and feet before the removal of the ashes is not required to do so after dawn?

### Part 15
<b>Abaye says: Actually,</b> the statement is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and</b> the disqualification of sanctification of the hands and feet by being <b>left overnight is by rabbinic law. And</b> although the Sages mandate that a priest must sanctify his hands and feet every morning, <b>they concede that</b> during the period <b>from the rooster’s crow</b> before dawn <b>until morning,</b> being <b>left overnight does not disqualify</b> his sanctification. Therefore, one who sanctifies his hands and feet at the rooster’s crow may continue to perform rites after dawn.

### Part 16
<b>Rava says: Actually,</b> the statement <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon. And Rabbi Yoḥanan saw the statement of</b> Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, as correct <b>with regard to the beginning of</b> the <b>service,</b> i.e., that a priest may serve during the day on the strength of sanctification performed before dawn. <b>But</b> he did <b>not</b> agree <b>with regard to the end of</b> the <b>service.</b> Rather, Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that if a priest sanctified his hands and feet before participating in the day’s final rites, he must sanctify them again the next morning. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, one who sanctified his hands and feet before sunrise must do so again afterward.

### Part 17
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Tamid</i> 28b) that describes the daily service: <b>His priestly brethren,</b> members of the patrilineal family, <b>saw that</b> the priest who removed the ashes <b>descended</b> from the altar with the coal pan in his hands, <b>and they ran and arrived</b> at the Basin. <b>They hurried and sanctified their hands and their feet</b> with water <b>from the Basin.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC