
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement of Rava, that intent of <i>piggul</i> does not apply to collection, is referring to a case <b>where</b> the one slaughtering the offering <b>says: I am hereby slaughtering</b> this offering <b>in order to collect its blood tomorrow.</b> Because the collection of the blood is not considered consumption, such intent does not render the offering <i>piggul</i>. <b>That</b> statement of the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the one collecting the blood <b>says: I am hereby collecting its blood in order to pour</b> the <b>remainder</b> of the blood on the base of the altar <b>tomorrow.</b> Since pouring the remains is considered consumption of the blood on the altar, such intent renders the offering <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 2
<b>One of the Sages said to Rava: And does</b> prohibited <b>intent with regard to</b> the <b>pouring of</b> the <b>remainder</b> of the blood <b>and</b> the <b>burning of</b> the <b>sacrificial portions not disqualify</b> the offering, as this explanation of the <i>baraita</i> seems to indicate?

### Part 3
<b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>only</b> prohibited <b>intent with regard to consumption of the meat is effective</b> to render the offering <i>piggul</i>. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>to include</b> the <b>pouring of</b> the <b>remainder</b> of the blood <b>and</b> the <b>burning of</b> the <b>sacrificial portions? The verse states: “And if</b> any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings <b>is at all eaten [<i>he’akhol ye’akhel</i> ]</b> on the third day, it shall not be accepted” (Leviticus 7:18). It is derived from the repeated verb that <b>the verse speaks of two</b> types of <b>consumption: One is consumption</b> of the meat <b>by man,</b> i.e., by the priests or the owner of the offering, <b>and</b> the other <b>one is consumption</b> of the blood and the sacrificial portions <b>on the altar.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: It is <b>not difficult. This</b> case, where intent renders the offering <i>piggul</i>, is <b>where</b> the one sprinkling the blood <b>says: I am hereby sprinkling</b> the blood <b>in order to pour</b> the <b>remainder tomorrow.</b> Since sprinkling the blood is necessary for atonement, if it is performed with the intent that consumption occur beyond its designated time, the offering is rendered <i>piggul</i>. <b>That</b> case, where intent does not render the offering <i>piggul</i>, is <b>where he says: I am hereby pouring</b> the <b>remainder in order to burn</b> the <b>sacrificial portions tomorrow.</b> Although burning the portions is considered consumption, pouring the remainder of the blood is not indispensable for atonement, and therefore the offering is not rendered <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 5
§ <b>Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, says: I heard that with regard to an inner sin offering,</b> whose blood is sprinkled on the curtain separating the Sanctuary and Holy of Holies, <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood in order to sprinkle it, if he does so with the intent of burning the offering on the altar the following day, <b>renders</b> the offering <b><i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Ilfa heard</b> this statement and <b>said it before Rav Padda.</b> Rav Padda <b>said</b> in response: <b>Did we derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>piggul</i></b> with regard to all offerings <b>from anything but a peace offering?</b> The source for the <i>halakha</i> of <i>piggul</i> is the verse stated with regard to peace offerings (Leviticus 7:18). Therefore, <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>a peace offering,</b> prohibited intent while <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood to sprinkle it on the altar <b>does not render it <i>piggul</i>,</b> as there is no requirement to sprinkle the blood of a peace offering with one’s finger rather than the containing vessel, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>a sin offering,</b> prohibited intent while <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood <b>does not render it <i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges: <b>But are all</b> of the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>piggul</i> <b>derived from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a peace offering? If</b> that is so, then <b>just as</b> sacrifice of <b>a peace offering not for its sake does not preclude</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> as it is still fit, <b>so too,</b> the <i>halakha</i> should be that sacrifice of <b>a sin offering not for its sake does not preclude</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>.</b> In fact, the <i>halakha</i> is that a sin offering sacrificed not for its sake cannot become <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 8
<b>Rather, what have you to say</b> to explain this <i>halakha</i>? You must say that it is <b>derived from an amplification of the verse. Here too,</b> the <i>halakha</i> that prohibited intent while dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering renders it <i>piggul</i> is <b>derived from an amplification of the verse.</b>

### Part 9
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: I heard in this upper story that</b> prohibited intent while <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood of an inner sin offering <b>renders</b> it <b><i>piggul</i>. Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish wondered [<i>tahei</i>] at this</b> <i>halakha</i>: <b>Did</b> the Sages <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>piggul</i> from anything but a peace offering? Just as</b> with regard to <b>a peace offering,</b> prohibited intent while <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood <b>does not render it <i>piggul</i>, so too,</b> with regard to <b>a sin offering,</b> the <i>halakha</i> should be that prohibited intent while <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood <b>does not render it <i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: <b>But are all</b> of the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>piggul</i> <b>derived from</b> those of <b>a peace offering? If</b> so, <b>just as</b> sacrifice of <b>a peace offering not for its sake does not preclude</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>, so too,</b> the <i>halakha</i> should be that sacrifice of <b>a sin offering not for its sake does not preclude</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: Indeed, all</b> of the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>piggul</i>, even this one, <b>are derived from a peace offering. Since in</b> the case of <b>a peace offering,</b> intent to consume it <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area disqualifies</b> it, <b>and in</b> the case of <b>a sin offering,</b> sacrifice <b>not for its sake disqualifies</b> it, one can infer that <b>just as</b> intent to consume the offering <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area, which disqualifies a peace offering, precludes</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>, so too,</b> sacrifice <b>not for its sake, which disqualifies a sin offering, precludes its</b> being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>.</b> By contrast, dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering with intent to consume it after its designated time does not render it <i>piggul</i>, as there is no parallel <i>halakha</i> with regard to a peace offering.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya says:</b> This inference is <b>inherently disjointed: What</b> is notable <b>about</b> intent to consume the offering <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area, which disqualifies a peace offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that</b> its disqualification <b>applies to all slaughtered offerings.</b> This is why it precludes the offering from becoming <i>piggul</i>. Need <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to</b> disqualification by sacrifice <b>not for its sake, which applies only to a Paschal offering and a sin offering?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather, what have you to say</b> to explain this derivation? One must say that it is not based on a case-to-case comparison, but on a principle that is derived from a peace offering, namely: Any <b>matter that disqualifies</b> a peace offering, e.g., intent to consume it outside its designated area, <b>precludes its</b> being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> and any <b>matter that prevents</b> atonement if not performed <b>renders</b> the offering <b><i>piggul</i></b> if performed with intent to consume it beyond its designated time.

### Part 14
One infers therefore that <b>here too,</b> with regard to an inner sin offering, any <b>matter that disqualifies it,</b> e.g., sacrifice not for its sake, <b>precludes</b> its being rendered <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> and any <b>matter that prevents</b> atonement if not performed <b>renders it <i>piggul</i></b> if it is performed with intent to consume it beyond its designated time. Accordingly, dipping one’s finger in the blood with intent to consume the offering beyond its designated time renders it <i>piggul</i>, as this rite is indispensable.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Mari says: We learn</b> in a mishna <b>as well</b> that dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering with intent to consume it beyond its designated time renders the offering <i>piggul</i> (<i>Menaḥot</i> 12a): <b>This is the principle:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who removes a handful</b> from a meal offering, <b>or</b> who <b>places</b> the handful <b>in a vessel, or who conveys</b> the handful to the altar, <b>or who burns</b> it on the altar, if he does so with intent that the offering will be consumed after its designated time the offering is <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 16
Since the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>piggul</i> are derived from those of a peace offering, one can ask: <b>Granted,</b> the one who <b>removes</b> a handful of a meal offering can render the offering <i>piggul</i>, as he <b>is</b> considered equivalent to the one who <b>slaughters</b> a peace offering. Just as the blood is the essential part of an animal offering, and it is removed by slaughter, so too, the handful of a meal offering is its essential part. Likewise, the one who <b>conveys</b> the handful <b>is</b> equivalent to the one who <b>conveys</b> the blood of a peace offering, and the one who <b>burns</b> the handful <b>is</b> equivalent to the one who <b>sprinkles</b> the blood <b>too. But</b> to <b>what is</b> the one who <b>places</b> the handful <b>in a vessel</b> equivalent? From where is it derived that he, too, can render the offering <i>piggul</i>?

### Part 17
<b>If we say that</b> placing the handful in a vessel is <b>comparable to collection</b> of the blood, as both rites involve placing the essential part of the offering in a vessel, one may respond: <b>Are</b> these rites actually <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case of a peace offering, the collection of the blood is performed passively. The blood spills into the vessel <b>by itself. Here,</b> in the case of a meal offering, the priest <b>takes</b> the handful himself <b>and places</b> it in a vessel. Clearly, placing the handful in a vessel is not equivalent to any specific rite in the sacrifice of a peace offering.

### Part 18
<b>Rather, since it is not sufficient</b> for the handful to be sacrificed <b>without</b> first <b>placing</b> it in a service vessel, <b>it is, perforce, an important rite.</b> One who performs it can therefore render the offering <i>piggul</i> like those who perform other essential rites. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering, although it has no equivalent in the sacrifice of a peace offering, <b>since it is not sufficient</b> if the priest <b>does not perform it, it is perforce</b> considered part of the <b>conveying</b> of the blood, and the priest can render the offering <i>piggul</i> while performing it.

### Part 19
The Gemara responds: <b>No, actually,</b> placing the handful in a vessel is <b>comparable to</b> the <b>collection</b> of the blood. <b>And</b> despite the distinction <b>that you say,</b> namely, that <b>here,</b> in the case of a peace offering, the blood spills <b>by itself,</b> while <b>there,</b> in the case of a meal offering, the priest <b>takes</b> the handful himself <b>and places</b> it in the vessel, nevertheless, <b>since</b> both <b>this</b> rite <b>and that</b> rite involve <b>placement</b> of the essential part of the offering in <b>a vessel,</b> they are equivalent. <b>What</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if the blood spills into the vessel <b>by itself,</b> and <b>what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> if the priest <b>takes</b> the handful himself <b>and places</b> it in the vessel? By contrast, dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering has no equivalent in a peace offering. Therefore, <i>piggul</i> does not apply to it.

### Part 20
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the principle that dipping one’s finger in the blood is considered part of conveying it to the curtain is <b>the subject of</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. As it is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>With regard to</b> an inner <b>sin offering, dipping</b> one’s <b>finger</b> in the blood with intent that it be consumed beyond its designated time <b>renders it <i>piggul</i>. And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: Dipping one’s finger in the blood with intent that it be consumed beyond its designated time <b>does not render</b> it <b><i>piggul</i>, and neither does</b> slaughtering the animal with the intent to dip his finger in the blood the next day <b>render</b> it <b><i>piggul</i>. What, is it not</b> that this matter <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>?</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> both <i>tanna’im</i> agree that dipping one’s finger in the blood of an inner sin offering is part of conveying it to the curtain. Rather, <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that a priest can render the offering <i>piggul</i> while dipping his finger in its blood, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> in the mishna (13a), who hold that one can render the offering <i>piggul</i> while conveying the blood to the altar. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states the opposite, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> in the mishna, who holds that one cannot render the offering <i>piggul</i> while conveying the blood.

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the latter <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, why</b> is it referring <b>specifically</b> to <b>dipping</b> one’s <b>finger? Doesn’t he say</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC