
### Part 1
even that meal offering <b>shall descend,</b> as it is not similar to lambs. With regard to <b>a meal offering that comes with</b> an animal <b>offering,</b> either a burnt offering or peace offering, <b>according to the statements of Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Yehoshua, it shall not descend,</b> as it is meant for consumpion by the fire. <b>According to the statements of everyone</b> else, i.e., Rabbi Shimon and the <i>tannai’im</i> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>it shall descend,</b> as it is neither offered by itself nor is it an animal.

### Part 2
Reish Lakish continues: With regard to <b>libations that come by themselves, according to the statements of everyone,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, Rabbi Akiva, and Rabbi Yehoshua, <b>they shall descend,</b> but <b>according to the statements of Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Shimon, they shall not descend.</b> With regard to <b>libations that come with an animal offering, according to the statements of everyone, they shall descend,</b> while according to <b>the statement of Rabban Gamliel alone, they shall not descend.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara questions the need for such a summary: Isn’t it <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary for</b> him to state the <i>halakha</i> in the case of <b>a meal offering that comes by itself, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rava. As Rava says: A person</b> can <b>volunteer</b> to bring <b>a meal offering</b> that normally accompanies libations, <b>on any day,</b> even without offering the libations and animal offering that it normally accompanies. Although the summary is itself obvious, it is nevertheless stated to indicate that it is possible to offer such a meal offering.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: If the intent of his summary is to express his agreement with the statement of Rava, then <b>let</b> Reish Lakish <b>teach us</b> explicitly that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rava.</b> The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary for</b> the case of <b>libations that come with</b> an animal <b>offering,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> in such a case is <b>that he may sacrifice</b> the libations <b>the next day and on a later [<i>ḥara</i>] day</b> sometime after sacrificing the animal offering that they accompany.

### Part 5
Accordingly, it may <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since the Master says</b> that the verse: “And <b>their meal offering and their liba-tions”</b> (Numbers 29:18), indicates that libations may be offered <b>at night,</b> and the phrase “and <b>their meal offering and their libations”</b> indicates that libations may be offered <b>the next day</b> and on a later day, perhaps libations offered on a later date than the animal itself are to be <b>considered as libations which come by themselves, and Rabbi Shimon</b> would <b>concede that they shall not descend.</b> Reish Lakish therefore <b>teaches us</b> the case of libations that accompany an animal offering, to indicate that such libations are still considered as those that accompany an animal offering and that they shall descend from the altar.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>These</b> are the items that even if they were disqualified, <b>if they ascended</b> the altar <b>they shall not descend:</b> Blood, sacrificial portions, or limbs of a burnt offering, any of <b>which were left overnight</b> off the altar, <b>or that emerge</b> from the Temple courtyard, <b>or that</b> become <b>ritually impure, or</b> that came from an animal <b>that was slaughtered</b> with the intent to sacrifice it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time or outside its</b> designated <b>area, or</b> an offering <b>that</b> people <b>unfit</b> to perform the Temple service <b>collected and</b> then <b>sprinkled its blood.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> In the case of a sacrificial animal <b>that was slaughtered at night, or</b> one <b>whose blood was spilled</b> on the floor of the Temple without its being collected in a vessel, <b>or</b> one whose <b>blood emerged outside the curtains,</b> i.e., outside the Temple courtyard: Even <b>if it ascended</b> upon the altar <b>it shall descend. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> In all these cases, if it ascended <b>it shall not descend, because its disqualification</b> occurred <b>in sanctity. As Rabbi Shimon says:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> unfit offering <b>whose disqualification</b> occurred <b>in sanctity,</b> i.e., in the course of the Temple service, <b>the sacred</b> area <b>renders</b> the offering <b>acceptable,</b> and if it ascended onto the altar it shall not descend. But with regard to any offering <b>whose disqualification</b> did <b>not</b> occur <b>in sanctity</b> but rather was unfit initially, <b>the sacred</b> area <b>does not render</b> the offering <b>acceptable.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And these are</b> the offerings <b>whose disqualification</b> did <b>not</b> occur <b>in sanctity: An animal that copulated with a person, and an animal that was the object of bestiality, and</b> an animal that was <b>set aside</b> for idol worship, <b>and</b> an animal that was <b>worshipped</b> as a deity, <b>and</b> an animal that was given as <b>payment</b> to a prostitute <b>or</b> as <b>the price</b> of a dog, <b>and</b> an animal born of a mixture of <b>diverse kinds, and an animal with a wound that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>], and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section, and blemished</b> animals. <b>Rabbi Akiva deems blemished</b> animals <b>fit</b> in the sense that if they ascended they shall not descend. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy High Priest, says: My father would reject blemished</b> animals <b>from upon the altar.</b>

### Part 9
Concerning those animals that, if they ascended, do not descend, <b>just as if they ascended</b> the altar <b>they shall not descend, so too, if they descended they shall not</b> then <b>ascend. And all of them that</b> if they ascend they do not descend, if <b>they ascended to the top of the altar alive they descend,</b> as an animal is fit for the altar only after it is slaughtered. <b>A burnt offering that ascended to the top of the altar alive shall descend,</b> as one does not slaughter an animal atop the altar <i>ab initio</i>. But if <b>one slaughtered</b> the animal <b>at the top of the altar, he should flay</b> it <b>and cut it into pieces in its place,</b> and it is not removed from the altar.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The verse from which is derived the <i>halakha</i> that items that ascended upon the altar shall not descend, states: <b>“This</b> is the law of the burnt offering: <b>It is the burnt offering</b> on the pyre upon the altar” (Leviticus 6:2). <b>These are three</b> terms of <b>exclusion</b> used in the verse: “This,” “it,” and “the,” from which it is derived that three instances are <b>excluded</b> from this <i>halakha</i>: A sacrificial animal <b>that was slaughtered at night, and</b> one <b>whose blood was spilled, and</b> one <b>whose blood emerged outside the curtains,</b> i.e., outside the Temple courtyard. With regard to these cases, the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that if</b> one of them <b>ascended</b> upon the altar <b>it shall descend.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> From the usage of the term <b>“burnt offering” I have</b> derived <b>only</b> with regard to <b>a fit burnt offering</b> that it shall not descend. <b>From where</b> is it derived that the verse also <b>includes</b> a sacrificial animal that was disqualified, such as one <b>that was slaughtered at night; or whose blood was spilled; or whose blood emerged outside the curtains,</b> i.e., outside the Temple courtyard; <b>or that was left overnight; or that emerged</b> from the Temple courtyard, <b>or that</b> became <b>ritually impure; or</b> that came from an animal <b>that was slaughtered</b> with the intent to sacrifice it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time or outside its</b> designated <b>area; or</b> an offering <b>that</b> people <b>unfit</b> to perform the Temple service <b>collected and</b> then <b>sprinkled its blood?</b>

### Part 12
In addition, from where is it derived that the following are also included in this <i>halakha</i>: <b>Those</b> offerings whose blood is to be <b>placed below</b> the red line that divided between the upper and lower halves of the external altar, i.e., a burnt offering, a guilt offering, or a peace offering, but it <b>was placed above</b> the red line; <b>and</b> a sin offering, whose blood is to be placed <b>above</b> the red line, <b>that</b> had its blood <b>placed below</b> the red line; <b>and those</b> offerings <b>whose</b> blood is to be <b>placed outside,</b> on the external altar, <b>that</b> had their blood <b>placed inside,</b> in the Sanctuary; and those offerings whose blood is to be placed <b>inside that</b> had their blood <b>placed outside?</b>

### Part 13
<b>And</b> in addition, with regard to <b>a Paschal offering or sin offering that were slaughtered not for their sake, from where</b> is it derived that if they ascended upon the altar they shall not descend? <b>The verse states: “The law of the burnt offering,”</b> which <b>included</b> in <b>one law all</b> items <b>that ascend</b> upon the altar, establishing the principle <b>that if they ascended</b> the altar <b>they shall not descend.</b>

### Part 14
One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I</b> should also <b>include an animal that copulated with a person, and an animal that was the object of bestiality, and</b> an animal that was <b>set aside</b> for idol worship, <b>and</b> an animal that was <b>worshipped</b> as a deity, <b>and</b> an animal that was given as <b>payment</b> to a prostitute <b>or</b> as the <b>price</b> of a dog, <b>and</b> an animal born of a mixture of <b>diverse kinds, and</b> an animal that is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This,”</b> to exclude these types of disqualifications, which descend even after they have ascended the altar.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> as reason <b>to include those and exclude these?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>After</b> noting <b>that</b> the verse <b>included</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC