
### Part 1
<b>“As he did with the bull”</b> (Leviticus 4:20); <b>this</b> is a reference to the <b>bull</b> for an unwitting sin <b>of the anointed priest,</b> teaching that all of the sprinklings of the blood of this bull are also indispensable. <b>“A sin offering”; these are</b> the <b>goats for</b> an unwitting communal sin of <b>idol worship,</b> teaching that they are offered in the same manner as the bull for an unwitting communal sin, their blood being sprinkled in the Sanctuary and their flesh burned. One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I</b> should <b>include also the goats of the Festivals and the goats</b> sacrificed on the <b>New Moons,</b> which are communal offerings as well, i.e., that their service should be performed inside the Sanctuary like that of the bull for an unwitting communal sin. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “So shall he do <b>with this”</b> (Leviticus 4:20), which indicates that this service is performed only with this animal and not with the goats of the Festivals or the goats of the New Moons.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see to include these</b> goats for an unwitting communal sin of idol worship <b>and to exclude those</b> goats sacrificed on the Festivals and the New Moons? The Gemara answers: <b>After</b> noting <b>that the verse included</b> some offerings <b>and excluded</b> others, one can say: <b>I include these</b> goats for an unwitting communal sin of idol worship, <b>as they atone for the known transgression of a mitzva,</b> i.e., idol worship, and therefore they are similar to the bull for an unwitting communal sin, which is brought for an erroneous ruling of the Sanhedrin with regard to a specific mitzva. <b>And I exclude those</b> goats sacrificed on the Festivals and the New Moons, <b>as they do not atone for the known transgression of a mitzva,</b> but rather they atone for the unwitting defilement of the Temple or its sacrificial foods.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> resumes its interpretation of the verse. <b>“And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement”;</b> this teaches that atonement is achieved <b>even if</b> the Elders <b>did not place</b> their <b>hands</b> on the head of the bull as they are commanded to do (see Leviticus 4:15). <b>“And</b> they <b>shall be forgiven”;</b> this teaches that atonement is achieved <b>even if</b> the priest <b>did not place</b> the <b>remainder</b> of the blood on the base of the altar, as is required (see Leviticus 4:7).

### Part 4
The Gemara again asks: <b>And</b> as the verse does not specify which aspects of the service are included and which are excluded, <b>what did you see to disqualify</b> the offering <b>in</b> the case of the seven <b>sprinklings;</b> how did you derive that the phrase “And he shall do…as he did” teaches that the seven sprinklings are indispensable? <b>And</b> what did you see <b>to render</b> the offering <b>fit in</b> the absence of <b>placing hands</b> on the head of the offering <b>and</b> pouring out the <b>remainder</b> of the blood on the base of the altar, based on the words “And the priest shall make atonement…and they shall be forgiven”?

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>You should say</b> the following logical argument: I <b>disqualify</b> the offering <b>in</b> the absence of the seven <b>sprinklings, as</b> these seven sprinklings <b>are indispensable in all cases,</b> as will be explained (40a), <b>and I render</b> the offering <b>fit in</b> the absence of <b>placing hands</b> on the head of the offering <b>and</b> in the absence of the pouring of the <b>remainder</b> of the blood onto the base of the altar, <b>as</b> these <b>are not indispensable in all cases,</b> and therefore it is reasonable to conclude that they are not indispensable here either.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC