
### Part 1
<b>Cushions and blankets that are</b> of <b>soft</b> leather, and for which the <i>halakha</i> with regard to laundering should be relevant, <b>and</b> yet <b>we learned</b> about them in the mishna (<i>Shabbat</i> 142b): If the filth <b>was</b> on a cushion <b>of leather, he applies water to it until</b> the filth <b>dissolves,</b> which indicates that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to laundering is not applicable even to soft leather. <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>any laundering that does not include rubbing,</b> it <b>is not considered laundering.</b> Consequently, one may apply water to a soft leather cushion, but soft leather remains subject to laundering, so long as there is rubbing.

### Part 2
<b>And that</b> statement <b>that Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi said: Many times I would stand before Rav</b> on Shabbat <b>and place water on his</b> leather <b>shoes,</b> may be explained accordingly. With regard to <b>placing</b> water on leather, <b>yes,</b> that is permitted, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>laundering,</b> which includes rubbing, it is <b>not</b> permitted. This may be explained as follows: <b>If</b> Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi spoke <b>of soft</b> leather shoes, then <b>all agree</b> that only placing water is permitted. And <b>if</b> Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi spoke <b>of hard</b> leather shoes, the distinction between placing and rubbing <b>accords with</b> the opinion of <b>the others,</b> who hold that the requirement of laundering sprayed blood applies even to hard leather.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> that placing water upon something is not considered laundering so long as one does not also rub the item, then with regard to a non-leather <b>garment as well,</b> one should be allowed to place water upon it on Shabbat. Why does the cited mishna state that one may wipe it only with a dry rag? The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>a garment, its soaking is its laundering,</b> and merely placing water on it is forbidden.

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: <b>Rava</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning; as Rava says:</b> If one <b>cast a cloth into water</b> on Shabbat, he is <b>liable</b> for laundering on Shabbat, as it is made of fabric like any garment; and if <b>one cast flax</b> seeds <b>into water,</b> he too is <b>liable.</b> The Gemara analyzes this statement: <b>Granted,</b> if he casts <b>a cloth</b> into water, he <b>performs laundering; but</b> with regard to <b>flaxseed, what is the reason</b> that one may not cast it into water on Shabbat?

### Part 5
<b>And if you would say</b> that it is prohibited <b>because it sprouts</b> in the water and constitutes the prohibited act of planting, <b>if so,</b> with regard to <b>wheat and barley,</b> it should <b>also</b> be forbidden to place them into water. The Gemara explains: Casting the flax into the water is not prohibited because of planting but because <b>these</b> flax seeds <b>have discharges</b> when soaked. <b>If so,</b> with regard to <b>hides,</b> it should <b>also</b> be prohibited to place them into water, because they too produce discharges in water. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> with regard to flaxseed, it is prohibited because it <b>effects kneading,</b> as the discharges cause the seeds to combine together, which is not true of hides.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>Rava taught</b> in public: It is <b>permitted to launder a shoe on Shabbat. Rav Pappa said to Rava: But didn’t Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi say: Many times I would stand before Rav</b> on Shabbat <b>and place water on his</b> leather <b>shoes?</b> Evidently, <b>placing</b> water upon leather, <b>yes,</b> that is permitted, <b>but laundering,</b> which includes rubbing, is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>Rava went back and placed an interpreter before him</b> so that he could tell the public that he had been wrong, <b>and taught</b> in public: The <b>statements that I said before you</b> earlier <b>are my error. Truly,</b> the Sages <b>said like this: Placing</b> water upon shoes is <b>permitted,</b> but <b>laundering</b> them is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The laundering</b> must be performed <b>in a sacred place,</b> and the breaking of an earthenware vessel must be performed in a sacred place, and the scouring and rinsing of a copper vessel must be performed in a sacred place. <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Concerning a garment on which blood was sprayed, the verse states: <b>“You shall launder</b> that on which it shall be sprinkled <b>in a sacred place”</b> (Leviticus 6:20). <b>From where</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the breaking of an earthenware vessel</b> in which a sin offering was cooked derived? <b>The</b> subsequent <b>verse states: “And the earthenware vessel in which it is cooked shall be broken”</b> (Leviticus 6:21). <b>From where</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>scouring and rinsing of a copper vessel</b> in which a sin offering was cooked derived? <b>The verse states</b> immediately thereafter: <b>“And if it be cooked in a copper vessel, it shall be scoured, and rinsed in water.”</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>this</b> matter, <b>a stringency</b> applies <b>to a sin offering</b> more than it applies to offerings of the most sacred order. The Gemara asks: <b>And are there no more</b> <i>halakhot</i> specific to a sin offering? <b>But there is</b> this <i>halakha</i>: <b>That its blood enters the innermost sanctum</b> to be sprinkled. The Gemara answers: The mishna is dealing <b>with external sin offerings,</b> and this <i>halakha</i> applies only to internal sin offerings.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: But there is the stricture <b>that if its blood enters into</b> the Sanctuary it becomes <b>disqualified.</b> The Gemara explains: This mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: Every</b> offering’s <b>blood,</b> not only that of a sin offering, <b>that enters the Sanctuary to atone</b> becomes <b>disqualified;</b> therefore, this is not a <i>halakha</i> specific to a sin offering.

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: But there is the <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> external sin offerings <b>atone for those who are liable to</b> receive excision, <b><i>karet</i>,</b> through unintentional sins. The Gemara explains: The mishna includes an offering that does not have that <i>halakha</i>, as its principles also apply <b>to a sin offering</b> brought <b>for hearing the voice,</b> i.e., for falsely taking an oath that one is unable to testify in another’s case. This transgression is not punishable by <i>karet</i>.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges: But there is the stricture <b>that</b> the blood of a sin offering <b>requires four placements</b> on the altar, unlike other offerings of the most sacred order. The Gemara explains: This mishna is composed <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, who says</b> that <b>all blood</b> of offerings <b>requires four placements,</b> one <b>upon</b> each of the <b>four corners</b> of the altar; accordingly, this is not a <i>halakha</i> limited to the sin offering.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> even <b>according to your reasoning,</b> can it be said that there is only one <i>halakha</i> that applies to a sin offering but does not apply to other offerings? <b>Isn’t there</b> the requirement to place a sin offering’s <b>blood</b> on the <b>corner</b> at the top of the altar? <b>Isn’t there</b> the requirement that a priest place a sin offering’s blood on the altar with his <b>finger? Isn’t there</b> the requirement to place it on <b>the edge of</b> the altar? Therefore, it should not be assumed that this is the only <i>halakha</i> unique to a sin offering, but <b>rather</b> that the mishna simply <b>cited one of two</b> or <b>three stringencies.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>a garment</b> upon which the blood of a sin offering was sprayed <b>that went outside the curtains,</b> i.e., the Temple courtyard, before being laundered, the garment <b>reenters</b> the courtyard <b>and</b> one <b>launders it in a sacred place.</b> If the garment <b>became ritually impure outside the curtains,</b> one <b>tears</b> the garment in order to render it ritually pure, <b>enters</b> the courtyard with it, <b>and launders it in a sacred place.</b> With regard to <b>an earthenware vessel</b> in which a sin offering was cooked <b>that went outside the curtains,</b> the vessel <b>reenters</b> the courtyard <b>and</b> one <b>breaks it in a sacred place.</b> If the vessel <b>became ritually impure outside the curtains,</b> one <b>punctures</b> the vessel to render it ritually pure, <b>and</b> one <b>enters</b> the courtyard with it <b>and breaks it in a sacred place.</b>

### Part 14
With regard to <b>a copper vessel</b> in which a sin offering was cooked <b>that went outside the curtains,</b> the vessel <b>reenters</b> the courtyard, <b>and</b> one <b>scours it and rinses it in a sacred place.</b> If the vessel <b>became ritually impure outside the curtains, one breaks</b> the vessel by boring a large hole in it to render it ritually pure <b>and enters</b> the courtyard with it <b>and scours and rinses it in a sacred place.</b>

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: If the garment became ritually impure outside the curtains, one tears the garment in order to render it ritually pure, enters the courtyard with it, and launders it in a sacred place. <b>Ravina objects to this:</b> How can the mishna say that <b>one tears it? The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah that one must launder <b>“a garment”</b> (Leviticus 6:20), <b>and</b> once this article is torn, <b>this is no</b> longer <b>a garment,</b> but only a scrap of cloth.

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: The mishna describes a scenario <b>when he leaves</b> untorn a fragment <b>of</b> the garment that is size <b>enough for a small cloth. Is that so?</b> If he leaves such a portion intact, is he still permitted to bring the garment back into the courtyard? <b>But doesn’t Rav Huna say:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that an impure garment, most of which has been torn, loses its impurity <b>only when</b> one <b>did not leave of it enough for a small cloth, but if he left enough of it</b> untorn <b>for a small cloth, it is</b> considered <b>a joining</b> of the pieces, and the garment remains ritually impure. Accordingly, leaving a piece that size would not serve any purpose with regard to ritual impurity.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC