
### Part 1
<b>They disagree</b> with regard to whether one is liable for pouring a libation outside the courtyard that was not first consecrated in a service vessel. This dispute is based on a disagreement <b>with regard to</b> whether wine <b>libations were offered</b> in the Tabernacle <b>in the wilderness</b> before the Jewish people entered Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara will soon explain the logical connection between the two issues.

### Part 2
<b>Ravina said:</b> Everyone agrees that wine libations are valid even if they are not first consecrated in a sacred service vessel. Therefore, one who pours a wine libation outside the courtyard is liable even if it was not first consecrated in a service vessel. <b>They disagree with regard to</b> whether the liability for pouring <b>a water libation can be derived from</b> that of <b>a wine libation.</b> The first <i>tanna</i> holds that it can; Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, holds that it cannot.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who pours as a libation three <i>log</i> of wine outside</b> the courtyard is <b>liable. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says: And that is</b> in a case <b>where he</b> first <b>consecrated</b> the wine <b>in</b> a sacred service <b>vessel.</b>

### Part 4
<b>What</b> is the difference <b>between them? Rav Adda bar Rav Yitzḥak said:</b> The difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to whether the <b>overfill of measuring vessels</b> is also consecrated. Both agree that one is liable for pouring a libation outside the courtyard only if it was first consecrated in a service vessel. The first <i>tanna</i> holds that the liquid that rises above the rim of a vessel is also consecrated, and if one collects three <i>log</i> of that liquid and pours it as a liba-tion outside the courtyard he is liable. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, holds that only the wine within the walls of the vessel itself is consecrated.

### Part 5
<b>Rava, son of Rabba, said:</b> The difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to whether one is liable for pouring a libation outside the courtyard that was not first consecrated in a service vessel. This dispute is based on a disagreement as to whether wine <b>libations were offered on</b> private <b>altars.</b>

### Part 6
He explains: <b>And</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between these <i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: An offering sacrificed on <b>a private altar does not need</b> to be accompanied by wine <b>libations;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> It does <b>require</b> wine <b>libations.</b> Service vessels are not used in the context of private altars. Therefore, if libations are brought on private altars then it is apparent that libations can be valid even if they were not first consecrated in a service vessel. Accordingly, one would be liable for pouring a libation outside the Temple even if it had not first been consecrated in a service vessel. If libations are not brought on private altars, then there is there is no precedent of a libation that was not first consecrated in a service vessel, and one would not be liable for pouring a non-consecrated libation outside the Temple.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> the opinion of <b>these <i>tanna’im</i> is like</b> the opinion of <b>those <i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In introducing the mitzva to bring wine libations together with animal offerings, the verse states: <b>“When you come</b> into the land of your dwellings, which I give to you” (Numbers 15:2), which indicates that the mitzva to bring libations began only once the Jewish people entered Eretz Yisrael. <b>The verse speaks</b> in order <b>to require</b> that <b>libations</b> be brought with animal offerings that are brought <b>upon a great</b> public <b>altar.</b> This assumes libations were not brought on a public altar in the wilderness. Therefore, it is necessary to teach that upon entering Eretz Yisrael they are required.

### Part 8
<b>Do you say</b> that the verse is referring <b>to</b> offerings brought on <b>a great</b> public <b>altar, or is it even</b> referring <b>to</b> offerings brought on <b>a small</b> private <b>altar?</b> Perhaps libations were brought on the public altar in the wilderness, and it is therefore unnecessary to state that after entering Eretz Yisrael libations should continue to be brought on a public altar. Accordingly, the verse must be teaching that after the Jewish people have entered Eretz Yisrael, libations are required even on private altars. This suggestion is rejected: <b>When</b> the verse <b>states: “Into the land of your dwellings, which I give to you [<i>lakhem</i>],”</b> using the plural form of the word “you,” it is apparent that <b>the verse is speaking of</b> a public <b>altar that is used by everyone;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> Through its introductory clause: <b>“When you come,” the verse speaks</b> in order <b>to require</b> that <b>libations</b> be brought with animal offerings that are brought <b>upon a small</b> private <b>altar.</b> This assumes libations were already brought in the wilderness, and the verse must be teaching that libations are required even on private altars.

### Part 10
<b>Do you say</b> that the verse is speaking of <b>a small</b> private <b>altar</b> outside the Temple? <b>Or is it only</b> referring <b>to a great</b> public <b>altar?</b> Perhaps libations were not brought on the public altar in the wilderness and the verse is necessary in order to teach that upon entering Eretz Yisrael they are required. <b>When</b> the verse <b>states: “Into the land of your dwellings,”</b> it is apparent that <b>the verse is speaking of an altar that is used in all your dwellings,</b> which certainly must be referring to private altars, as there was only one central public altar.

### Part 11
The Gemara explains: <b>When</b> you analyze the matter <b>you will find</b> that you can <b>say</b> that <b>according to the statement of Rabbi Yishmael, libations were not offered in the wilderness.</b> Therefore, it is necessary to teach that upon entering Eretz Yisrael they are required. <b>And according to the statement of Rabbi Akiva libations were offered in the wilderness.</b> Therefore, the verse must be teaching that libations are required even on private altars.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says:</b> For the <b>remainder of the blood</b> of an offering that was supposed to be poured at the base of the altar and <b>that</b> instead <b>one sacrificed outside</b> the courtyard, one is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Rabbi Neḥemya taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with the statement of the one who says</b> that failure to pour the <b>remainder</b> of the blood at the base of the altar <b>disqualifies</b> the offering.

### Part 14
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says</b> that for the <b>remainder of the blood</b> of an offering <b>that one sacrificed outside</b> the courtyard, one is <b>liable. Rabbi Akiva said to him: Isn’t</b> pouring <b>the remainder of the blood</b> considered <b>a non-essential mitzva,</b> which is not indispensable to the validity of the offering? Accordingly, one should not be liable for sacrificing the blood outside the Temple courtyard. Rabbi Neḥemya <b>said to him:</b> Sacrificial <b>limbs and fats</b> of a burnt offering <b>will prove</b> the matter, <b>as they are</b> considered <b>a non-essential mitzva, and</b> yet <b>one who sacrifices them outside</b> the courtyard is <b>liable.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: No, if you said</b> that one is liable <b>with regard to</b> the burning of the <b>limbs and fats, which is the start of</b> a sacrificial <b>rite,</b> i.e., burning them is an sacrificial rite in and of itself, <b>shall you</b> also <b>say</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> the pouring of the <b>remainder of the blood, which is not the start of</b> a sacrificial <b>rite,</b> but is just the conclusion of the sprinkling of the blood?

### Part 15
The Gemara explains the challenge from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And if it is so</b> that Rabbi Neḥemya holds that that failure to pour the remainder of the blood at the base of the altar disqualifies the offering, <b>let</b> Rabbi Neḥemya <b>say</b> in response <b>to</b> Rabbi Akiva: <b>These too,</b> i.e., the pouring of the remainder of the blood, are considered to be a sacrificial rite in and of themselves because failure to pour out the remainder <b>disqualifies</b> the offering. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, this is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara qualifies its rejection: <b>And now that Rav Adda bar Ahava says:</b> The <b>dispute</b> between the <i>tanna’im</i> with regard to whether failure to pour the remainder of the blood disqualifies the offering is only <b>with regard to</b> the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on <b>the inner</b> altar, <b>but with regard to</b> the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on <b>the external</b> altar <b>everyone agrees</b> that failure to pour it <b>does not disqualify</b> the offering; the apparent contradiction between Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement and the <i>baraita</i> can therefore be resolved. <b>When Rabbi Neḥemya says</b> in the mishna that one is liable for sacrificing the remainder of the blood outside the courtyard, he is referring <b>to</b> the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on <b>the inner</b> altar. The pouring of that blood is considered a rite in and of itself, and one is liable for sacrificing it outside the Temple. <b>When that</b> statement of Rabbi Neḥemya <b>is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, it is referring <b>to</b> the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on <b>the external</b> altar. Concerning such blood, Rabbi Neḥemya concedes that the pouring is not considered a rite in and of itself.

### Part 17
In light of this, the Gemara explains the discussion between Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Neḥemya: <b>And Rabbi Akiva did not know what Rabbi Neḥemya was saying.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>thought</b> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya was stating</b> a ruling about the pouring of the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on the <b>external</b> altar. Therefore, Rabbi Akiva <b>responded to him</b> with a claim relating to the <b>remainder of</b> blood that was presented on <b>the external</b> altar and said that it is a non-essential mitzva. <b>And</b> then <b>Rabbi Neḥemya</b> answered him by <b>saying</b> a defense of his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the misconception underlying <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 18
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who pinches</b> the nape of <b>a bird</b> offering <b>inside</b> the Temple courtyard <b>and</b> then <b>offers</b> it <b>up outside</b> the courtyard is <b>liable.</b> But if <b>one pinched</b> its nape <b>outside</b> the courtyard <b>and</b> then <b>offered</b> it <b>up outside</b> the courtyard he is <b>exempt,</b> as pinching the nape of a bird outside the courtyard is not considered valid pinching. <b>One who slaughters,</b> with a knife, <b>a bird</b> offering <b>inside</b> the courtyard <b>and offers</b> it <b>up outside</b> the courtyard is <b>exempt,</b> as slaughtering a bird offering in the Temple courtyard disqualifies it as an offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC