
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: This</b> is the <b>principle</b> of where sacrificial items are placed on the inner and outer altars: <b>Any</b> sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary in order <b>to be placed</b> on the altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary, in the Temple courtyard, <b>may be placed only on</b> the area of that altar that is <b>near</b> the Sanctuary, so <b>that there is no</b> area closer to the <b>inside</b> of the Sanctuary. It must therefore be placed on the part of the external altar closest to the entrance to the Sanctuary.

### Part 2
<b>And any</b> sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from the altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary, in the Temple courtyard, in order <b>to be placed</b> on the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>may be taken only from</b> the area of the external altar that is <b>near</b> the Sanctuary, so <b>that there is no</b> area closer to the <b>inside</b> of the Sanctuary, i.e., from the part of the external altar closest to the entrance to the Sanctuary.

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: With regard to the statement concerning <b>any</b> sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary in order <b>to be placed</b> on the altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>what are these</b> items? <b>If we say</b> they are the <b>remaining</b> blood of the sin offerings whose blood is presented on the inner altar, there is no reason for Rabbi Yosei to formulate his principle, as <b>it is explicitly written concerning them:</b> “And all the remaining blood of the bull he shall pour out <b>at the base of the altar of the burnt offering, which is at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting”</b> (Leviticus 4:7). This verse describes how the blood of the inner sin offerings that remained after the sprinkling was to be poured out on the base of the west side of the altar, which is the side closest to the entrance to the Sanctuary.

### Part 4
<b>And furthermore,</b> with regard to the statement about <b>any</b> sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from the altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary, in the Temple courtyard, in order <b>to be placed</b> on the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>what are these</b> items? <b>If we say</b> these are the <b>coals of</b> the <b>Yom Kippur</b> service, which must be taken from the western side of the altar, <b>it is explicitly written concerning them: “And he shall take a coal pan full of coals of fire</b> from off the altar before the Lord” (Leviticus 16:12). The expression “before the Lord” is a reference to the western side of the altar, which is the side closest to the Sanctuary.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues: <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yosei’s statement with regard to <b>any</b> sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary in order <b>to be placed</b> on the altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary is referring to the <b>two bowls of frankincense of the shewbread.</b> According to Rabbi Yosei, they must be burned on the western side of the altar, <b>as he derives</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the location on the base of the altar where the <b>remaining</b> blood of the inner sin offerings is poured.

### Part 6
Rabbi Yosei’s next statement, that any sacrificial item <b>that is taken</b> from <b>the</b> altar <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary in order <b>to be placed on</b> the altar located <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary may be taken only from the area of the external altar that is near the Sanctuary, is referring to the <b>coals that</b> are taken from the external altar <b>each and every day</b> and placed on the inner altar in order to burn the incense. According to Rabbi Yosei these coals must be taken from the western side of the altar, <b>as we derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the location on the altar from where the <b>coals of</b> the <b>Yom Kippur</b> service must be taken.

### Part 7
The Gemara discusses Rabbi Yosei’s opinion that the second arrangement of wood was placed four cubits north of the southwest corner of the altar: <b>And what does</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>hold</b> about the placement of the altar in the Temple courtyard? <b>If he holds</b> that <b>the entire altar stands in the south</b> side of the Temple courtyard, then only the five northernmost cubits of the altar are opposite the entrance to the Sanctuary. Accordingly, in order for the arrangement of wood to be opposite the entrance to the Sanctuary, one is <b>required to move</b> it <b>twenty-seven</b> cubits north of the southwest corner of the altar.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues: <b>And even if</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>holds</b> that the level of <b>sanctity of</b> the <b>Sanctuary and</b> the <b>Entrance Hall is the same,</b> so that the arrangement of wood can be opposite the Entrance Hall, which is ten cubits wider than the Sanctuary, his opinion is still difficult. In order for the arrangement of wood to be opposite the Entrance Hall, one is <b>required to move</b> it <b>twenty-two</b> cubits north of the southwest corner of the altar.

### Part 9
The Gemara continues: <b>And</b> even <b>if</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>holds</b> that <b>half of</b> the altar was located <b>in the north</b> side of the Temple courtyard <b>and half in the south,</b> in order for the arrangement of wood to be opposite the entrance to the Sanctuary one is still <b>required to move</b> it <b>eleven</b> cubits to the north of the southwest corner of the altar. <b>And</b> if one suggests that, <b>rather, he holds</b> that <b>the sanctity of</b> the <b>Sanctuary and</b> the <b>Entrance Hall is one matter,</b> i.e., equal, one is still <b>required to move</b> the arrangement of wood <b>six</b> cubits from the southwest corner in order to be opposite the Entrance Hall.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> that Rabbi Yosei’s opinion that the arrangement of wood was located four cubits from the altar’s southwest corner is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he holds</b> that <b>the entire altar stands in the north</b> side of the Temple courtyard? Accordingly, only the five southernmost cubits of the altar were opposite the entrance to the Sanctuary.

### Part 11
<b>And</b> of <b>these four cubits</b> from which the arrangement of wood was distanced from the southwest corner of the altar, one <b>cubit</b> was the <b>base</b> of the altar; <b>and</b> one <b>cubit</b> was <b>the surrounding ledge</b> of the altar; <b>and</b> one <b>cubit</b> was the <b>place</b> where the <b>corners</b> of the altar were located; <b>and</b> another <b>cubit</b> was <b>the place of the feet of the priests,</b> i.e., space for the priests to walk around the perimeter of the surface of the altar in order to perform the sacrificial rites. The arrangement of wood was located specifically in that location, <b>as if</b> one were to <b>move</b> it <b>farther away</b> from the southwest corner of the altar, it would <b>no longer</b> be opposite the <b>entrance</b> to the Sanctuary. This proves that according to Rabbi Yosei, the entire altar was located in the northern side of the Temple courtyard, as stated by Rabbi Yoḥanan.

### Part 12
The Gemara challenges this proof by suggesting an alternative explanation of the mishna in <i>Tamid</i>: <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The altar was centered and standing</b> precisely <b>in the middle of the</b> Temple <b>courtyard, and it was thirty-two cubits</b> wide. <b>Ten cubits</b> were <b>opposite the entrance to</b> the <b>Sanctuary, eleven cubits</b> were <b>to this</b> side of the entrance to the Sanctuary, <b>and eleven cubits</b> were <b>to that</b> side of the entrance to the Sanctuary. It <b>turns out</b> that the length of the <b>altar was aligned opposite</b> the width of the <b>Sanctuary,</b> which itself was thirty-two cubits wide.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>Ultimately, according to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> one is still <b>required to move</b> the arrangement of wood <b>eleven</b> cubits from the southwest corner in order for it to be opposite the entrance to the Sanctuary. <b>And</b> even <b>if he holds</b> that <b>the sanctity of</b> the <b>Sanctuary and</b> the <b>Entrance Hall is one matter,</b> i.e., equal, one is still <b>required to move</b> the arrangement of wood <b>six</b> cubits in order to be opposite the Entrance Hall. Therefore, the mishna, which states that the arrangement of wood is four cubits north of the southwest corner, cannot be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 14
The Gemara responds: <b>Do you hold</b> that <b>these four cubits include</b> the <b>cubit</b> of the <b>base</b> of the altar <b>and</b> the <b>cubit</b> of the <b>surrounding ledge</b> of the altar? Actually, the <b>four cubits</b> are <b>aside from</b> the <b>cubit</b> of the <b>base</b> of the altar <b>and</b> the <b>cubit</b> of the <b>surrounding ledge</b> of the altar. Accordingly, the arrangement of wood was actually a total of six cubits from the southwest corner of the altar, and the mishna can be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks why Rav Adda bar Ahava interpreted the mishna to be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda: <b>But let him interpret it</b> to be <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei and</b> explain that the altar is located <b>in the center</b> of the Temple courtyard. The Gemara explains: Rav Adda bar Ahava interpreted the mishna to be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda <b>because we heard that Rabbi Yehuda explicitly</b> said that the altar was positioned <b>in the center</b> of the Temple courtyard, whereas we did not hear that Rabbi Yosei maintains such an opinion.

### Part 16
<b>And Rav Sherevya said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna in <i>Tamid</i>, which holds that the entire altar was located in the northern part of the Temple courtyard? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: Since it is stated: “And you shall set the Basin between the Tent of Meeting</b> and the altar” (Exodus 40:7), and another verse states: <b>“And</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC