
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who designates a sin offering</b> for <b>his</b> performance of an unwitting sin <b>and dies, his son shall not bring it in his stead,</b> neither on behalf of his father nor for his own unwitting sin, even if it was the same transgression. Likewise, <b>one may not bring</b> a sin offering by reassigning it <b>from</b> the <b>sin</b> for which it is designated to atone and sacrificing it <b>for</b> atonement of another <b>sin. Even if he designated</b> a sin offering as atonement <b>for</b> forbidden <b>fat that he</b> unwittingly <b>ate yesterday, he may not bring it</b> as atonement <b>for</b> forbidden <b>fat that he</b> unwittingly <b>ate today, as it is stated:</b> “And he shall bring <b>his</b> sin <b>offering,</b> an unblemished female goat, <b>for his sin</b> that he has sinned” (Leviticus 4:28), indicating that he does not satisfy his obligation <b>until his offering is</b> brought <b>for the sake of</b> the <b>sin</b> for which he designated it.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter,</b> i.e., that a son may not bring his father’s sin offering, derived? The Gemara answers that it is derived <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states with regard to a sin offering: “And he shall bring for <b>his offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:23). This indicates that <b>one fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with his</b> own <b>offering, but he does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering,</b> if his father was obligated to bring a sin offering and died after he designated an animal for this purpose.

### Part 3
One <b>might</b> have thought that one <b>does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering by</b> means of <b>an animal that his father designated,</b> only in a case where the son’s transgression is not equal in severity to his father’s sin, e.g., <b>from a lenient</b> transgression committed by the father <b>for a severe</b> sin of the son, <b>or from a severe</b> transgression of the father <b>for a lenient one</b> of the son. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>he</b> does <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with</b> the <b>offering that his father designated, from a lenient</b> sin <b>for a lenient</b> sin of the son, <b>or from a severe</b> transgression committed by the father <b>for a severe</b> one of the son. Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> a second time: <b>“His offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:28), to emphasize that <b>he fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with his</b> own <b>offering, but he does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering,</b> even for similar transgressions.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that one <b>does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering by</b> means of <b>an animal</b> that the father <b>designated, even from a lenient</b> sin <b>for a lenient</b> one, <b>or from a severe</b> transgression <b>for a severe</b> one, as stated above, <b>as</b> a person <b>cannot shave,</b> i.e., bring the offerings sacrificed, at the end of <b>his term of naziriteship with an animal that his father designated.</b> If the father died, the son cannot bring an animal that the father designated as an offering for the conclusion of his naziriteship.

### Part 5
<b>But</b> one might think that a son can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with money that his father designated</b> for his offering, <b>even from a lenient</b> sin <b>for a severe</b> one, <b>or from a severe</b> transgression <b>for a lenient</b> one, <b>as a person can shave</b> i.e., bring the offerings sacrificed, at the end of <b>his term of naziriteship with the money his father designated</b> for naziriteship <b>when</b> the money <b>is unallocated but not when it is allocated</b> for a specific nazirite offering. Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> again: <b>“His offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:32), indicating that <b>he fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with his</b> own <b>offering, but he does not fulfill</b> his obligation even <b>with</b> money that was designated for <b>his father’s offering.</b>

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> further states: One <b>might</b> have thought that one <b>does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>even with</b> the <b>money that</b> his father <b>designated, even</b> when father and son committed transgressions of the same severity, i.e., <b>from a lenient</b> sin <b>for a lenient</b> one <b>or from a severe</b> transgression <b>for a severe</b> one; <b>but</b> one may <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with</b> the <b>offering that he designated for himself, even from a severe</b> transgression <b>for a lenient</b> one, <b>or from a lenient</b> one <b>for a severe</b> one. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His offering for his sin”</b> (Leviticus 4:28), indicating that he does not fulfill his obligation <b>until</b> his offering <b>is</b> sacrificed <b>for the sake of</b> the specific <b>sin</b> for which it was designated.

### Part 7
Furthermore, one <b>might</b> have thought that one <b>has not fulfilled</b> his obligation <b>to</b> bring <b>an offering</b> for <b>himself with an animal that he designated for himself, even</b> with an animal designated <b>for a lenient</b> sin that is then used <b>for</b> a different <b>lenient</b> sin <b>or from a severe</b> one <b>for</b> a different <b>severe</b> one. This is <b>because if he designated an animal</b> as a sin offering <b>for</b> unintentionally eating forbidden <b>fat and he brought</b> that sin offering <b>for</b> unintentionally consuming <b>blood,</b> or if he designated a sin offering <b>for</b> consuming <b>blood and brought</b> it <b>for</b> the transgression of consuming forbidden <b>fat,</b> it is invalid, <b>as</b> in this case <b>he</b> is <b>not</b> considered to have <b>misused</b> consecrated property <b>and</b> this animal <b>does not atone</b> for him. This statement will be explained below.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>But</b> it might have been thought that one <b>fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with money that he designated for himself,</b> with money designated <b>for a lenient</b> sin <b>for</b> a different <b>lenient</b> sin, <b>or</b> with money designated <b>for a severe</b> sin <b>for</b> another <b>severe</b> sin, <b>or from a severe</b> one <b>for a lenient</b> one, <b>or from a lenient one for a severe</b> one.

### Part 9
The reason is <b>that if he designated money for himself for</b> purchasing a sin offering for unintentionally eating forbidden <b>fat and he</b> instead <b>brought</b> a sin offering with that money <b>for</b> consuming <b>blood; or</b> if he designated money for purchasing a sin offering <b>for</b> the transgression of consuming <b>blood and brought</b> the sin offering <b>for</b> the transgression of consuming forbidden <b>fat,</b> in that case he <b>has misused</b> Temple property, <b>and</b> the money <b>atones</b> for him. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His offering for his sin,”</b> which indicates that he does not fulfill his obligation <b>until his offering,</b> and even the money designated for an offering, <b>is</b> designated <b>for the sake of his</b> particular <b>sin.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>He</b> is <b>not</b> considered to have <b>misused</b> consecrated property <b>and</b> this animal <b>does not atone</b> for him? <b>Rav Shmuel bar Shimi interpreted</b> this <b>before Rav Pappa: This</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: Since</b> one <b>cannot misuse</b> this animal, i.e., an animal consecrated for sacrifice upon the altar cannot be desacralized, <b>so too, one cannot achieve atonement</b> for another sin with that animal. <b>Since it is so,</b> it is clear that one is <b>unable to convert</b> the animal for use as an offering for a different sin.

### Part 11
<b>But</b> with regard to <b>money, since if one</b> unwittingly <b>converted</b> the money for a different use <b>he has misused</b> consecrated property, the money is consequently desacralized, <b>and</b> he is liable to <b>bring an offering</b> for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, therefore one might <b>say</b> that <b>from the outset too,</b> he may use the money to <b>bring</b> an offering for a different sin. Consequently, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that one may not do so.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One may bring a female goat from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female lamb,</b> and <b>a female lamb from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female goat. And</b> likewise, one may bring <b>doves and pigeons from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female lamb and a female goat; and one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>doves and pigeons.</b>

### Part 13
<b>How so? If</b> one unwittingly performed a sin for which he is liable to bring a sliding-scale sin offering, which varies based on economic status (see Leviticus 5:1–13; see also 9a), and he <b>designated</b> money <b>to</b> purchase <b>a female lamb or for a female goat</b> and then <b>became poorer, he may bring a bird,</b> and the remaining money is non-sacred. If <b>he became</b> yet <b>poorer, he may bring one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour. Likewise, if <b>he designated</b> money <b>to</b> purchase <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour and <b>became wealthier, he shall bring a bird.</b> If <b>he became</b> yet <b>wealthier, he shall bring a female lamb or a female goat.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> that are mentioned in the mishna derived? The Gemara answers that they are derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that discusses the sliding-scale offering: It is written with regard to one who brings a lamb for his obligation: “And the priest shall make atonement for him <b>from his sin”</b> (Leviticus 5:6); and it is written with regard to one who brings a bird: “And the priest shall make atonement for him <b>from his sin”</b> (Leviticus 5:10); and it is written with regard to one who brings one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour: <b>“Over his sin”</b> (Leviticus 5:13). <b>What</b> is the meaning of these phrases that <b>the verse states?</b>

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>you say that one may bring a female goat from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female lamb, and a female lamb from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female goat? And</b> likewise, from where is it derived that one may bring <b>doves and pigeons from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>a female lamb and a female goat, and one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering of <b>doves and pigeons?</b>

### Part 16
<b>How so? If</b> a person <b>designated</b> money <b>to</b> purchase <b>a female lamb or to</b> purchase <b>a female goat and</b> then <b>became poorer, he shall bring a bird,</b> and the remaining money is non-sacred. If <b>he became</b> yet <b>poorer, he shall bring one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour. Likewise, if <b>he designated</b> money to purchase <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>and became wealthier, he shall bring a bird.</b> If <b>he became</b> yet <b>wealthier, he shall bring a female lamb or a female goat.</b>

### Part 17
If <b>one designated a female lamb or goat</b> as an offering <b>and it developed a blemish,</b> he must redeem the animal and bring another offering with the money. If he became poorer, <b>he may bring a bird with its money.</b> But if <b>one designated a bird</b> as an offering <b>and it developed a blemish, he may not bring one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>with its money, as there is no</b> possibility of <b>redemption for birds.</b>

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> provides the source for this entire <i>halakha</i>: <b>Therefore,</b> with regard to an offering of a female goat or lamb and a bird offering <b>it is stated: “From his sin,”</b> which indicates that one fulfills his obligation with even part of the money that was designated for his offering. By contrast, with regard to an offering of one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour it is written: <b>“Over his sin,”</b> indicating that if one becomes wealthier he must add to the value of his offering.

### Part 19
<b>And it was necessary</b> for the Torah <b>to write: “From his sin,” with regard to a female lamb or a female goat, and it was necessary to write</b> the same phrase <b>with regard to a bird.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>As, if the verse had written</b> this phrase only <b>with regard to a consecrated female lamb or a female goat, I would say</b> that if one <b>designated</b> money to purchase <b>a female lamb,</b> then <b>when he became poorer he may redeem that money on a bird</b> and <b>bring a bird</b> offering, <b>as a female lamb and a bird are both types of blood</b> offerings.

### Part 20
<b>But</b> with regard to <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour, <b>which is not a type of blood</b> offering but a meal offering, <b>if the verse had not written: “From his sin,” with regard to a bird, I would say</b> that <b>if one designates money for his nest,</b> i.e., pair of birds, <b>and</b> then <b>becomes poorer, he may not bring one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour with that money, <b>as it is not a type of blood</b> offering. <b>Rather, he brings one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>from his house,</b> i.e., with other money, <b>and that money that he designated</b> for his bird pair <b>is allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings. <b>Therefore, the verse repeats</b> and <b>writes: “From his sin,” with regard to a bird, to say that one may also bring one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>from</b> money <b>consecrated</b> for a sin offering <b>of birds.</b>

### Part 21
<b>And</b> with regard to the phrase: “Over his sin,” which is written in connection to the one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour, <b>this</b> is what the verse <b>is saying: When one designates</b> money <b>for</b> an offering of <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour, <b>and before he brought</b> the money to the Temple to purchase the offering <b>he grew wealthier, he must add</b> money <b>to</b> those coins <b>and bring a bird.</b> If <b>he grew</b> even <b>wealthier, he must add</b> money <b>to them and bring a female lamb or a female goat.</b>

### Part 22
<b>And what is the reason</b> that the phrase: <b>“Over his sin,”</b> is <b>written</b> specifically <b>with regard to the one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour? The reason is <b>that if</b> the verse <b>had stated: Over his sin, with regard to a bird, I would say</b> that <b>it is</b> only <b>when one designates money for his nest and</b> then <b>becomes wealthier that one must add</b> money <b>and bring a female lamb or a female goat, as they are both types of blood</b> offerings.

### Part 23
<b>But</b> in a case where <b>one designated money to</b> purchase <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> of fine flour <b>and became wealthier,</b> perhaps he may not add to the money <b>that he designated</b> earlier. And <b>if he did not become much wealthier he</b> now <b>brings a bird, and if he became much wealthier he</b> now <b>brings a female lamb or a female goat,</b> without using the money he had designated for the one-tenth of the ephah of flour. <b>And that money which he</b> initially <b>designated</b> for one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour <b>is allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings. It is <b>for this</b> reason that <b>the verse states: “From his sin,” with regard to that sin offering</b> which one brings when <b>rich and</b> when <b>poor,</b> i.e., a lamb and a bird, <b>and: “Over his sin,” with regard to</b> that which he brings when he is <b>exceedingly poor,</b> i.e., one-tenth of an ephah of fine flour, <b>so</b> that one should <b>interpret</b> the verses <b>as we said,</b> that in either case he adds to the money he had designated to bring the more expensive offering.

### Part 24
<b>Rabbi Elazar says</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya says: A wealthy person who defiles the Temple,</b> i.e., he enters the Temple while ritually impure, is obligated to bring a female lamb or goat as his offering in accordance with his wealth. If <b>he designated a nest,</b> i.e., a pair of birds,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC