### Part 1
This is referring to a case <b>where he intended</b> both <b>to extinguish and to kindle.</b> The Torah singles out the labor of kindling on Shabbat, as it is written: “You shall not kindle fire in all your dwelling places on the day of Shabbat” (Exodus 35:3). The Sages disagree with regard to the interpretation of this verse. <b>As the first <i>tanna</i> holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, who says: Kindling was</b> singled <b>out</b> from the general category of prohibited labors in order to teach that it is unlike other labors, teaching <b>that</b> it is a regular <b>prohibition,</b> i.e., it is punishable only with lashes and does not entail <i>karet</i> or stoning for an intentional transgression, or a sin offering for an unwitting transgression. Consequently, he is not liable to bring a sin offering for the kindling.

### Part 2
<b>And Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok, holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan, who says: Kindling was</b> singled <b>out</b> in the Torah <b>to divide</b> the various primary categories of labor and to establish liability for the performance of each of them. According to this opinion, the prescribed punishments for kindling are the same as for the rest of the prohibited labors.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said</b> yet another explanation of the disagreement in the <i>baraita</i>: The difference <b>between them</b> involves a case where one intended to ignite the lower coals and subsequently extinguish the upper coals, and instead he extinguished the upper ones and ignited the lower ones simultaneously. Since he <b>performed</b> the extinguishing <b>first</b> and did not perform it after he ignited as he had intended, the first <i>tanna</i> rules he is liable to bring only one sin offering. By contrast, Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok, maintains there is no exemption for performing the prohibited labors in a different sequence than intended.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> another explanation: The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where he intended to extinguish</b> a flame <b>and</b> he was not aware that the bottom coals would be kindled. Rather, <b>they ignited by themselves,</b> as he moved aside and extinguished the upper coals. <b>And the first <i>tanna</i> holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who says:</b> If one commits <b>an unintentional act,</b> an action from which an unintended prohibited result ensues on Shabbat, as he did not intend to perform a prohibited labor, he is <b>exempt. And Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok, holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says:</b> One who commits <b>an unintentional act</b> from which a prohibited labor inadvertently results is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Concerning <b>one who stokes coals on Shabbat</b> with the intention to move them in order <b>to be warmed by them, and they ignited by themselves; it is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> that he is <b>liable and it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that he is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara explains: The reason for <b>that which is taught</b> in the first <i>baraita</i>, i.e., that he is <b>liable,</b> is that this <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that one who performs <b>a labor</b> on Shabbat that is <b>not necessary for its own sake,</b> i.e., he performs the labor for a purpose other than the direct result of the action, is held <b>liable for it. And</b> the reason for <b>that which is taught</b> in the second <i>baraita</i>, i.e., that he is <b>exempt,</b> is that <b>he holds</b> that one who performs <b>a labor</b> that is <b>not necessary for its own sake is exempt</b> from liability <b>for it.</b>

### Part 6
end of chapter

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one consumed</b> an olive-bulk of <b>blood</b> that spurted during the <b>slaughter of a domesticated animal, an undomesticated animal, or a bird, whether</b> it is <b>a kosher or non-kosher</b> species; or if one consumed <b>blood</b> that flowed after <b>stabbing</b> an animal or killing it in a manner other than by ritual slaughter, or <b>blood</b> that spurted after <b>ripping</b> the animal’s windpipe or gullet, or <b>blood</b> that spurted during <b>bloodletting with which the soul departs, one is liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i> <b>for</b> consuming <b>it</b> intentionally or to bring a sin offering for consuming it unwittingly.

### Part 8
But with regard to <b>blood of the spleen, blood of the heart, blood of eggs, blood of grasshoppers,</b> or <b>blood of exudate [<i>tamtzit</i>],</b> i.e., that oozes from the neck of the animal after the initial spurt of its slaughter concludes,<b>one is not liable for</b> consuming <b>it. Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> one <b>liable in</b> the case of <b>blood of exudate.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And you shall consume no manner of blood”</b> (Leviticus 7:26). <b>I</b> would <b>derive</b> from here that <b>even</b> with regard to the <b>blood of bipeds,</b> i.e., human beings, and the <b>blood of eggs,</b> the <b>blood of grasshoppers,</b> and the <b>blood of fish, all</b> these are <b>included</b> in the prohibition against consuming blood. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Whether it is of bird or of animal”</b> (Leviticus 7:26).

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> explains the derivation from the verse: <b>Just as birds and animals are unique</b> in <b>that they have</b> the capacity for both <b>a light</b> form of <b>ritual impurity,</b> if they become impure after they are slaughtered, in which case they are considered impure food, <b>and a severe</b> form of <b>impurity,</b> if they die without valid ritual slaughter, <b>and they have</b> the possibility of being <b>forbidden or permitted, and they are a type of meat, so too, everything</b> that has the capacity for both <b>a light</b> form of <b>impurity</b> and a severe form of ritual impurity, and has the possibility of being forbidden or permitted, and is a type of meat, is included in the prohibition.

### Part 11
<b>I will</b> therefore <b>exclude</b> the <b>blood of bipeds, as they have</b> the capacity for <b>a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity,</b> i.e., the impurity of a corpse, <b>but they do not have</b> the capacity for <b>a light</b> form of <b>ritual impurity,</b> since the <i>halakhot</i> of the impurity of food do not apply to the human body.