
### Part 1
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The leftover of the incense,</b> from the three extra <i>maneh</i> each year, would accumulate so that <b>once every sixty or every seventy years they would blend</b> the incense for the new year <b>by halves,</b> i.e., they required only half the usual amount, and the other half would come from the leftover incense. <b>Therefore,</b> a private <b>individual who blended</b> incense <b>by halves</b> in order to smell it is <b>liable</b> for violating the prohibition: “And the incense that you shall prepare, according to its composition you shall not prepare for yourselves, it shall be to you sacred for the Lord” (Exodus 30:37). This is <b>the statement of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, who said</b> it <b>in the name of the deputy</b> High Priest.

### Part 2
Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel added: <b>But I did not hear</b> the same with regard to the blending of <b>one-third or one-quarter</b> of the amount of the incense. <b>And the Rabbis say: Every day</b> one <b>would prepare</b> incense for the day <b>according to its composition,</b> i.e., in the appropriate ratio for each ingredient, <b>and he would bring</b> it <b>in</b> the Sanctuary and burn it on the golden altar.

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: This opinion of the Rabbis <b>supports</b> the opinion <b>of Rava, as Rava says:</b> With regard to <b>the anointing oil that one blended in parts,</b> i.e., in any amount, in order to apply it to the skin, he is exempt, but if one blended the incense to smell it, even in parts, he is <b>liable, as it is written: “And the incense that you shall prepare,</b> according to its composition you shall not prepare for yourselves” (Exodus 30:37). This teaches that <b>any</b> incense of the amount <b>that you prepare</b> for the Sanctuary is prohibited, as <b>it is possible to burn a portion,</b> i.e., one-half of the <i>maneh</i> that must be prepared, <b>in the morning, and a portion in the afternoon.</b>

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They would return</b> the incense <b>to the mortar</b> to regrind it <b>twice a year; in the summer</b> they would place it <b>scattered so</b> that <b>it should not grow moldy,</b> while <b>in the rainy season</b> it was kept <b>piled, in order that its scent should not dissipate. And when one would grind</b> the incense he would <b>say: Crush well, well crush;</b> this is <b>the statement of Abba Yosei ben Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> as for the <b>extra three <i>maneh</i></b> of incense <b>from which the High Priest would bring in his handful</b> required <b>on Yom Kippur, one would place it in the mortar on Yom Kippur eve and grind it thoroughly so that</b> the incense <b>should be extra fine. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states, with regard to the incense on Yom Kippur, that it shall be: <b>“Finely ground</b> aromatic incense” (Leviticus 16:12). <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> this? <b>Isn’t it already stated</b> with regard to all incense: <b>“And you shall grind some of it finely”</b> (Exodus 30:36)? <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state “finely ground”?</b> This teaches that on Yom Kippur one must grind the incense more, <b>in order that it should be extra fine.</b>

### Part 6
<b>The Master said</b> earlier: <b>When one would grind</b> the incense he would <b>say: Crush well, well crush.</b> The Gemara notes that this <b>supports</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Just as speech is detrimental to wine,</b> and therefore no words were spoken during its preparation, <b>so too, speech is beneficial to</b> the preparation of <b>the spices</b> of the incense.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The <b>eleven ingredients</b> of the incense <b>were stated</b> by God <b>to Moses at Sinai,</b> as not all of them are specified in the verses. <b>Rav Huna said: What is the verse</b> from which it is derived? “Take for you spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; spices with pure frankincense” (Exodus 30:34). The plural form of the phrase: <b>“Take for you spices”</b> is referring to <b>two</b> ingredients; <b>“stacte, and onycha, and galbanum”</b> are three ingredients; <b>this</b> results in a total of <b>five; and</b> the <b>other</b> mention of <b>“spices”</b> indicates that there are another <b>five,</b> i.e., that one should double the previous total, and <b>this</b> results in a total of <b>ten. And</b> finally, <b>“pure frankincense”</b> is <b>one,</b> and <b>this</b> results in a total of <b>eleven.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> the first mention of <b>“spices”</b> is <b>a generalization; “stacte, and onycha, and galbanum,”</b> is <b>a detail;</b> and when the verse repeats <b>“spices” it</b> is <b>then generalized</b> again. This is the hermeneutical principle of: <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization,</b> and therefore <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail: Just as the detail is explicit</b> in that it is referring to <b>an item whose smoke rises and its scent diffuses, so too,</b> it includes <b>any item whose smoke rises and its scent diffuses.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And if you would say: If</b> that is <b>so,</b> that this is a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization, then <b>let the verse write</b> only <b>one detail</b> of the three; the fact is that <b>indeed [<i>la’ei</i>],</b> all the details <b>are necessary. As, if</b> the Torah <b>had written</b> merely <b>“stacte,” I would say</b> that spices from <b>a type of tree, yes,</b> they may serve as ingredients of the incense, <b>but</b> spices <b>grown from the ground, no,</b> they may not serve this purpose. It is <b>due to that</b> reason that the verse <b>wrote “and onycha.” And if</b> the Torah <b>had written</b> only <b>“and onycha,” I would say</b> that spices <b>grown from the ground, yes,</b> they may serve as ingredients of the incense, <b>but</b> spices from <b>a type of tree,</b> one might <b>say no,</b> they may not serve this purpose. It is <b>due to that</b> reason that the verse <b>wrote “stacte.”</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara concludes its rejection of the suggested resolution: <b>And</b> as for the mention of <b>galbanum,</b> this <b>comes for itself,</b> i.e., one would not otherwise have included this ingredient, <b>because</b> unlike the other spices <b>its smell is foul.</b> Consequently, all these details are necessary, and therefore it is possible to expound the verse as a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization, which means that the difficulty remains: How is it derived that there were eleven spices? The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> that the verse is a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization, there is no need for the first mention of “spices,” as one could <b>derive</b> the generalization from the phrase <b>“Take for you.”</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara raises another difficulty: How is it derived from the verse that there are eleven spices? <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that <b>the last</b> mention of <b>“spices”</b> signifies <b>two</b> ingredients, just <b>like the first</b> mention of <b>“spices”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let</b> the verse <b>write “spices”</b> and <b>“spices” together, and afterward let it write “stacte, and onycha, and galbanum.”</b> The fact that the second mention of “spices” is written after all those specified ingredients indicates that its number corresponds to the total of all of them.

### Part 12
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael teaches</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The first mention of <b>“spices”</b> is <b>a generalization; “stacte, and onycha, and galbanum,”</b> is <b>a detail;</b> and when the verse repeats <b>“spices” it then generalized</b> again. This is <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization,</b> and <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail: Just as the detail is explicit</b> in that it is referring to <b>an item whose smoke rises and its scent diffuses, so too,</b> it includes <b>any item whose smoke rises and its scent diffuses.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Or</b> perhaps <b>it is only</b> that the second <b>generalization</b> is <b>in</b> the same category as the <b>first generalization, and</b> the second <b>detail</b> is <b>in</b> the same category as the <b>first detail. You</b> must <b>say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case; <b>consequently, you cannot learn in accordance with the last version,</b> but <b>rather</b> you must learn <b>in accordance with the first version.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara clarifies the latter clause of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said: Or</b> perhaps <b>it is only</b> that the second <b>generalization</b> is <b>in</b> the same category as the <b>first generalization, and</b> the second <b>detail</b> is <b>in</b> the same category as the <b>first detail. You</b> must <b>say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case; <b>consequently, you cannot learn</b> in accordance with the last version, but rather you must learn in accordance with the first version. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>the difficulty</b> alluded to here by the <i>baraita</i>? The Gemara explains that <b>this is what</b> is <b>difficult to</b> the <i>tanna</i>: Let us say that <b>the last</b> mention of <b>“spices”</b> is referring to <b>two</b> ingredients, just <b>as the first</b> mention of <b>“spices”</b> is referring to <b>two</b> ingredients. The <i>tanna</i> <b>then answered as we answered</b> earlier, <b>that if so, let</b> the verse <b>write: Spices, spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum,</b> in that order.

### Part 15
The Gemara further asks: <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the suggestion: The second <b>detail</b> is <b>in</b> the same category as the <b>first detail?</b> The Gemara answers that <b>this is what</b> is <b>difficult to</b> the <i>tanna</i>: Since it is derived by the principle of a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization that all items similar to those specified in the verse are included, as stated earlier that spices from <b>types of trees are derived from</b> the mention of <b>stacte and</b> spices <b>grown from the ground are derived from</b> the mention of <b>onycha,</b> one might say as follows: <b>Let them also learn from</b> the mention of <b>pure frankincense, which includes one aspect,</b> i.e., <b>that</b> one should <b>include an item whose scent diffuses, even though its smoke</b> does not <b>rise.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara continues: The <i>tanna</i> <b>then said</b> that this cannot be the case, as <b>if so, let the verse write “pure frankincense” in the middle,</b> between the two mentions of “spices,” alongside stacte, onycha, and galbanum, <b>and</b> then one would <b>derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from it.</b> Since the frankincense is mentioned after the second mention of “spices,” it is not part of the generalization, detail, and generalization.

### Part 17
The Gemara questions this claim: <b>If</b> the verse were to <b>write “pure frankincense” in the middle, there</b> would be <b>twelve</b> ingredients in the incense, as that ingredient would also be included in the doubling of the second mention of “spices.” The Gemara explains: <b>If so,</b> that frankincense is meant to be one of the details, <b>let the verse write “pure frankincense” in the middle and “galbanum” at the end,</b> after the second mention of “spices.” Since the verse placed frankincense at the end, one cannot derive <i>halakhot</i> from it as a detail. <b>Reish Lakish says</b> that this <i>halakha</i> can be derived <b>from</b> the word incense <b>itself: What</b> is the meaning of the <b>term incense [<i>ketoret</i>]?</b> It means <b>an item that</b> produces <b>smoke [<i>koter</i>] and rises.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rav Ḥana bar Bizna says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon Ḥasida says: Any fast that does not include</b> the participation of some <b>of the sinners of the Jewish people is not a fast, as the smell of galbanum is foul and</b> yet <b>the verse lists it with the ingredients of the incense. Abaye says</b> that this is derived <b>from here:</b> “It is He Who builds His upper chambers in the heavens <b>and has established His bundle on the earth”</b> (Amos 9:6), i.e., when the people are united as a bundle, including their sinners, they are established upon the earth.

### Part 19
§ The mishna includes in its list of those liable to receive <i>karet</i>: <b>And one who applies the anointing oil</b> to his skin. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who applies the anointing oil to animals or vessels</b> is <b>exempt,</b> and one who applies it <b>to gentiles or to corpses</b> is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara objects: <b>Granted,</b> one is exempt in the case of <b>animals and vessels, as it is written: “Upon the flesh of a person it shall not be applied”</b> (Exodus 30:32), <b>and animals and vessels are not</b> the flesh of <b>a person.</b> It is <b>also</b> clear why one is <b>exempt</b> if he applies it to <b>a corpse, as once someone has died,</b> the body <b>is called a corpse and not a person. But</b> if one applies anointing oil to <b>gentiles why</b> is he <b>exempt? Aren’t they</b> included in the meaning of the term <b>person [<i>adam</i>]?</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara explains: <b>Indeed</b> they are not. <b>As it is written: “And you My sheep, the sheep of My pasture, are people [<i>adam</i>]”</b> (Ezekiel 34:31), from which it is derived that <b>you,</b> the Jewish people, <b>are called <i>adam</i>, but gentiles are not called <i>adam</i>.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara raises an objection based on a verse discussing captives taken during the war against Midian. <b>But isn’t it written: “And the people [<i>nefesh adam</i>] were sixteen thousand”</b> (Numbers 31:40). This indicates that gentiles are also referred to as <i>adam</i>. The Sage who was asked this <b>said to</b> the questioner: <b>That</b> term serves <b>to exclude,</b> i.e., to distinguish between the people who were taken captive and the <b>animals</b> that were taken as spoils of war, which are also mentioned in that verse.

### Part 22
The Gemara raises another difficulty: <b>But isn’t it written: “And should I not have pity on Nineveh,</b> that great city, wherein are more than one hundred and twenty thousand people [<i>adam</i>] who cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and also much cattle” (Jonah 4:11). The inhabitants of Nineveh were gentiles. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> term serves <b>to exclude</b> them from the <b>animals</b> mentioned in the verse.

### Part 23
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead a different reason why one who applies anointing oil to gentiles is exempt. This is <b>as a <i>tanna</i> teaches before Rabbi Elazar: Anyone included in</b> the obligation not to <b>apply</b> anointing oil to himself or others <b>is</b> likewise <b>included</b> as subject to the prohibition of: <b>It shall not be applied,</b> i.e., it is prohibited to apply the oil to him. <b>And anyone not included in</b> the obligation not <b>to apply</b> anointing oil to himself or others <b>is not included</b> as the object of: <b>It shall not be applied.</b> Only Jews are included in the prohibition against applying the anointing oil.

### Part 24
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who applies the anointing oil to animals or vessels,</b> or <b>to gentiles or</b> on <b>corpses,</b> is <b>exempt.</b> If one applies the anointing oil <b>to kings or to priests</b> after they had already been anointed, <b>Rabbi Meir deems</b> him <b>liable and Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> him <b>exempt. And how much</b> oil must one <b>apply</b> to his skin <b>and be liable? Rabbi Meir says: Any amount. Rabbi Yehuda says: An olive-bulk.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t Rabbi Yehuda say</b> that he is entirely <b>exempt?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> him <b>exempt</b> that is <b>with regard to</b> applying oil to <b>kings and priests,</b> whereas in the case <b>of an ordinary</b> person Rabbi Yehuda <b>deems</b> him <b>liable.</b>

### Part 25
The Gemara asks: <b>Concerning what</b> matter do <b>Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda disagree? Rav Yosef says</b> that <b>they disagree concerning this</b> issue: <b>Rabbi Meir holds</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is based on the fact that <b>it is written: “Upon the flesh of a person it shall not be applied”</b> (Exodus 30:32), <b>and it is written: “Or whoever places any of it upon a stranger,</b> he shall be cut off from his people” (Exodus 30:33). The wording of the prohibition teaches with regard to the liability to receive <i>karet</i>: <b>Just as</b> the act of <b>applying</b> the oil to the skin prohibited by the verse refers to the application of <b>any amount,</b> as there is no specific measure stated in this regard, <b>so too,</b> the act of <b>placing</b> the oil mentioned with regard to <i>karet</i> refers to <b>any amount.</b>

### Part 26
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds: We derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>placing [<i>netina</i>] that</b> is stated here, which is <b>upon a stranger,</b> i.e., one upon whom there is no mitzva to place the anointing oil, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>giving [<i>netina</i>] in general. Just as giving in general</b> is with the amount of <b>an olive-bulk, so too, placing</b> anointing oil <b>upon a stranger</b> is with the amount of <b>an olive-bulk.</b> The principle that giving [<i>netina</i>] in general is with the amount of an olive-bulk is derived from the verse: “And if a man eats a sacred thing in error then he shall add a fifth part in addition to it, and shall give [<i>venatan</i>] to the priest the sacred item” (Leviticus 22:14). This verse is referring to an item given for eating, and the minimum amount that must be consumed for an act to be considered eating is an olive-bulk. Rav Yosef adds: <b>But</b> with regard to the mitzva of <b>applying</b> the oil in order <b>to anoint kings and priests, everyone agrees</b> it is accomplished with <b>any amount.</b>

### Part 27
<b>And Rav Yosef</b> further <b>says: With regard to what</b> matter do <b>Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda disagree</b> in the case <b>of kings and priests</b> who had already been anointed? <b>Rabbi Meir holds</b> that since <b>it is written: “Or whoever puts any of it upon a stranger,” and</b> right <b>now</b> the <b>king and priest are strangers</b> because the mitzva to anoint them no longer applies, they are included in the prohibition. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds:</b> For the purposes of this prohibition <b>we require that</b> the individual in question <b>be a stranger from his beginning to his end, and</b> the <b>king and priest were initially not strangers.</b>

### Part 28
<b>Rav Ika, son of Rav Ami, said: And</b> Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda both <b>follow their</b> lines of <b>reasoning, as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 7:2):

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC