
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> In continuation of the discussion of the mishna, it <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai:</b> The verse <b>states:</b> “And when the days of her purification are fulfilled, for a son or <b>for a daughter”</b> (Leviticus 12:6). The entire clause: “For a son or for a daughter,” is superfluous and serves <b>to include the night</b> preceding the <b>eighty-first</b> day, i.e., if she has a miscarriage at that point she is obligated to bring another offering.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Hoshaya would regularly</b> study <b>before bar Kappara. He</b> then <b>left him and came</b> to study <b>before Rabbi Ḥiyya. One day</b> Rabbi Hoshaya <b>encountered</b> bar Kappara and <b>raised</b> the following <b>dilemma before him:</b> With regard to <b>a man who experiences a gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>zav</i>],</b> who is obligated to bring an offering on the eighth day of his purification for three discharges, if <b>he saw</b> another <b>three sightings,</b> i.e., experienced an additional three discharges, <b>on the night</b> preceding the <b>eighth</b> day, <b>what do Beit Hillel say about this matter?</b> Must the <i>zav</i> bring a separate offering for this impurity as he would if he experienced the discharges on the eighth day?

### Part 3
Rabbi Hoshaya explains the sides of the dilemma: Is the <b>reason</b> for the ruling <b>of Beit Hillel that</b> a woman <b>who miscarries on the night</b> preceding the eighty-first day must bring an additional offering <b>due to</b> the derivation from the verse, <b>as it is written:</b> “For a son or <b>for a daughter”? But</b> with regard to <b>a <i>zav</i> who saw three sightings on the night</b> preceding the <b>eighth</b> day, <b>they</b> deem him <b>exempt, as</b> in this case there are <b>no superfluous verses</b> from which one could derive this obligation. <b>Or perhaps</b> there <b>is no difference</b> between these <i>halakhot</i>, and just as a woman who miscarried on the night preceding the eighty-first day after childbirth must bring another offering, as it is the night preceding the day upon which she can bring her offering, a <i>zav</i> must likewise bring another offering for this impurity.

### Part 4
<b>Bar Kappara said to</b> Rabbi Hoshaya: <b>What does</b> the <b>Babylonian,</b> i.e., Rabbi Ḥiyya, who came from Babylonia, <b>say about this matter? Rabbi Hoshaya was silent and did not say anything. Bar Kappara said to him:</b> Do <b>we require the statement of Iyya,</b> i.e., Ḥiyya? <b>Let us review the earlier</b> ruling, as the <i>baraita</i> teaches that the verse that <b>states:</b> “For a son or <b>for a daughter”</b> (Leviticus 12:6), serves <b>to include the night of</b> the <b>eighty-first</b> day. This indicates that the <i>halakha</i> applies only in the case of a woman after childbirth.

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> this dilemma <b>is subject</b> to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> With regard to <b>a <i>zav</i> who saw three sightings on the night</b> preceding the <b>eighth</b> day, it <b>is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> that he <b>brings</b> an additional offering, <b>and</b> it <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that he <b>does not bring</b> another offering. <b>What, is it not</b> the case that this <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>? As,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>who taught</b> that he <b>brings</b> an additional offering <b>holds</b> that <b>night</b> is <b>not</b> considered part of a date <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived, and therefore it is as though the eighth day itself has begun; <b>and</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>who taught</b> that he <b>does not bring</b> another offering <b>holds</b> that <b>night</b> is considered part of a date <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived, and consequently it is not yet time to sacrifice his first offering of a <i>zav</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna bar Aḥa said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: These <i>tanna’im</i></b> both <b>hold</b> that <b>night</b> is considered part of a date <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived, and therefore a <i>zav</i> who experienced three discharges on the night preceding the eighth day does not bring another offering. <b>And</b> the ruling of <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>, <b>which taught</b> that he <b>brings</b> an additional offering, is stated <b>with regard to a <i>zav</i> who experienced two sightings.</b> Since this <i>zav</i> has completed his purification process, as he is not obligated to bring an offering, these discharges constitute a new instance of ritual impurity. <b>And</b> the ruling of <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i>, <b>which taught</b> that he <b>does not bring</b> another offering, is stated <b>with regard to a <i>zav</i> who</b> had <b>experienced three sightings.</b> This <i>zav</i> must bring an offering, and the time for the offering has not yet arrived on the eighth night. Therefore, he is not obligated to bring another offering.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty: If the ruling of that <i>baraita</i> is stated with regard to <b>a <i>zav</i> who experienced two sightings, what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> this <i>halakha</i>? It is obvious that this is a new instance of ritual impurity. The Gemara explains: <b>This</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us:</b> It is <b>specifically</b> if this <i>zav</i> <b>saw</b> a discharge <b>on the night</b> preceding the <b>eighth</b> day that he must bring an offering; <b>but</b> if he saw a discharge <b>on</b> the <b>seventh day</b> he is <b>not</b> obligated to bring an offering. This is because the <i>tanna</i> of this <i>baraita</i> <b>holds: Any sighting</b> of <i>ziva</i> <b>that negates</b> the days of purity, i.e., which causes the <i>zav</i> to have to count seven clean days afresh, <b>does not bring</b> him <b>to</b> the point of being liable to bring another <b>offering.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava said: Why did you interpret that which is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, i.e., that he <b>does not bring</b> another offering, as stating a ruling <b>with regard to a <i>zav</i> who experienced three sightings?</b> If that is correct, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> this example <b>in</b> the list that appears in a mishna from the next chapter (9a): There are <b>five</b> people who <b>bring one offering for multiple transgressions,</b> i.e., for violating the same transgression several times. The Gemara explains: The <i>tanna</i> did not include this case in that list because he could <b>not</b> state this <i>halakha</i> as <b>a definitive</b> ruling. <b>As Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If the <i>zav</i> <b>saw one</b> discharge <b>at night and</b> then <b>two on the</b> eighth <b>day,</b> he <b>brings</b> an additional offering for these discharges. By contrast, if he saw <b>two</b> discharges <b>at night and one in the day,</b> he <b>does not bring</b> an additional offering.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yosef said: Know that</b> if a <i>zav</i> saw <b>one</b> discharge <b>at night and two in the day</b> he <b>brings</b> an additional offering. This is <b>because</b> the <b>first sighting</b> of any <i>zav</i> is considered <b>merely semen,</b> since one who has a single discharge of <i>ziva</i> immerses on that day and is rendered ritually pure at sundown, like one who experiences a seminal emission. <b>And yet</b> if he <b>sees two other</b> discharges <b>they combine</b> with the first one <b>to</b> establish <b>him</b> as a <i>zav</i> and render him liable to bring an offering. The same applies in this case with regard to the eighth day.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Sheshet, son of Rav Idi, said: Are the cases comparable?</b> With regard to the <b>first sighting of a <i>zav</i>, he saw it at a time of</b> potential <b>liability</b> to bring an offering, which is why it combines with the next two discharges. By contrast, in a case where a <i>zav</i> sees <b>one</b> discharge <b>at night</b> preceding the eighth day, <b>since he saw it</b> when it was <b>not the time of</b> potential <b>liability</b> to bring an offering for the subsequent two sightings, as one who sees three discharges on the night preceding the eighth day does not bring an additional offering, <b>were it not</b> for the fact <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan teaches us that it combines</b> with the other two discharges <b>I would say</b> it <b>does not combine</b> with them.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And does Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> actually <b>say</b> that <b>night</b> is considered part of a date <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived, as indicated by his ruling that if a <i>zav</i> experienced two discharges at night and one in the daytime he does not bring an additional offering?

### Part 12
<b>But doesn’t Ḥizkiyya say</b> that if a nazirite contracted ritual impurity through contact with a corpse and underwent the purification rites, after which he must bring an offering on the eighth day, and he again <b>became ritually impure on the</b> eighth <b>day</b> itself, he <b>brings</b> a second set of offerings. But if he became ritually impure <b>on the night</b> preceding the eighth day he <b>does not bring</b> an additional set of offerings, because he could not have brought the offering at night. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Even</b> if the nazirite became ritually impure <b>on the night</b> preceding the eighth day, he <b>brings</b> a second set of offerings. This indicates that according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, night is not considered part of a date whose time has not yet arrived.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that if a <i>zav</i> experienced <b>two</b> discharges <b>at night and one on the</b> eighth <b>day</b> he <b>does not bring</b> an additional offering, he spoke <b>according to the statement of the one who says</b> that <b>night</b> is considered part of a date <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived. He himself maintains that even if a <i>zav</i> experienced all three discharges at night he must bring an additional offering.

### Part 14
The Gemara objects: If he spoke only <b>according to the statement of the one who says</b> that night is considered part of a date whose time has not yet arrived, it is <b>obvious</b> that no new offerings are required. What novelty did Rabbi Yoḥanan intend to express? The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for him</b> to teach the first case, of a <i>zav</i> who <b>saw one</b> discharge <b>at night and two in the day. Lest you say: Since he saw</b> the one at night <b>when it was not the time of</b> incurring <b>liability</b> to bring an offering, <b>it should not combine</b> with the other two discharges. Rabbi Yoḥanan therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the discharges do combine with each other.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>a woman who has in her</b> case <b>uncertainty</b> concerning <b>five births, and</b> likewise a woman with regard to whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> concerning <b>five</b> irregular <b>discharges</b> of blood from the uterus [<i>ziva</i>], <b>she brings one offering, and</b> then <b>she may partake of</b> the meat of <b>offerings. And the remaining</b> offerings <b>are not an obligation for her.</b> If she experienced <b>five definite discharges of a <i>zava</i> or five definite births, she brings one offering, and</b> then <b>she may partake of</b> the meat of <b>offerings. And the remaining</b> offerings <b>are an obligation for her.</b>

### Part 16
There was <b>an incident where</b> the price of <b>nests,</b> i.e., pairs of birds, <b>stood in Jerusalem at one gold dinar,</b> as the great demand for birds for the offerings of a woman after childbirth and a <i>zava</i> led to an increase in the price. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said:</b> I swear by <b>this abode</b> of the Divine Presence that <b>I will not lie</b> down <b>tonight until</b> the price of nests <b>will be in</b> silver <b>dinars. Ultimately, he entered the court and taught: A woman who has in her</b> case <b>five definite discharges of a <i>zava</i> or five definite births brings one offering, and</b> then <b>she may partake of</b> the meat of <b>offerings. And the remaining</b> offerings <b>are not an obligation for her. And</b> as a result, the price of the <b>nests stood that day at one-quarter</b> of a silver dinar, as the demand for nests decreased.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 1:10): If a woman has the obligations of <b>five definite births and five uncertain discharges of a <i>zava</i>, or five definite births and five uncertain births, she brings two nests, one for the definite</b> obligation <b>and one for the uncertain</b> obligation. That which she brought <b>for</b> the <b>definite</b> obligation is <b>eaten</b> by the priests, <b>and the remaining</b> offerings <b>are an obligation for her.</b> That which she brought <b>for</b> the <b>uncertain</b> obligation is <b>not eaten, and the remaining</b> offerings <b>are not an obligation for her.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says:</b> With regard to offerings brought <b>for</b> the <b>definite</b> obligation, <b>she should say:</b> I am bringing the offering <b>for the last</b> definite obligation, <b>and she is exempt</b> from bringing the rest of the offerings. The reason is so that she should not think that no atonement is required for the others. With regard to offerings brought <b>for</b> the <b>uncertain</b> obligation, <b>if there is a definite</b> obligation <b>among</b> the uncertain offerings <b>she should say:</b> I am bringing it <b>for the definite</b> obligation, <b>and she is exempt</b> from the rest. <b>But if</b> there is <b>no</b> definite obligation <b>she should say:</b> I am bringing the offering <b>for</b> any <b>one of them,</b> not necessarily for the last one, <b>and she is exempt. Rabbi Akiva says: Whether</b> she brings her offering <b>for the definite</b> obligation or <b>whether</b> she brings it <b>for the uncertain</b> obligation, <b>she should say:</b> I am bringing it <b>for one of them, and she is exempt.</b>

### Part 19
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to Rav Pappa: I will say</b> a statement <b>to you in the name of Rava:</b> With regard to <b>these <i>tanna’im</i>, with regard to what</b> matter do they <b>disagree?</b> Their disagreement is <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri,</b> who requires her to bring the offering for her definite obligation for the last definite obligation, <b>compares</b> the offerings of a woman after childbirth <b>to a sin offering</b> brought for a transgression. <b>As, one who is liable</b> to bring <b>five sin offerings</b> does not achieve atonement <b>until he brings all of them, and</b> only the offering that he brings at the <b>end atones for him. Here too,</b> it <b>is no different,</b> and therefore she achieves atonement and may consume sacrificial food only if she brings an offering for her last obligation.

### Part 20
<b>And Rabbi Akiva compares</b> the offerings of a woman after childbirth <b>to immersions</b> in a ritual bath. <b>As</b> with regard to <b>one who is obligated</b> to perform <b>five immersions, once he</b> has <b>immersed one time he is purified. Here too,</b> it <b>is no different,</b> and consequently as soon as she brings an offering for any of the obligations she is ritually pure and is permitted to partake of sacrificial food.

### Part 21
<b>Rav Pappa said to</b> Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak: <b>If</b> it <b>enters your mind</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri compares</b> the offerings of a woman after childbirth <b>to a sin offering, why</b> then, with regard to offerings brought <b>for</b> the <b>uncertain</b> obligation, <b>should she say:</b> I am bringing it <b>for</b> any <b>one of them, and she is exempt? If one who is obligated</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC