
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the issue of whether one brings a provisional guilt offering for an uncertain misuse of consecrated property, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Immediately following the passage in the Torah discussing a guilt offering for misuse of consecrated property the Torah introduces the <i>halakhot</i> of a provisional guilt offering by stating: <b>“And if anyone</b> sin” (Leviticus 5:17). The term “and” serves <b>to render</b> one <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering for uncertain misuse</b> of consecrated property; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. And the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt</b> in such a case.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that they disagree about this</b> following method of halakhic derivation: <b>That Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that when the Torah connects two topics with the term “and” <b>one learns</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>earlier</b> passage <b>from</b> those in the <b>later</b> passage. Consequently, it can be derived that one who is uncertain about whether he misused consecrated property must bring a provisional guilt offering. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>one does not learn</b> the <i>halakhot</i> in the <b>earlier</b> passage <b>from</b> those of the <b>later</b> passage.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b> In fact, <b>everyone</b> agrees that <b>one learns</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>earlier</b> passage <b>from</b> those of the <b>later</b> passage, <b>as if</b> one does not say <b>so, you will not find</b> a source for the requirement <b>that a young bull</b> brought as a burnt offering must be slaughtered in the <b>north</b> section of the Temple courtyard. This is derived from the fact that the Torah states the <i>halakhot</i> of a young bull brought as a burnt offering (Leviticus 1:3–9) and then states: “And if his offering is of the flock, from the sheep or from the goats, as a burnt offering, an unblemished male he shall present it, and he shall slaughter it on the side of the altar northward” (Leviticus 1:10–11).

### Part 4
<b>Rather, here,</b> in the case of one who is uncertain whether he misused consecrated property, <b>this is</b> the <b>reason that the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt</b> from bringing a provisional guilt offering: It is <b>because they derive</b> the details of the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the provisional guilt offering written in the verse: “And if anyone sin, and perform one of all the <b>commandments</b> of the Lord that are not to be performed” (Leviticus 5:17), by means of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the verse stated with regard to <b>a sin offering:</b> “And if any one of the common people sin through error, in his performance of any of the <b>commandments</b> of the Lord that may not be performed” (Leviticus 4:27).

### Part 5
The verbal analogy indicates that <b>just as there,</b> the sin offering is brought only for <b>an act that renders one liable to</b> be punished with <b><i>karet</i> for its intentional</b> violation <b>and</b> liable to bring <b>a sin offering for its unwitting</b> violation, <b>and</b> to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering for its uncertain</b> violation, <b>so too,</b> for <b>every</b> transgression <b>for which one is liable to</b> be punished with <b><i>karet</i> for its intentional</b> violation <b>and</b> one is liable to bring <b>a sin offering for its unwitting</b> violation, one is also liable to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering for its uncertain</b> violation.

### Part 6
This verbal analogy serves <b>to exclude misuse</b> of consecrated property from the transgressions for which one would bring a provisional guilt offering in a case of uncertainty, <b>as one is not liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for its intentional</b> violation. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who intentionally misused</b> a consecrated item, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that he is liable to the punishment of <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> He has violated a standard <b>prohibition,</b> and is flogged. Everyone agrees that he is not liable to receive <i>karet</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> with regard to the verbal analogy cited above as the source of the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>Rabbi Akiva holds</b> the following: <b>When we derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of provisional guilt offerings based upon the term <b>“the commandments of”</b> used in that context (Leviticus 5:17) and the identical expression <b>“the commandments of”</b> stated with regard to <b>a sin offering</b> brought for the consumption of forbidden <b>fat</b> (Leviticus 4:27), i.e., a standard sin offering, it is <b>for this</b> purpose <b>that we derive it: Just as there,</b> the verse is referring <b>to a fixed</b> sin offering, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the provisional guilt offering, one brings it only for the uncertain transgression <b>of</b> a sin for which one would be liable to bring <b>a fixed</b> offering.

### Part 8
This serves <b>to exclude</b> transgressions for which one brings <b>a sliding-scale</b> sin offering, i.e., the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods, taking a false oath of testimony, and violating an oath (see Leviticus 5:1–13). Since one who unwittingly violated these prohibitions brings an animal, bird, or meal offering depending on his financial status, if he is uncertain whether he violated one of these prohibitions he does <b>not</b> bring a provisional guilt offering.

### Part 9
<b>And the Rabbis</b> disagree with Rabbi Akiva and <b>hold</b> that <b>there is no verbal analogy for half</b> of a matter. Once a verbal analogy is accepted, the two cases are treated as entirely similar, which in this case means that the provisional guilt offering is brought only for a sin punishable by <i>karet</i> for its intentional violation. The Gemara asks: Should one conclude <b>by inference that Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that <b>there is a verbal analogy for half</b> of a matter? There is no record of any <i>tanna</i> maintaining this opinion. <b>Rather, everyone agrees that there is no verbal analogy for half</b> of a matter.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, this is</b> the <b>reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva, as the verse states</b> with regard to the provisional guilt offering: <b>“And if anyone</b> sin” (Leviticus 5:17). The term “and” in the form of the letter <b><i>vav</i>, adds to the previous matter.</b> When a sentence begins with the conjunction <i>vav</i>, it is a continuation of the previous discussion, <b>and</b> therefore the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>earlier</b> passage, in this case misuse of consecrated property, <b>are learned from the later</b> passage. Consequently, one brings a provisional guilt offering even for uncertain misuse of consecrated property.

### Part 11
<b>And the Rabbis maintain</b> that it is the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>later</b> passage that <b>are derived from the earlier</b> passage. Consequently, the ram brought <b>for</b> a provisional <b>guilt offering</b> must be <b>worth</b> at least two <b>silver shekels,</b> just like the ram brought as a guilt offering in a case where one is certain that he misused consecrated property (see Leviticus 5:15).

### Part 12
<b>And</b> how would <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> respond to this opinion? He <b>holds</b> that <b>there is no juxtaposition for half</b> of a matter. Consequently, one must also derive the <i>halakhot</i> of the earlier passage from the later passage, and one is liable to bring a provisional guilt offering for uncertain misuse of consecrated property. The Gemara raises a difficulty: Should one conclude <b>by inference that the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>there is a juxtaposition for half</b> of a matter? <b>But</b> this is difficult, because <b>we maintain</b> as a principle <b>that there is no juxtaposition for half</b> of a matter.

### Part 13
Rather, <b>everyone</b> agrees that <b>there is no juxtaposition for half</b> of a matter. <b>And here, this is</b> the <b>reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the Rabbis, as they derive</b> from the verbal analogy of the expression <b>“the commandments of</b> the Lord” (Leviticus 5:17) stated with regard to the provisional guilt offering and the identical expression <b>“the commandments of</b> the Lord” (Leviticus 4:27) stated with regard to the sin offering that one is not liable to bring a provisional guilt offering for uncertain misuse of consecrated property. One does not derive the <i>halakhot</i> of the earlier passage based upon the later passage, as this aspect of the comparison has been explicitly <b>excluded from</b> the comparison of these two passages based upon their <b>juxtaposition.</b>

### Part 14
<b>And Rabbi Akiva derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> that the provisional <b>guilt offering</b> must be worth at least two <b>silver shekels from</b> the verse: <b>“This is the law of the guilt offering”</b> (Leviticus 7:1). This teaches that there is <b>one law for all of the guilt offerings,</b> and therefore each <b>guilt offering</b> must be <b>worth</b> at least two <b>silver shekels.</b> Since it is not necessary for him to derive this <i>halakha</i> from the juxtaposition of the passages concerning misuse of consecrated property and the provisional guilt offering, and the verbal analogy cannot entirely negate the comparison indicated by this juxtaposition, Rabbi Akiva derives from the juxtaposition that one is liable to bring a provisional guilt offering for uncertain misuse of consecrated property.

### Part 15
<b>And the Rabbis</b> would reply that <b>even though it is written: “This is the law of the guilt offering,”</b> nevertheless it <b>was necessary</b> for the verse <b>to write: “And if anyone</b> sin,” in which the letter <b><i>vav</i> adds to the previous matter and</b> indicates that the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>later</b> passage <b>are learned from the earlier</b> passage. This teaches that a provisional guilt offering must be worth at least two silver shekels.

### Part 16
<b>And if</b> you would say that this could be derived <b>from</b> the verse: <b>“This is the law of the guilt offering,”</b> that is impossible, as <b>I would say: When I say</b> that there is <b>one law for all of the guilt offerings, that statement</b> applies only <b>to other definite guilt offerings.</b> In other words, just as the guilt offering for definite misuse of consecrated property must be worth at least two silver shekels, the same applies to all definite guilt offerings.

### Part 17
<b>But</b> with regard to the <b>provisional guilt offering, since it comes for an uncertain</b> violation, e.g., in a case where one is uncertain whether he ate forbidden <b>fat,</b> one might <b>say</b> that the offering one brings for <b>its uncertain</b> violation <b>should not be</b> more <b>stringent than</b> the offering one brings for <b>its definite</b> violation: <b>Just as</b> for <b>its definite</b> violation one may bring <b>a sin offering worth</b> even <b>one-sixth [<i>danka</i>]</b> of a dinar, <b>so too,</b> for <b>its uncertain</b> violation one may bring <b>a guilt offering worth</b> even <b>one-sixth</b> of a dinar. It is <b>for this</b> reason that <b>the Merciful One wrote: “And if anyone</b> sin,” in which the letter <b><i>vav</i> adds to the previous matter.</b> By contrast, since Rabbi Akiva does not derive the requirement for a provisional guilt offering to be worth at least two silver shekels from this verse, he derives from it that one brings a provisional guilt offering in a case of uncertain misuse of consecrated property.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who expounds</b> the verse: <b>“This is the law of the guilt offering,”</b> as Rabbi Akiva derives from here that a provisional guilt offering must be worth at least two silver shekels. <b>But according to the one who does not expound</b> the verse: <b>“This is the law of the guilt offering,” what is there to say?</b> From where does he derive that all guilt offerings must have the same minimum value? The Gemara answers that <b>he derives</b> it from a verbal analogy between the term <b>“your valuation”</b> stated with regard to other guilt offerings (see Leviticus 5:18, 5:25), and the identical term <b>“your valuation”</b> (Leviticus 5:15) <b>from</b> the case of <b>a guilt offering for misuse</b> of consecrated property, which the verse indicates must be worth at least two silver shekels.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: What is the source of this <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>guilt offering</b> for engaging in intercourse with <b>an espoused maidservant, about which</b> the term <b>“your valuation”</b> is <b>not written</b> in the Torah? The Gemara answers: <b>We derive</b> it <b>from</b> a verbal analogy between the word <b>“ram”</b> (Leviticus 5:15) in the verse about a guilt offering for misuse of consecrated property and the word <b>“ram”</b> (Leviticus 19:21) in a verse concerning the espoused maidservant.

### Part 20
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Akiva concedes</b> that one does not bring payment for his misuse of consecrated property until it becomes known to him that he is guilty of misuse, as then he brings a definite guilt offering with his payment. Rabbi Tarfon said: One brings payment for misuse and its additional payment of one-fifth, and a guilt offering worth two <i>sela</i>, and says: If it is certain that I misused consecrated property, this is payment for my misuse and this is my definite guilt offering. <b>And if</b> it is <b>uncertain</b> whether I misused consecrated property, the money is a contribution to the Temple fund for the purchase of communal offerings and the guilt offering is provisional.

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: According to Rabbi Tarfon, <b>what is</b> this individual <b>saying?</b> How can he say: If it is uncertain, when he clearly is uncertain about whether he misused consecrated property? <b>Rava said</b> that one should <b>teach</b> the mishna as follows: <b>If its uncertainty persists forever,</b> this offering <b>should be a provisional guilt offering,</b> whereas if it becomes known that I misused consecrated property, this should be a regular guilt offering. This is an effective stipulation, <b>as</b> the offering <b>one brings</b> in a case where it is <b>known</b> to him that he misused consecrated property is <b>from</b> the same <b>species</b> as the offering <b>he brings</b> in a case where it is <b>unknown</b> to him whether he misused consecrated property.

### Part 22
The Gemara objects: <b>Ultimately,</b> even according to Rabbi Tarfon one cannot necessarily avoid bringing two guilt offerings. Since at the time when he brought his first offering he was uncertain whether he had misused consecrated property, <b>when it becomes known to him</b> that he misused consecrated property <b>he is required to bring a definite guilt offering.</b>

### Part 23
In response to this question <b>Rava said: From the statement of both of</b> the <i>tanna’im</i>, i.e., Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva, it can <b>be learned</b> that <b>a definite guilt offering does not require knowledge</b> that the individual definitely sinned <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b> Consequently, as long as it eventually becomes known that he sinned, he has fulfilled his obligation to bring a definite guilt offering.

### Part 24
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Apropos the previous case in which one brings the same type of animal when liability is certain as when liability is uncertain, this mishna teaches: With regard to <b>a woman who brought a bird sin offering</b> in a case of uncertainty whether she miscarried a fetus that would have rendered her liable to bring a sin offering or whether what she expelled would not render her liable to bring an offering, in which case this sin offering may not be eaten by priests, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: If <b>before</b> the nape of the neck of the bird <b>was pinched it became known to her that she certainly gave birth,</b> i.e., miscarried, in a manner that obligates her to bring a sin offering, <b>she should render</b> the offering <b>a definite</b> sin offering, <b>as from the</b> same <b>type</b> of animal <b>that she brings</b> a sin offering <b>for</b> a case where it is <b>known</b> to her that she miscarried, <b>she brings</b> a sin offering <b>for</b> a case where it is <b>unknown</b> to her.

### Part 25
The mishna resumes discussion of the provisional guilt offering. If one had <b>a piece of non-sacred</b> meat <b>and a piece of sacrificial</b> meat, and <b>he ate one of them and does not know which of them he ate,</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from the obligation to bring a guilt offering for misuse of consecrated property. <b>Rabbi Akiva deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering,</b> in accordance with his opinion in the previous mishna that one brings a provisional guilt offering even in a case of uncertainty with regard to misuse. If he then <b>ate the second</b> piece, <b>he brings a definite guilt offering,</b> as it is certain that he ate the sacrificial meat.

### Part 26
If <b>one</b> person <b>ate the first</b> piece <b>and another</b> person <b>came and ate the second</b> piece, <b>this</b> first person <b>brings a provisional guilt offering and that</b> second person <b>brings a provisional guilt offering;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Shimon says: Both of them bring one</b> definite <b>guilt offering</b> as partners, and they stipulate that the one who ate the non-sacred meat grants his share of the animal to the one who ate the sacrificial meat, and the guilt offering is sacrificed on his behalf. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC