
### Part 1
With regard to <b>the daughter of a priest who married an Israelite and</b> then unwittingly <b>partook of <i>teruma</i>, she pays the principal,</b> as a thief would, as she partook of <i>teruma</i> to which she owns no rights. <b>But she does not pay the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, which is the fine paid by an Israelite who partakes of <i>teruma</i> unwittingly (see Leviticus 22:14). This is because she is not completely disqualified from the priesthood, since if she becomes widowed or divorced without having borne children she will again be permitted to partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And</b> if she commits adultery <b>her death</b> penalty is administered <b>by burning,</b> as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the daughter of a priest (see Leviticus 21:9).

### Part 2
By contrast, if <b>she married one of those who are unfit</b> for her to marry due to his lineage, thereby disqualifying herself from the priesthood for the future, <b>she pays</b> the <b>principal and</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, <b>and her death</b> is <b>by strangulation,</b> as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to Israelite women. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And the Rabbis say:</b> In <b>both this</b> case <b>and that</b> case, whether she was married to an Israelite or to one unfit for her to marry, <b>she pays the principal but she does not pay the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, <b>and her death</b> is <b>by burning,</b> as she previously had the status of a daughter of the priesthood. This opinion of the Rabbis is presumably that of Rabbi Yehuda, who is usually the disputant of Rabbi Meir. As explained with regard to the anointing of a king, Rabbi Yehuda requires that the individual in question must have the status of a stranger, i.e., not a High Priest or a king, from beginning to end.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> the <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda applies <b>to the placing of the anointing oil, and</b> it is explained <b>by</b> those <b>answers that we answered</b> earlier, that according to Rabbi Meir one is liable for the placing of any amount, as the verse uses an expression of applying, whereas according to Rabbi Yehuda one is liable only if one places oil that is the volume of an olive-bulk. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>placing in general,</b> e.g., the prohibition not to place frankincense on the meal offering of a sinner (see Leviticus 5:11), <b>everyone agrees</b> one is liable for placing only the volume of <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara discusses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: A <i>tanna</i> teaches</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rabbi Elazar: Anyone included in</b> the obligation not to <b>apply</b> anointing oil to himself or others <b>is</b> likewise <b>included</b> as the object of: <b>It shall not be applied,</b> i.e., it is prohibited to apply the oil to him. <b>And anyone not included in</b> the obligation not <b>to apply</b> anointing oil to himself or others <b>is not included</b> as the object of: <b>It shall not be applied.</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said to</b> that <i>tanna</i>: <b>You are saying well,</b> as <b>it is written:</b> “Upon the flesh of a person <b>it shall not be applied [<i>lo yisakh</i>]”</b> (Exodus 30:32), <b>and</b> you <b>read into</b> the verse: <b><i>Lo yasikh</i>,</b> he shall not apply it to others. This dual reading indicates that one who is commanded not to apply the oil is the same as the one upon whom it is prohibited to apply the oil, as stated by the <i>tanna</i>.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Ḥananya taught</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>before Rava: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a High Priest who took from the anointing oil that is on his head and placed it on his stomach; from where</b> is it derived <b>that he is liable?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “Upon the flesh of a person it shall not be applied”</b> (Exodus 30:32). <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: What is different between</b> this case and <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a priest who applied <i>teruma</i> oil</b> to himself, <b>the Israelite son of his daughter may rub against [<i>mitaggel</i>]</b> this oil <b>without concern</b> that he might be deriving benefit from <i>teruma</i>?

### Part 7
Rav Ashi <b>said to him: There,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i> oil, <b>it is written: “They will die through it if they profane it”</b> (Leviticus 22:9), and <b>since</b> the priest <b>has</b> already <b>profaned</b> the oil by using it, it is considered <b>profaned. But with regard to the anointing oil it is written: “For the consecration</b> of the anointing oil of <b>His God is upon him”</b> (Leviticus 21:12). <b>The Merciful One calls it anointing oil</b> even at this stage, to teach <b>that even though it is upon</b> the High Priest it is <b>not</b> considered <b>profaned,</b> and instead remains sacred.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>For</b> any of <b>these</b> prohibitions, <b>one is liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i> <b>for its intentional</b> violation and to bring a sin offering for its unwitting violation. And for violation in a case where it is unknown to him whether he transgressed, he is liable to bring a provisional guilt offering. The Gemara notes that the mishna further <b>teaches:</b> This is the <i>halakha</i> for all the transgressions listed above <b>except for one who defiles the Temple,</b> i.e., he enters the Temple while ritually impure <b>or</b> renders <b>its consecrated items</b> ritually impure. The Gemara asks: <b>From what</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>does</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>exclude</b> these cases? After all, one who enters the Temple while impure or renders its consecrated items impure is also liable to receive <i>karet</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what the mishna <b>is teaching: Except for one who defiles the Temple or</b> renders <b>its consecrated items</b> ritually impure, <b>as</b> he <b>does not bring a provisional guilt offering.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>And let</b> the mishna <b>also teach: Except for one who</b> sinned and <b>Yom Kippur passed, as</b> he too <b>does not bring a provisional guilt offering. Reish Lakish said: When</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> these exceptions he is referring to those cases <b>where there is a sin and</b> nevertheless <b>the Merciful One exempts him</b> from bringing a provisional guilt offering. By contrast, in a case where <b>Yom Kippur passed, there is no</b> remaining <b>sin, as</b> Yom Kippur <b>atoned for him,</b> i.e., for his sin.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The mishna is referring <b>to one who rejects</b> the atonement of Yom Kippur, <b>who says: Yom Kippur does not atone</b> for one’s sins. In this situation Yom Kippur does not atone for him, which means <b>that if he retracted</b> from his sinful ways <b>after Yom Kippur</b> he is <b>required to bring a provisional guilt offering.</b> Therefore, it cannot be listed in the exceptions stated in the mishna. The Gemara notes: <b>And Reish Lakish</b> does not explain the mishna in this manner, as <b>he maintains</b> that <b>even</b> with regard to <b>one who rejects</b> its atonement, <b>Yom Kippur atones for his</b> sins.

### Part 11
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> their dispute is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between later <i>amora’im</i>: Concerning <b>one who says: My sin offering,</b> which is sacrificed for me, <b>should not atone for me, Abaye said:</b> This sin offering <b>does not atone</b> for him. <b>Rava said: It atones</b> for him. The Gemara explains: In a case <b>where he said:</b> I do <b>not</b> want it <b>to be sacrificed, everyone agrees that it does not atone</b> for him, <b>as it is written: “He shall bring it in accordance with his will”</b> (Leviticus 1:3), which indicates that if the offering is brought against his will it is not effective. <b>Where they disagree</b> is <b>when he says:</b> The sin offering <b>should be sacrificed but it should not atone</b> for me. <b>Abaye said:</b> It <b>does not atone</b> for him, <b>as he said</b> that <b>it should not atone</b> for him. <b>Rava said: It does atone</b> for him, as <b>once he says</b> it <b>should be sacrificed,</b> the <b>atonement comes by itself.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara notes: <b>And Rava retracted</b> his opinion, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>Yom Kippur atones for those who repent and for those who do not repent.</b> The <i>baraita</i> elaborates: <b>And there is a logical inference</b> to negate this assertion: <b>Just as a sin offering and a guilt offering atone, and</b> likewise <b>Yom Kippur atones, just as a sin offering and a guilt offering atone only for those who repent, so too, Yom Kippur atones only for those who repent.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> rejects this opinion: <b>No, if you said</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a sin offering and a guilt offering, which do not atone for intentional</b> sins <b>as</b> they do for <b>unwitting</b> sins, <b>shall you</b> also <b>say</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to Yom Kippur, which does atone for intentional</b> sins <b>as</b> it does for <b>unwitting</b> sins? Yom Kippur effects atonement even in cases where offerings do not. <b>And since</b> it is the case that the atonement of Yom Kippur is far-reaching in that <b>it atones for intentional</b> sins <b>as</b> it does for <b>unwitting</b> sins, it follows that it <b>may atone</b> both <b>for those who repent and for those who do not repent.</b> To dispel this notion, <b>the verse states: “Yet</b> on the tenth day of this month it is Yom Kippur” (Leviticus 23:27). By means of the word “yet,” the verse <b>divided</b> and limited the atonement of Yom Kippur so that it atones only for those who repent. This concludes the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 14
The Gemara analyzes this <i>baraita</i>. <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Those who repent and those who do not repent? Shall we say those who repent</b> are those whose transgressions were <b>unwitting,</b> whereas <b>those who do not repent</b> are those whose transgressions were <b>intentional?</b> This cannot be the case, as the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: No, if you said</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a sin offering and a guilt offering,</b> which do not atone for intentional sins as they do for unwitting sins. Since the <i>baraita</i> is referring to the concepts of intentional and unwitting sins in this clause, the categories of those who repent and do not repent must have another meaning.

### Part 15
<b>Rather,</b> the category of those who do not repent is <b>like that which Ulla says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says: If one unwittingly <b>ate</b> forbidden <b>fat and separated an offering</b> for this sin, <b>and became an apostate and subsequently retracted</b> his apostasy, nevertheless, <b>since</b> the offering <b>was rejected</b> from being sacrificed while he was an apostate, <b>it shall</b> remain <b>rejected.</b> Accordingly, the <i>baraita</i> is suggesting that the same applies to one who became an apostate and Yom Kippur passed: Even if he retracts his apostasy, the following Yom Kippur should not atone for his transgression.

### Part 16
The Gemara rejects this interpretation: Granted, the <b>offering is rejected</b> from the altar, and therefore it cannot be sacrificed at a later stage. But the <b>man</b> himself <b>is fit for atonement,</b> and he can bring another sin offering. The Gemara suggests another interpretation of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rather,</b> it must be that the category of <b>those who repent</b> is referring to one <b>who says: My sin offering should atone for me, and</b> the category of <b>those who do not repent</b> is referring to one <b>who says: My sin offering should not atone for me.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that a sin offering does not atone for one who states beforehand: My sin offering should not atone for me, in contradiction of the earlier statement of Rava. Since Rava was aware of this <i>baraita</i>, he must have retracted his opinion.

### Part 17
The Gemara continues its analysis of this <i>baraita</i> by comparing it to another <i>baraita</i>. <b>And</b> the Sages <b>raise a contradiction:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>Yom Kippur shall atone only for</b> one <b>who fasted on it and did not perform labor on it and declared it a holy convocation.</b> With regard to one who <b>did not fast on it, or performed labor on it, or did not declare it a holy convocation,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>Yom Kippur shall not atone</b> for him. To counter this <b>the verse states:</b> “Yet on the tenth day of this seventh month <b>it is Yom Kippur”</b> (Leviticus 23:27); the additional emphasis of “it is” serves to teach that the day atones <b>in any case.</b> The ruling of this <i>baraita</i> disputes the one cited earlier, which states that Yom Kippur atones only for those who repent, <b>and both</b> are <b>unattributed</b> <i>baraitot</i> in the <b><i>Sifra</i>.</b> They <b>are difficult,</b> as they contradict <b>each other.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Abaye said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. This</b> first <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> and <b>that</b> second <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>in accordance with his own</b> opinion. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> For <b>all transgressions that are</b> stated <b>in the Torah, whether one repented or whether one did not repent, Yom Kippur atones.</b>

### Part 19
Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi continues: This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>except for</b> one <b>who divests</b> himself of the <b>yoke</b> of God, by denying His existence, <b>and one who</b> impudently <b>reveals facets of the Torah</b> in a manner that departs from their true meaning, <b>and one who nullifies the covenant of</b> the <b>flesh,</b> i.e., circumcision. <b>With regard to</b> these, <b>if one repented, Yom Kippur atones, and if not, Yom Kippur does not atone.</b> This indicates that according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, Yom Kippur atones even if one did not repent.

### Part 20
<b>Rava said:</b> Both <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>in accordance with his own</b> opinion, that Yom Kippur atones even for those who do not repent, <b>but</b> even <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>concedes</b> that <b>with regard to</b> the <b>transgressions of</b> violating <b>Yom Kippur itself,</b> e.g., if one ate or performed labor on Yom Kippur, <b>that</b> Yom Kippur <b>does not atone</b> for those transgressions. He must necessarily concede this point, <b>as if you do not say so,</b> then <b>according to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, with regard to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> for</b> transgressing the prohibitions of <b>Yom Kippur, since each and every hour</b> of the day <b>atones</b> for one’s sins, <b>how can you find</b> the application of <i>karet</i> in this case?

### Part 21
The Gemara questions this proof: <b>And what is the difficulty? Perhaps</b> you find a case <b>where he performed labor the entire night</b> of Yom Kippur <b>and died at dawn, as</b> in such a case <b>there was no daytime</b> of Yom Kippur, which is the part of Yom Kippur that effects atonement, <b>to atone for him.</b> The Gemara asks: That <b>works out well</b> with regard to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> for</b> transgressing at <b>night;</b> but with regard to <b><i>karet</i> for</b> transgressing at <b>daytime, how can you find these</b> circumstances, i.e., how can he be liable to receive <i>karet</i> for transgressing in the day?

### Part 22
The Gemara responds: <b>And what is the difficulty? Perhaps while eating bread he choked on</b> a chunk of <b>meat</b> he ate with it, and died, <b>as there was not enough time in the day</b> after his transgression <b>to atone for him. Alternatively,</b> it is referring to a case <b>where he performed labor close to sunset; alternatively,</b> it is referring to a case where <b>as he was performing labor, the hoe</b> with which he was working <b>cut his thigh and he died, as</b> in these cases too <b>there was no time</b> in the day after his transgression <b>to atone for him,</b> either because it was no longer Yom Kippur or because he died immediately.

### Part 23
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is the same, i.e., there is no obligation to bring a sin offering, <b>even</b> with regard to <b>the one who blasphemes,</b> as it is stated with regard to the sin offering: “You shall have one law for him who performs the action unwittingly” (Numbers 15:29), excluding one who blasphemes, as he does not perform an action but sins with speech. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> caused the Rabbis to specify: <b>Even</b> one who <b>blasphemes, as he does not perform an action?</b> Why do the Rabbis mention this explanation?

### Part 24
The Gemara explains: <b>The Rabbis heard that Rabbi Akiva teaches</b> in his list of those who must bring a sin offering <b>a necromancer, and he does not teach a sorcerer</b> in his list, and therefore <b>they said to him: What is different</b> about a sorcerer <b>that he does not bring an offering?</b> It must be <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> his transgression <b>does not involve an action.</b> If so, with regard to the sin of one who <b>blasphemes as well,</b> it <b>does not involve an action.</b>

### Part 25
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 1:1): One who unwittingly <b>blasphemes brings an offering, since <i>karet</i> is stated with regard to it.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. And</b> the verse <b>states:</b> “Whoever curses his God <b>shall bear his sin”</b> (Leviticus 24:15), as the Gemara will explain. The Gemara asks: <b>And is it</b> an established <b>principle</b> that <b>wherever it is written <i>karet</i> with regard to</b> a mitzva, one who violates it unwittingly <b>brings an offering? But there</b> is the case of the mitzva of the <b>Paschal offering, and</b> the mitzva of <b>circumcision, as</b> the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> is written</b> for failing to perform <b>them, and</b> yet <b>one does not bring an offering</b> for failing to perform these mitzvot unwittingly.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC