
### Part 1
<b>and she is a maidservant</b> designated to a man” (Leviticus 19:20). This verse likewise serves <b>to</b> require <b>separate</b> offerings <b>for each and every</b> espoused <b>maidservant.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A nazirite who became ritually impure</b> with <b>several</b> instances of contact with <b>ritual impurity</b> brings one offering for several transgressions. The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> that <b>taught</b> this?

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who says:</b> A new <b>naziriteship of purity,</b> which is required of a nazirite who became ritually impure, <b>takes effect from</b> the <b>seventh</b> day of the nazirite’s purification. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>you find</b> that the nazirite brings one offering for several transgressions in a case <b>where</b> he <b>became impure on the seventh</b> day of his purification, was pure for seven days, <b>and again became impure on the seventh</b> day of his purification. <b>And since for</b> each case where he became impure <b>the appropriate time to sacrifice an offering,</b> i.e., the eighth day of his purification, <b>had not</b> yet <b>emerged, he is liable to bring only one offering.</b>

### Part 4
Rav Ḥisda explains: The mishna must be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>as if</b> it follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, then it is not possible for a nazirite to bring one offering for several transgressions, <b>since Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> A new <b>naziriteship of purity does not take effect until</b> a nazirite’s <b>eighth</b> day of purification. <b>If</b> there was a case <b>where</b> a nazirite <b>became impure on the seventh</b> day of his purification, was pure for seven days, <b>and</b> then <b>became impure again on the seventh</b> day of his purification, according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>that is all</b> one <b>long</b> period of <b>impurity,</b> as the new term of naziriteship has not yet begun, and therefore the nazirite brings one offering for the entire period.

### Part 5
And <b>if</b> there was a case <b>where</b> a nazirite <b>became impure on the eighth</b> day of his purification, was pure for seven days, <b>and</b> then <b>again became impure on the eighth</b> day of his purification, then <b>since the appropriate time to sacrifice an offering had emerged, he is obligated</b> to bring an offering <b>for each and every</b> time he became impure. Rav Ḥisda concludes: <b>Rather, conclude from it</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And what</b> is the statement <b>of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to a nazirite who begins a new naziriteship of purity after having become impure: “And on the eighth day he shall bring two doves or two pigeons…And the priest shall prepare one for a sin offering and the other for a burnt offering, and make atonement for him, for that he sinned by reason of the dead; <b>and he shall sanctify his head on that day”</b> (Numbers 6:10–11). This teaches that the new term of naziriteship begins <b>on the day of the bringing of his offerings,</b> which is the eighth day of his purification. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 7
By contrast, <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> The verse means that the new term of naziriteship begins <b>on the day of his shaving,</b> i.e., the seventh day of his purification.

### Part 8
mishna The mishna continues to list the five situations in which one offering is brought to atone for several transgressions: Third, <b>one who issues a warning to his wife</b> declaring himself jealous <b>with regard to several</b> different <b>men</b> with whom he suspects her of committing adultery, and forbidding her to be alone with them. If the wife was then found separately in seclusion with each of the men, he brings her to the Temple with one single meal offering of jealousy. <b>And</b> fourth, <b>a leper who was afflicted</b> with <b>several</b> instances of <b>leprosy,</b> meaning that he was purified from his leprosy, and before he brought his offerings, he suffered a relapse of the leprosy. When he is finally purified, he brings only one set of offerings.

### Part 9
If a leper <b>brought</b> the two requisite <b>birds</b> on the first day of his purification (see Leviticus 14:4–7), <b>and</b> prior to bringing his offerings on the eighth day of his purification he <b>was afflicted</b> with a relapse of leprosy, those birds <b>do not satisfy his obligation until he brings his sin offering. Rabbi Yehuda says: Until he brings his guilt offering.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that if a man issues a warning to his wife with regard to several different men, and the wife violates the warning and is secluded with each of them, he brings one meal offering of jealousy. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that it is <b>as it is written: “This is the law of jealousies,</b> when a wife, being under her husband, goes aside, and is defiled” (Numbers 5:29). The plural form of the word “jealousies,” teaches that <b>one law,</b> meaning one sacrificial offering, can suffice <b>for several jealousies,</b> i.e., different warnings.

### Part 11
The mishna teaches that <b>a leper who was afflicted</b> with <b>several</b> instances of <b>leprosy</b> brings one single offering. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that it is <b>as it is written: “This</b> shall be <b>the law of the leper</b> in the day of his purification” (Leviticus 14:2). The term “the law” teaches that <b>one law,</b> meaning one sacrificial offering, can suffice <b>for several lepers,</b> i.e., for several instances of leprosy in the same individual.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: If a leper <b>brought</b> the two <b>birds</b> on the first day of his purification, <b>and</b> prior to bringing his offerings on the eighth day of his purification he <b>was afflicted</b> with a relapse of leprosy, those birds <b>do not satisfy his obligation until he brings his sin offering. Rabbi Yehuda says: Until he brings his guilt offering.</b> This apparently means that when he is healed from the relapse of his leprosy, he must bring additional birds to fulfill the obligation generated by the first instance of leprosy.

### Part 13
The Gemara challenges this assumption: <b>But didn’t you say</b> in the mishna that <b>he brings only one</b> set of <b>offerings</b> for several instances of leprosy? The Gemara answers: The text of the mishna <b>is incomplete, and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> In the case of a leper who was afflicted with several instances of leprosy and was subsequently purified from his leprosy, if he <b>brought</b> the two <b>birds, and was</b> then <b>afflicted</b> with a relapse of leprosy, he <b>brings only one</b> set of <b>offerings. But</b> with regard to <b>establishing</b> whether a leper has a status <b>of poverty or of affluence</b> in order to determine whether he brings a poor man’s offering or a rich man’s offering (see Leviticus, chapter 14), that <b>is not established until he brings</b> his <b>sin offering. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The leper’s status of poverty or affluence is not established <b>until he brings his guilt offering.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara cites a dispute that supports this interpretation: <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Nega’im</i> 14:11): In a case of <b>a leper who</b> was poor when he <b>brought his guilt offering and then became wealthy</b> before bringing the other offerings, <b>all</b> differences in offerings between a leper with the status of a rich man or a poor man <b>follow</b> his status at the time he brought his <b>sin offering;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon. Rabbi Yehuda says: It all follows</b> his status at the time he brought his <b>guilt offering.</b> The Gemara cites an additional opinion: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: It all follows</b> his status at the time he brought the two <b>birds.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> All <b>three of them interpreted the same verse</b> to arrive at their respective opinions: “This is the law of he who has the mark of leprosy, <b>whose means do not suffice for that which pertains to his purification”</b> (Leviticus 14:32). <b>Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that the term “his purification” is referring to the <b>matter that atones for his</b> sin, i.e., the sin offering. <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that it is referring to the <b>matter that renders him fit</b> to consume sacrificial meat, which is the guilt offering. And <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says</b> that it is referring to the <b>matter that causes him</b> to return to a state of <b>purity. And what are these?</b> The <b>birds.</b>

### Part 16
mishna The mishna continues with the last of the five situations in which one offering is brought to atone for several transgressions: <b>A woman who gave birth to several offspring.</b> This is a case where a woman gave birth to a daughter, after which she is ritually impure for fourteen days and then enters a period of sixty-six days of ritual purity, even if she experiences uterine bleeding. Nevertheless, during this interim period, she is still somewhat impure, and it is therefore prohibited for her to enter the Temple or to partake of consecrated food, and at the end of the period she must bring an offering. <b>And</b> during those days of ritual purity, <b>she</b> became pregnant again and then <b>miscarried a female</b> fetus <b>within</b> the <b>eighty</b> days, <b>and then</b> became pregnant <b>again and miscarried</b> another <b>female</b> fetus <b>within eighty</b> days of the first miscarriage. In this situation, when she ultimately completes her process of purification, she brings one single offering for all the births and miscarriages.

### Part 17
<b>And</b> a similar <i>halakha</i> applies to a woman <b>who miscarries multiple</b> fetuses from a single pregnancy at different points in time, miscarrying each fetus before completing the purification period of forty days for a male or eighty days for a female for the previous fetus. When she finally completes her process of purification, she brings one single offering for all of the miscarriages.

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> In these cases, a single offering does not suffice for all the births or miscarriages. Rather, <b>she brings</b> an offering <b>for the first</b> birth or miscarriage and <b>does not bring</b> an offering <b>for the second</b> miscarriage, as it took place before the completion of the purification period for the first. <b>She</b> then <b>brings</b> an offering <b>for the third</b> miscarriage <b>and does not bring</b> an offering <b>for the fourth</b> fetus, as it was miscarried before the completion of the purification period for the third fetus.

### Part 19
gemara The mishna teaches that a woman who gave birth to several offspring brings a single offering. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains: <b>As the <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Sheshet</b> with regard to the verse: <b>“This is the law for the woman who bears a child, whether a male or a female”</b> (Leviticus 12:7). <b>This teaches that she brings one offering for several offspring.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that she brings one single offering <b>even</b> in a case where she becomes purified simultaneously both <b>for a birth and for</b> an irregular <b>discharge</b> of blood from the uterus <b>[<i>ziva</i>].</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This,”</b> to exclude such a case.

### Part 20
The Gemara challenges the assumption that was refuted by the textual derivation: The <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that even in a case where she completes her purification at the same time <b>for a birth and for <i>ziva</i>, she should bring only one offering. If that is so,</b> then in a case where she <b>consumed blood</b> unintentionally, and is therefore liable to bring a sin offering, <b>and</b> she also <b>gave birth,</b> might one <b>also</b> have thought <b>that she should bring only one offering?</b> That is illogical, as these offerings are two completely different obligations. So too, the offerings after childbirth and <i>ziva</i> are two separate obligations.

### Part 21
The Gemara explains: Rather, <b>say</b> that <b>this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> taught: One <b>might</b> have thought that she should bring one offering <b>for a birth that</b> occurred <b>before the completion</b> of the term, i.e., the first birth, <b>and</b> a second offering <b>for a birth that</b> occurred <b>after the completion</b> of the purification period for the first one. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This,”</b> to negate that assumption.

### Part 22
§ The mishna teaches that in a case of a woman who <b>miscarried within</b> the <b>eighty-</b>day purification period of a previous miscarriage, and then miscarried a third time within the eighty-day purification period for the second miscarriage, the first <i>tanna</i> says that she brings a single offering for all of them, and Rabbi Yehuda says that she must bring a separate offering for the third miscarriage, as it took place after the completion of the purification period for the first one. The Gemara states: When you analyze the matter <b>you will find</b> that one should <b>say</b> that <b>according to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> the <b>first fetus</b> is the one that <b>causes</b> the obligation of the offering, <b>and she</b> therefore <b>counts</b> the purification period <b>from</b> the birth or miscarriage of the <b>first fetus;</b> and <b>according to</b> the <b>Rabbis,</b> it is the <b>second fetus</b> that <b>causes</b> the obligation of the offering, <b>and she counts</b> the purification period <b>from</b> the birth or miscarriage <b>of</b> the <b>second fetus.</b>

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: Why was it necessary to state that when you analyze the matter <b>you will</b> find that one should <b>say</b> that according to Rabbi Yehuda the first fetus causes the obligation and according to the Rabbis it is the second fetus which causes the obligation? This is <b>obvious,</b> as <b>it is</b> stated explicitly. The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary for</b> the Gemara to say this with regard to the case of a woman who <b>miscarries multiple</b> fetuses from the same pregnancy. It might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>in</b> a case of a woman who <b>miscarries multiple</b> fetuses from the same pregnancy, <b>Rabbi Yehuda concedes to the Rabbis</b> that as the fetuses were in the womb together, their births are deemed a single event, and therefore the woman counts eighty days from the miscarriage of the second fetus. Consequently, the Gemara <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Yehuda disagrees with the Rabbis even in this case.

### Part 24
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC