
### Part 1
The Gemara answers that <b>this</b> is what Rabbi Akiva <b>is saying:</b> One who unwittingly <b>blasphemes brings an offering, since its</b> punishment of <b><i>karet</i> comes,</b> i.e., is written, <b>in a place</b> where the Torah discusses <b>an offering,</b> i.e., <i>karet</i> is mentioned in a passage that discusses a sin offering (see Numbers 15:27–31). This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva,</b> as <b>he maintains: Since</b> the verse <b>should have written <i>karet</i> in general,</b> i.e., without connecting it to bringing an offering, <b>and</b> yet this <b><i>karet</i> is written in a place</b> where the Torah discusses <b>an offering, conclude from it</b> that the unwitting blasphemer <b>brings an offering</b> for his transgression.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the next clause of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> the verse <b>states:</b> “Whoever curses his God <b>shall bear his sin”</b> (Leviticus 24:15). The Gemara explains: Here we <b>arrive at</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Akiva is saying to the Rabbis: You say</b> that the transgression of one who <b>blasphemes does not involve an action,</b> as <b>what is</b> the case of one who <b>blasphemes?</b> It is one who <b>blesses,</b> i.e., curses, <b>the Name,</b> i.e., God. <b>But</b> if so, then concerning the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> that is written:</b> “That person blasphemes the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off [<i>venikhreta</i>] from among his people” (Numbers 15:30), <b>for what</b> purpose <b>does it come,</b> if not to render him liable to bring an offering?

### Part 3
The Rabbis <b>say to him:</b> It comes <b>to give</b> the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> to one who curses</b> God, in order to teach that the phrase: “Shall bear his sin,” written in the verse: “Whoever curses his God shall bear his sin” (Leviticus 24:15), is referring to <i>karet</i>, so that one can derive by verbal analogy that an individual who was obligated to bring a Paschal offering for the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> and did not do so is likewise liable to receive <i>karet</i>. <b>As it is written with regard to one who curses</b> God: “Whoever curses his God <b>shall bear his sin,” and it is written with regard to</b> one who was obligated to bring a Paschal offering for the <b>second <i>Pesaḥ</i></b> and did not do so: “That man <b>shall bear his sin”</b> (Numbers 9:13). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to one who curses God it is referring to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>, so too here,</b> with regard to the Paschal offering it is referring to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 4
With regard to one who blasphemes, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “That person <b>blasphemes [<i>megaddef</i> ] the Lord”</b> (Numbers 15:30). <b>Isi ben Yehuda says:</b> This is <b>like a person who says to another: You cleaned [<i>geirafta</i>] the bowl and rendered it lacking,</b> i.e., the transgression of blasphemy is so severe that it is compared to one who does actual damage to God. Isi ben Yehuda <b>maintains</b> that the case of the <b>blasphemer is</b> identical to that of one who <b>blesses,</b> i.e., curses, <b>the Name,</b> i.e., God, which is a particularly severe transgression.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says</b> that this is <b>like a person who says to another: You cleaned the bowl</b> and removed its contents, <b>but did not render it lacking,</b> i.e., the transgression of blasphemy is not compared to one who does actual damage to God. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya <b>maintains</b> that the case of the <b>blasphemer is</b> the same as that of <b>an idol worshipper,</b> which is a less severe transgression.

### Part 6
This dispute as to the nature of the transgression of the blasphemer <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: “That person blasphemes <b>the Lord”</b> (Numbers 15:30), and <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says: The verse is speaking of an idol worshipper. And the Rabbis say: The verse comes only to give</b> the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> to one who blesses,</b> i.e., curses, <b>the Name,</b> i.e., God.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>There are</b> some women who <b>bring</b> a sin <b>offering</b> of a woman after childbirth <b>and</b> the offering <b>is eaten</b> by the priests. <b>And there are</b> some women who <b>bring</b> a sin <b>offering but it is not eaten. And</b> there are <b>some</b> women who <b>do not bring</b> a sin offering at all.

### Part 8
The mishna elaborates: The following women <b>bring</b> a sin <b>offering and it is eaten</b> by the priests: <b>One who miscarries</b> a fetus with a form <b>similar to a domesticated animal,</b> one who miscarries a fetus with a form similar to <b>an undomesticated animal, or</b> one who miscarries a fetus with a form similar to <b>a bird;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> She does not bring a sin offering <b>unless</b> the fetus <b>has the form of a person.</b>

### Part 9
With regard to a woman <b>who miscarries a sandal</b> fetus, i.e., one that has the form of a flat fish; <b>or</b> if she miscarries the <b>placenta; or an amniotic sac</b> in which <b>tissue developed; or</b> a fetus <b>that emerged cut,</b> i.e., in pieces; <b>and likewise</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant,</b> owned by a Jew, <b>who miscarried;</b> in all these cases <b>she brings</b> a sin <b>offering and it is eaten</b> by the priests.

### Part 10
<b>And these</b> women <b>bring</b> sin offerings <b>but</b> their sin offerings <b>are not eaten: One who miscarries and does not know</b> the nature of <b>what she miscarried; and two women who miscarried,</b> in a case where <b>one</b> miscarried a fetus <b>of a type</b> for which a woman is <b>exempt</b> from bringing an offering <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> miscarried a fetus <b>of a type</b> for which a woman is <b>liable</b> to bring an offering, and they do not know which miscarried which type. <b>Rabbi Yosei said: When</b> is their sin offering not eaten? It is <b>when</b> both women <b>went</b> to different places within the Temple to bring their offerings, e.g., <b>this</b> woman went <b>to the east and that</b> woman went <b>to the west. But if both of them were standing</b> together, <b>both of them</b> together <b>bring</b> one sin <b>offering, and it is eaten.</b>

### Part 11
<b>These</b> women <b>do not bring</b> a sin offering: A woman <b>who miscarries an amniotic sac full of water,</b> or one <b>full of blood,</b> or one <b>full of</b> different <b>colors;</b> and likewise a woman <b>who miscarries</b> a fetus with a form <b>similar to fish, or grasshoppers, or repugnant creatures, or creeping animals;</b> and a woman <b>who miscarries</b> on the <b>fortieth day</b> of her pregnancy; <b>and</b> a woman who gives birth by <b>caesarean section. Rabbi Shimon deems</b> a woman <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering <b>in</b> the case where she gives birth by <b>caesarean section.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>From where do we</b> derive that in the case of a Canaanite <b>maidservant,</b> owned by a Jew, who miscarried, she brings a sin offering and it is eaten? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The passage discussing the <i>halakhot</i> of a woman following childbirth begins with the verse: “Speak to <b>the children of Israel,</b> saying: If a woman conceives and gives birth to a male” (Leviticus 12:2). From this verse <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that the full-fledged <b>children of Israel</b> are included in these <i>halakhot</i>; <b>from where</b> do I derive that <b>a convert and</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant</b> are also included in these <i>halakhot</i>? <b>The verse states “a woman,”</b> which includes other women.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the special emphasis in the mishna: <b>And likewise</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant?</b> Why does the mishna deem it necessary to write this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: It might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>when we say:</b> With regard to <b>any mitzva in which a woman is obligated</b> a Canaanite <b>slave is</b> also <b>obligated in that</b> mitzva, <b>this statement</b> applies <b>with regard to a matter that is the same for a man and for a woman. But</b> with regard to the offerings of <b>a woman after childbirth, which is</b> a category that applies <b>to women</b> but <b>does not</b> apply <b>to men,</b> one might <b>say</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant is not obligated</b> to bring these offerings. It is <b>for this</b> reason the mishna <b>taught</b> the case of a Canaanite <b>maidservant.</b>

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches: <b>These</b> women <b>bring</b> a sin <b>offering</b> but their sin offerings are not eaten. It then teaches that in a case where one miscarried a fetus of a type for which a woman is exempt from bringing an offering and the other one miscarried a fetus of a type for which a woman is obligated to bring an offering, Rabbi Yosei maintains that if both are standing together they bring one offering together. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> exactly <b>do they do? The two of them bring one definite</b> burnt <b>offering, and a sin offering of a bird</b> due to <b>uncertainty, and they</b> each <b>stipulate</b> that if she is obligated to bring the sin offering the animal is hers, and if not then it belongs to the other woman.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And is Rabbi Yosei of</b> the opinion that <b>a stipulation</b> is effective in the case of a sin offering? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (23a): With regard to a situation where one of two women unwittingly ate a piece of forbidden fat and is obligated to bring a sin offering, but it is unknown which woman, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: They both bring one sin offering</b> together, and <b>Rabbi Yosei says: They do not both bring one sin offering</b> together. <b>Evidently, Rabbi Yosei is not of</b> the opinion that <b>a stipulation</b> is effective with regard to a sin offering.

### Part 16
<b>Rava said: Rabbi Yosei concedes</b> that a stipulation is effective <b>with regard to one who has not yet</b> brought <b>an atonement</b> offering to complete the purification process, as is the case concerning a woman after childbirth. <b>And likewise, when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Yosei concedes with regard to one who has not yet</b> brought <b>an atonement</b> offering that a stipulation is effective.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this difference between the sin offering of one who has not yet brought an atonement offering and standard sin offerings? The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> with regard to a sin offering brought for a transgression, <b>the man requires</b> definite <b>awareness</b> of his transgression for him to be obligated to bring a sin offering, <b>as it is written: “If his sin,</b> which he has sinned, <b>be known to him”</b> (Leviticus 4:28). <b>Therefore,</b> in the case where one of two women ate forbidden fat, <b>they do not bring</b> a sin offering together <b>and stipulate</b> that it should be for whichever of them ate the forbidden fat. <b>But here,</b> with regard to a woman after a miscarriage, <b>when</b> these <b>women bring</b> their sin offering they do so only in order <b>to become permitted in the consumption of sacrificial</b> food, and therefore the stipulation is effective.

### Part 18
The Gemara cites a proof that this distinction is in fact the opinion of Rabbi Yosei: <b>As it is taught in the latter clause of that</b> mishna that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to <b>any sin offering that comes</b> as atonement <b>for a sin, two</b> people <b>do not bring it</b> together. This indicates that if a sin offering does not atone for a sin, two people can bring it together.

### Part 19
§ The mishna teaches: And <b>these</b> women <b>do not bring</b> a sin offering, and among them are a woman who gives birth by caesarean section. <b>Rabbi Shimon deems</b> a woman <b>liable</b> to bring an offering <b>in</b> a case where she gives birth by <b>caesarean section.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Shimon? Reish Lakish said</b> that <b>the verse states: “But if she bears a girl”</b> (Leviticus 12:5). The term “she bears” is superfluous in the context of the passage, and it serves <b>to include another</b> type of <b>birth,</b> and <b>what</b> is <b>it?</b> This is a birth by <b>caesarean section.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the Rabbis, what is</b> their <b>reasoning? Rabbi Mani bar Pattish said</b> that their ruling is derived from the verse: <b>“If a woman conceives [<i>tazria</i>] and gives birth to a male”</b> (Leviticus 12:2). The word <i>tazria</i> literally means to receive seed, indicating that all the <i>halakhot</i> mentioned in that passage do not apply <b>unless she gives birth through the place where she receives seed,</b> not through any other place, such as in the case of a caesarean section.

### Part 21
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> A woman who gives birth to a daughter counts fourteen days during which she is ritually impure. That is followed by sixty-six days during which she remains ritually pure even if she experiences a flow of blood. The Torah obligates a woman to bring her offering on the eighty-first day (see Leviticus 12:1–6). If the woman miscarries another fetus before that day, she is not required to bring an additional offering. In the case of a woman <b>who miscarries</b> a fetus <b>on the night of,</b> i.e., preceding, <b>the eighty-first</b> day, <b>Beit Shammai deem</b> her <b>exempt from</b> bringing a second <b>offering and Beit Hillel deem</b> her <b>liable</b> to bring a second offering.

### Part 22
<b>Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: What is different</b> between the <b>night of the eighty-first and</b> the <b>day of the eighty-first? If they are equal with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>ritual impurity,</b> i.e., the blood flow of this woman on the eighty-first night renders her ritually impure and all the standard strictures of ritual impurity apply to her, <b>will</b> the two time periods <b>not be equal with regard to</b> liability to bring an additional <b>offering</b> as well?

### Part 23
<b>Beit Shammai said to</b> Beit Hillel: <b>No,</b> there is a difference between that night and the following day. <b>If you said with regard to</b> a woman <b>who miscarries</b> on the <b>eighty-first day</b> that she is obligated to bring an additional offering, this is logical, <b>as she emerged into a period that is fit</b> for <b>her to bring</b> her <b>offering.</b> Would you <b>say</b> the same <b>with regard to</b> a woman <b>who miscarries on the night of</b> the <b>eighty-first</b> day, <b>where she did not emerge into a period that is fit</b> for <b>her to bring</b> her <b>offering,</b> as offerings are not sacrificed at night?

### Part 24
<b>Beit Hillel said to</b> Beit Shammai: <b>But let</b> the case of a woman <b>who miscarries on</b> the <b>eighty-first day that occurs on Shabbat prove</b> that this distinction is incorrect, <b>as she did not emerge into a period that is fit</b> for <b>her to bring</b> her <b>offering</b> because individual offerings are not sacrificed on Shabbat, <b>and</b> nevertheless <b>she is obligated to bring</b> an additional <b>offering.</b>

### Part 25
<b>Beit Shammai said to</b> Beit Hillel: <b>No,</b> there is a difference between these cases. <b>If you said</b> this ruling with regard to a woman <b>who miscarries on</b> the <b>eighty-first day that occurs on Shabbat,</b> the reason is <b>that although</b> Shabbat <b>is unfit for</b> the sacrifice of <b>an individual offering,</b> it is <b>fit for</b> the sacrifice of <b>a communal offering</b> whose time is fixed, e.g., the daily offering. Would you <b>say</b> the same <b>with regard to</b> a woman <b>who miscarries on the night of</b> the <b>eighty-first</b> day, <b>as the night is completely unfit,</b> since <b>neither an individual offering nor a communal offering</b> is sacrificed at night?

### Part 26
Beit Shammai add: <b>And</b> as for the ritual impurity status of <b>the blood,</b> i.e., Beit Hillel’s opinion that the two time periods are equal with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity, this <b>does not prove</b> what the <i>halakha</i> should be with regard to offerings, <b>as</b> with regard to a woman <b>who miscarries</b> before the <b>completion</b> of the term of eighty days, <b>her blood is impure</b> like the blood of a woman after childbirth, and nevertheless <b>she is exempt from</b> bringing <b>the offering.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC