
### Part 1
reason that <b>the Merciful One writes: “You may not eat”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:17), <b>to establish</b> the consumption of second-tithe produce outside Jerusalem <b>as a prohibition.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara challenges: <b>But still, it is a general prohibition,</b> as all three types of second tithe are included in a single command. The Gemara explains: <b>If so,</b> that one receives only one set of lashes, <b>let</b> the verse <b>say: You may not eat them within your gates,</b> as a previous verse already stated “your tithes” (Deuteronomy 12:11). <b>Why do I</b> need the verse to specify: <b>“The tithe of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil”?</b> This serves <b>to designate</b> a prohibition and the punishment of lashes for the <b>consumption of each and every</b> type of produce.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: One who eats bread, parched grain, and fresh stalks</b> before the <i>omer</i> offering has been sacrificed <b>is flogged</b> with <b>three</b> sets of lashes, as it states: “And you shall eat neither bread, nor parched grain, nor fresh stalks until this day itself, until you have brought the offering of your God; it is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings” (Leviticus 23:14). The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But one is not flogged for</b> transgressing <b>a general prohibition.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is different here, as the verses are superfluous;</b> the verse did not need to specify these three types of grain products.

### Part 4
The Gemara tries to ascertain which terms are superfluous. <b>Let</b> the verse <b>say “bread,” and we will derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>parched grain and fresh stalks from</b> that of bread. The Gemara questions this suggestion: This derivation <b>can be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about bread?</b> It is unique <b>in that it</b> has <b>an increased</b> obligation <b>with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> which is separated only from the dough of bread, not from parched grain and fresh stalks not made into dough.

### Part 5
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>write</b> only <b>“parched grain,” and let it not write bread</b> or fresh stalks, <b>and we will derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of bread and fresh stalks <b>from</b> that of <b>parched grain.</b> The Gemara responds: The <i>halakha</i> of <b>bread cannot be derived from</b> that of <b>parched grain due to</b> the fact <b>that parched grain is in its unadulterated form,</b> whereas <b>bread is not in its unadulterated form,</b> i.e., it has been fully processed, and therefore it can be maintained that only produce that has not been changed is prohibited before the <i>omer</i>. Likewise, the <i>halakha</i> of <b>fresh stalks cannot be derived from</b> that of <b>parched grain due to</b> the fact <b>that parched grain</b> has <b>an increased</b> obligation <b>with regard to meal offerings,</b> as the <i>omer</i> meal offering is of parched grain, whereas <b>fresh stalks do not</b> have <b>an increased</b> obligation <b>with regard to meal offerings.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>write</b> only <b>“fresh stalks,” and we will derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>bread and parched grain from</b> that of fresh stalks. The Gemara responds: This derivation <b>can be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about fresh stalks?</b> They are unique <b>in that they have not changed from their original state</b> at all. The Gemara states: Clearly, the <i>halakha</i> of two of these types <b>cannot be derived from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of any <b>one</b> of the others. But <b>let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>one</b> of them <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the other <b>two.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Let the verse not write bread, and let us derive</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> that of <b>parched grain and fresh stalks.</b> The Gemara responds: This derivation <b>can be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about parched grain and fresh stalks?</b> They are unique in <b>that</b> relative to bread, which has been fully processed, <b>they are in their unadulterated form.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let the verse not write fresh stalks, and let us derive</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>bread and parched grain.</b> The Gemara responds: This derivation <b>can be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about bread and parched grain?</b> They are unique <b>in that they</b> have <b>an increased</b> obligation <b>with regard to meal offerings.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak</b> could <b>say to you: Let the verse not write parched grain, and let us derive</b> its <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>bread and fresh stalks. What</b> would you say to <b>refute</b> this? <b>If you refute</b> it by saying: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about bread?</b> It is unique <b>in that it</b> has <b>an increased</b> obligation <b>with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> the example of <b>fresh stalks will prove</b> that this is not a decisive factor, as the obligation of <i>ḥalla</i> does not apply to it and yet it is prohibited before the <i>omer</i>. <b>And if</b> you would refute the derivation <b>due to</b> the fact that <b>fresh stalks</b> differ from parched grain, as they have <b>not changed from</b> their <b>original state,</b> the case of <b>bread will prove</b> that this is not the key factor, as it has changed from its original state and yet it is prohibited. <b>Therefore,</b> one <b>is flogged</b> for each type, <b>as</b> the verse <b>is superfluous.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that for the consumption of <b>parched grain, whose</b> mention <b>is superfluous,</b> one <b>is</b> separately <b>liable</b> to receive <b>one</b> set of lashes, whereas <b>for</b> eating <b>all</b> the rest <b>of them,</b> i.e., bread and fresh stalks, one <b>is liable</b> to be flogged with only <b>one</b> set of lashes, as they are prohibited by a general prohibition? The Gemara explains: <b>If so,</b> and the <i>halakha</i> of parched grain is unique, <b>let the verse write: Bread, fresh stalks, and parched grain; alternatively, let it write: Parched grain, bread, and fresh stalks. Why does it write</b> the example <b>of parched grain in between</b> the others? <b>This</b> is what the verse <b>is saying:</b> One who eats <b>bread is liable to</b> receive the punishment given for eating <b>parched grain, and</b> likewise one who eats <b>fresh stalks is liable to</b> receive the punishment given for eating <b>parched grain.</b>

### Part 10
§ <b>Rabbi Yannai says: A verbal analogy should never be lightly regarded in your eyes, as</b> the fact that one is punished with <i>karet</i> for consuming meat of <b>an offering that was sacrificed with the intent to consume it after its appointed time [<i>piggul</i>]</b> is <b>one of the fundamental</b> principles <b>of the Torah, and the verse taught it only through a verbal analogy.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara explains that this is <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>Zavda bar Levi teaches: It is stated there,</b> with regard to meat of an offering left over after the appointed time for its consumption [<i>notar</i>]: <b>“But everyone who eats it shall bear his iniquity”</b> (Leviticus 19:8), <b>and it is stated here,</b> with regard to intent to consume an offering after its appointed time: <b>“And the soul that eats it shall bear his iniquity”</b> (Leviticus 7:18). <b>Just as there</b> the punishment for eating <i>notar</i> is <b><i>karet</i>, so too here,</b> the punishment for eating <i>piggul</i> is <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Simai says: A verbal analogy should never be lightly regarded in your eyes, as</b> the fact that one is punished with <i>karet</i> for consuming <b><i>notar</i>,</b> from which it is derived that one is punished with <i>karet</i> for partaking of <i>piggul</i>, is <b>one of the fundamental</b> principles <b>of the Torah, and the verse taught it only through a verbal analogy.</b>

### Part 13
<b>What is</b> this verbal analogy? One <b>derives</b> by verbal analogy of the word <b>“sacred”</b> in Leviticus and the word <b>“sacred”</b> in Exodus that the verse: “But everyone who eats it shall bear his iniquity,” is discussing <i>notar</i>. This verse states: <b>“But everyone who eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned the sacred thing of the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 19:8), <b>and it is written: “You shall burn the leftovers [<i>notar</i>] in fire;</b> they are not to be eaten, <b>for</b> they are <b>sacred”</b> (Exodus 29:34). Just as the verse in Exodus is referring to <i>notar</i>, the same is true of the verse in Leviticus.

### Part 14
<b>Abaye says: A verbal analogy should never be lightly regarded in your eyes, as</b> the fact that one is punished with <i>karet</i> for engaging in intercourse with <b>one’s daughter</b> born <b>from the woman he raped is</b> one of <b>the fundamental</b> principles <b>of the Torah, and the verse taught it only through a verbal analogy.</b>

### Part 15
Abaye elaborates: This is <b>as Rava says: Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said to me</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is <b>derived</b> by a verbal analogy between the unusual form <b>“they [<i>henna</i>]”</b> and <b>“they [<i>henna</i>],”</b> written <b>with regard to the prohibition</b> against engaging in intercourse with one’s daughter born from the woman he raped. As it is written: “The nakedness of a woman and her daughter…you shall not take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness: They [<i>henna</i>] are near kinswomen” (Leviticus 18:17). And it is stated: “The nakedness of your son’s daughter, or of your daughter’s daughter; for they [<i>henna</i>] are your own nakedness” (Leviticus 18:10). This latter verse is interpreted as referring to one’s granddaughter from the woman he raped (see <i>Yevamot</i> 97a). The verbal analogy teaches that although one’s daughter from the woman he raped is not mentioned in the verse, she too is included with one’s granddaughter, just as a daughter and a granddaughter are equated in Leviticus 18:17.

### Part 16
Furthermore, the punishment for this transgression of intercourse with one’s daughter from the woman he raped is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy between: “It is <b>lewdness”</b> (Leviticus 18:17), which is written with regard to engaging in intercourse with both a woman and her daughter, and the same term <b>“lewdness”</b> that appears elsewhere, which teaches that the transgressor is liable <b>to</b> be put to death by <b>burning.</b> As it is stated: “And if a man take with his wife also her mother, it is lewdness; they shall be burnt with fire, both he and they” (Leviticus 20:14). This teaches that death by burning is the punishment for engaging in intercourse with both a woman and her daughter, and the same applies to intercourse with one’s daughter from the woman he raped, due to the verbal analogy of <i>henna</i> and <i>henna</i> linking the two cases.

### Part 17
<b>Rav Ashi says: A verbal analogy should not be lightly regarded in your eyes, as</b> the list of <b>those who are</b> liable to be put to death by <b>stoning is one</b> of <b>the fundamental</b> principles <b>of the Torah, and the verse taught it only through a verbal analogy.</b>

### Part 18
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>it is stated here,</b> with regard to engaging in intercourse with specific relatives: <b>“Their blood shall be upon them”</b> (Leviticus 20:11–16), <b>and it is stated with regard to a necromancer and a sorcerer: “Their blood shall be upon them”</b> (Leviticus 20:27). <b>Just as there,</b> the verse specifies that a necromancer and a sorcerer are executed <b>by stoning, so too here,</b> with regard to one who engages in intercourse with those relatives, they are executed <b>by stoning.</b>

### Part 19
§ The mishna’s list of prohibitions for whose unwitting violation one must bring a sin offering includes <b>one who blends the</b> anointing <b>oil</b> according to the specifications of the oil prepared by Moses in the wilderness (see Exodus 30:22–33). <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who blends the</b> anointing <b>oil to learn</b> how <b>it</b> was prepared or <b>to transfer it to the community</b> for them to use in the Temple is <b>exempt.</b> But if he blends the anointing oil in order <b>to apply</b> it to his body he is <b>liable. And one who applies</b> to his body the oil prepared by another is <b>exempt, because he is liable for applying</b> the oil to his body <b>only</b> if he uses <b>the anointing oil that was prepared by Moses alone,</b> in accordance with the verse: “Or whoever puts any of it upon a stranger” (Exodus 30:33), which is referring to that specific oil.

### Part 20
<b>The Master said</b> earlier: One who blends the anointing oil <b>to learn</b> how <b>it</b> was prepared or <b>in order to transfer it to the community</b> for them to use in the Temple is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? The Gemara answers: This is <b>derived</b> via a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the term: <b>“Its composition”</b> (Exodus 30:32), written with regard to the oil and the term: <b>“According to its composition”</b> (Exodus 30:37), written <b>with regard to</b> the <b>incense. And it is written with regard to</b> the <b>incense</b> in that verse: “You shall not prepare for yourselves,” from which it is inferred that <b>it is</b> incense prepared <b>for yourselves that is prohibited, but</b> if one prepares it <b>to transfer it to the community</b> he is <b>exempt. With regard to</b> the anointing <b>oil as well,</b> one who blends it <b>to transfer it to the community</b> is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> in light of this verbal analogy, <b>let</b> the case of <b>incense return and let us derive</b> it <b>from</b> that of the anointing <b>oil: Just as</b> with regard to the anointing oil, <b>when one blends</b> it <b>in halves,</b> i.e., not all the specified amount at once, he is <b>exempt, so too,</b> with regard to the <b>incense, when one blends</b> it <b>in halves</b> he should be <b>exempt. Why,</b> then, does <b>Rava say:</b> In the case of <b>incense that one blended in halves,</b> he is <b>liable,</b> whereas with regard to anointing <b>oil that one blended in halves,</b> he is <b>exempt?</b>

### Part 22
The Gemara answers that <b>Rava</b> could <b>say to you: With regard to</b> the anointing <b>oil it is written: “Neither shall you prepare any like it according to its composition”</b> (Exodus 30:32), which indicates that <b>it is</b> oil prepared precisely <b>like it that is prohibited, but</b> with regard to preparing <b>half of it,</b> one may <b>well</b> do so. By contrast, <b>with regard to incense, as it is written: “And the incense that you shall prepare,</b> according to its composition you shall not prepare for yourselves” (Exodus 30:37), which teaches that <b>any</b> act of <b>preparing of</b> this <b>incense</b> is prohibited, as it is <b>possible to burn a portion,</b> half of the <i>maneh</i> that must be prepared, <b>in the morning, and a portion in the afternoon.</b>

### Part 23
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The anointing oil</b> contains <b>pure myrrh</b> weighing <b>500</b> shekels, <b>cassia</b> of <b>500</b> shekels, <b>aromatic cinnamon</b> of <b>500</b> shekels, <b>and aromatic calamus</b> of <b>250</b> shekels. <b>It is found</b> that <b>all of them</b> together amount to <b>1,750</b> shekels.

### Part 24
The Gemara expresses surprise at the statement of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Does the <i>tanna</i></b> come to <b>teach us the tally?</b> Why is it necessary for the <i>baraita</i> to state the sum of the amounts? The Gemara answers that <b>this is difficult for the <i>tanna</i>:</b> Since the verse states: “And of aromatic cinnamon half so much, two hundred and fifty, and of aromatic calamus two hundred and fifty” (Exodus 30:23), one might <b>say</b> that the weight of <b>aromatic calamus</b> is <b>like</b> that of <b>aromatic cinnamon: Just as half of</b> the amount of <b>aromatic cinnamon</b> is <b>two hundred and fifty, so too,</b> the verse means that <b>half of</b> the amount of <b>aromatic calamus</b> is <b>two hundred and fifty, which</b> would mean that the sum total <b>is two thousand.</b>

### Part 25
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that it is <b>indeed</b> so, that the total weight of calamus is five hundred? The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse write: And of aromatic cinnamon and of aromatic calamus half so much and half so much, two hundred and fifty.</b> The fact that the verse employs the term “half so much” only with regard to cinnamon indicates that their weights were different.

### Part 26
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: When one weighs</b> these substances, <b>does he weigh</b> the ingredients <b>with</b> a slight <b>surplus,</b> so that they tip the scales, or <b>does he weigh</b> the ingredients <b>with precision?</b> Abaye <b>said to him</b> that <b>the Merciful One writes: “Of each there shall be a like weight”</b> (Exodus 30:34), which indicates a precise measure, <b>and you say</b> it is possible that one weighs the ingredients <b>with a surplus?</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t Rabbi Yehuda say: The Holy One, Blessed be He, knows</b> the amount of <b>surpluses</b> that should be added. <b>Evidently, there is a surplus</b> involved <b>in these</b> measures.

### Part 27
<b>Rather,</b> one certainly weighs with a surplus, and this is what <b>Rav Yehuda says: With regard to aromatic cinnamon, why does one bring half of its</b> total <b>of five hundred,</b> i.e., <b>two hundred and fifty at one time, and two hundred and fifty at one time? Since its entire</b> amount <b>is five hundred, let him bring five hundred all at once. Conclude from</b> the fact <b>that one brings aromatic cinnamon at two</b> separate <b>times</b> that <b>there is a surplus</b> involved <b>in this</b> measure, i.e., one must add a little each time he weighs the cinnamon, <b>and the Holy One, Blessed be He, knows</b> the amount <b>of surpluses.</b>

### Part 28
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to Rav Yehuda’s opinion, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>“Of each there shall be a like weight”? Ravina said:</b> It means <b>that one should not place a weight</b> of one ingredient <b>against</b> the <b>weight</b> of another ingredient <b>and weigh</b> in this manner. In other words, after weighing one of the ingredients one may not weigh another ingredient against that one; rather, each ingredient must be weighed independently against the scales.

### Part 29
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: How did they prepare <b>the anointing oil that Moses prepared in the wilderness?</b> They would <b>cook the roots</b> of the spices <b>in it;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei said to him: But</b> that amount of oil <b>is not sufficient</b> even <b>to apply</b> to <b>the roots,</b> as they would absorb the oil; how, then, could the roots be cooked in it? Instead, <b>how</b> did they <b>act? They brought the roots and boiled them in water</b> and the fragrant substance would rise to the top, <b>and one poured the anointing oil on</b> the water, <b>and</b> the oil would <b>absorb the fragrance</b> and retain it, <b>and</b> later he <b>removed</b> the oil <b>[<i>vekipeḥo</i>]</b> from off the top and place it in its flask. This is how the anointing oil was prepared.

### Part 30
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said to</b> Rabbi Yosei:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC