
### Part 1
it is possible for a woman who gave birth to count <b>dispersed</b> days? No, as <b>the Rabbis say</b> that <b>she counts</b> the days from the birth <b>of</b> the <b>second fetus. Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? And</b> therefore, <b>conclude from it</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>is of</b> the opinion that the second offspring is considered as though it exists only where <b>a stringency</b> results, but where <b>a leniency</b> results, <b>he is not of</b> the opinion that the second offspring is considered to have existed.

### Part 2
<b>And further, Rav Ashi said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>, which discusses the verse: “Sixty days <b>and six days”</b> (Leviticus 12:5). One <b>might</b> have thought that she counts these six days <b>whether they are continuous or dispersed,</b> so that if, for example, she miscarried on the sixty-third day, she would complete the remaining three days of purity for the first fetus after completing the period of purification for the second. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Sixty”</b> to teach that <b>just as the sixty days are all continuous, so too, the six days are all continuous. Whose</b> opinion is this? <b>If we say</b> it is the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> that cannot be correct, as <b>are the Rabbis</b> of the opinion that it is possible for a woman who gave birth to count <b>dispersed</b> days? <b>Didn’t the Rabbis say</b> that <b>she counts for</b> the <b>second offspring?</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? And</b> therefore, may one <b>conclude from it</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda is of</b> the opinion that the second offspring is considered extant only where <b>a stringency</b> results; but where <b>a leniency</b> results, <b>he is not of</b> the opinion that the second offspring is considered to have existed? The Gemara rules: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is the case.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>These</b> are the five situations mentioned in the mishna (9a) in which one <b>brings a sliding-scale offering: For hearing the voice</b> of an oath, i.e., where one took a false oath that he does not have any testimony to provide on a given issue; <b>and for</b> the <b>utterance of the lips,</b> which is a case where one took a false oath about a different matter; <b>and for</b> the <b>defiling of</b> the <b>Temple,</b> by entering it while ritually impure, <b>or</b> defiling <b>its sacrificial</b> foods, by partaking of them while ritually impure; <b>and a woman after childbirth; and a leper</b> at the end of his purification process.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the nature of a sliding-scale offering, which varies depending on the owner’s financial status: <b>There is</b> a case in which <b>one brings</b> the offering in one of two possible states, either a bird offering if the individual is in a state <b>of poverty or</b> an animal offering if he is in a state of <b>wealth; and there is</b> a case in which <b>one brings</b> the offering in one of three possible states, of wealth, <b>of poverty,</b> or <b>of extreme poverty.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates: <b>A woman after childbirth brings</b> a sliding-scale offering either <b>in poverty,</b> i.e., two doves or two pigeons, one as a burnt offering and one as a sin offering, <b>or</b> in <b>wealth,</b> i.e., a lamb as a burnt offering and a dove or a pigeon as a sin offering (see Leviticus 12:1–8). <b>A leper brings</b> the offering either <b>in poverty</b> in the form of a lamb for a guilt offering, and two doves or two pigeons, one as a sin offering and one as a burnt offering, or in wealth in the form of a lamb for a guilt offering, a lamb as a burnt offering, and a female lamb as a sin offering (see Leviticus 14:10–22). For <b>the hearing of the voice,</b> i.e., taking a false oath that one cannot provide testimony, <b>or the utterance of the lips,</b> or the <b>defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, one <b>brings</b> an offering either in wealth, i.e., a female lamb or goat as a sin offering, <b>or in poverty,</b> i.e., two doves or two pigeons, one as a sin offering and one as a burnt offering, <b>or in extreme poverty,</b> i.e., a meal offering.

### Part 7
It <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: When offerings are brought in poverty rather than wealth, <b>there is</b> a case in which one <b>brings one</b> offering <b>instead of</b> a different <b>one; there is</b> a case in which one <b>brings two</b> offerings <b>instead of two</b> other offerings; <b>there is</b> a case in which one <b>brings two</b> offerings <b>instead of one</b> offering; and <b>there is</b> a case in which one <b>brings one</b> offering <b>instead of two</b> offerings. <b>From here you may derive</b> that the offering <b>of one-tenth of an ephah</b> may be worth as little <b>as one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>A woman after childbirth brings one</b> offering <b>instead of one</b> offering: <b>One young bird,</b> as a sin offering that she would bring even in wealth, <b>and</b> another <b>bird</b> as a burnt offering <b>instead of</b> the <b>lamb. A leper</b> brings <b>two young birds instead of two lambs.</b> For <b>the hearing of the voice and the utterance of the lips and the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, one <b>brings two young birds instead of one female lamb, and in</b> a case <b>of extreme poverty</b> one <b>brings one</b> meal offering of <b>one-tenth of an ephah instead of two young birds.</b>

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: From here you may derive</b> that the offering <b>of one-tenth of an ephah</b> may be worth as little <b>as one <i>peruta</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> learn this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that it is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me to</b> bring an offering worth <b>one <i>sela</i> to the altar,</b> he <b>brings a lamb, as there is nothing that is sacrificed upon the altar</b> that is worth <b>one <i>sela</i> other than a lamb.</b>

### Part 10
<b>From where</b> is this <i>halakha</i> derived? It is derived <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah that the <b>ram</b> brought in its second year as <b>a guilt offering</b> must be “according to your valuation in <b>silver</b> by <b>shekels”</b> (Leviticus 5:15), i.e., it must be worth two <i>sela</i>. It may therefore be understood <b>by inference that a lamb,</b> i.e., a young ram, <b>in its</b> first <b>year is</b> worth <b>one <i>sela</i>.</b> And it is known that a lamb is brought when it is within its first year, <b>as it is written: “A lamb of the first year”</b> (Leviticus 12:6). <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna (8a): The price of <b>nests,</b> i.e., pairs of birds brought by an impoverished person instead of a lamb, <b>stood that day at one-quarter</b> of a silver dinar. A quarter-dinar is one-sixteenth of a <i>sela</i>, the price of a lamb.

### Part 11
<b>And from</b> the fact <b>that the Merciful One has mercy upon</b> one who brings an offering <b>in poverty,</b> in that He permits him to bring an offering <b>that is</b> worth <b>one-sixteenth</b> of the value of the lamb that is brought <b>in wealth,</b> it may be inferred that <b>the Merciful One takes pity upon</b> one who brings an offering <b>in extreme poverty,</b> and consequently He permits him to bring an offering <b>which is</b> worth <b>one-sixteenth</b> of the value of the offering brought <b>in</b> moderate <b>poverty.</b> Accordingly, the offering brought in extreme poverty may be equal to a two hundred fifty-sixth part of the value of a <i>sela</i>.

### Part 12
The Gemara examines the mathematics necessary to determine that the value of the offering brought in extreme poverty is equal to one <i>peruta</i>: <b>If so, how much is</b> the offering brought in <b>poverty</b> worth? It is worth <b>one-quarter</b> of a dinar. <b>And how many <i>perutot</i></b> are <b>in one-quarter</b> of a dinar? <b>Forty-eight <i>perutot</i>.</b> Accordingly, <b>how many</b> <i>perutot</i> <b>are</b> in the offering brought in extreme poverty, which is worth <b>one-sixteenth of</b> the offering brought in <b>poverty? Three <i>perutot</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> with regard to <b>that</b> which the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: From here you may derive</b> that the offering <b>of one-tenth of an ephah</b> may be worth as little <b>as one <i>peruta</i>, why</b> did the <i>baraita</i> teach that it may be worth <b>one <i>peruta</i>,</b> rather than three <i>perutot</i>? <b>Didn’t you say</b> that <b>one-tenth of an ephah is</b> brought in <b>extreme poverty, and you</b> also <b>said</b> that this offering should be worth <b>one-sixteenth of</b> the offering brought in <b>poverty, which we calculated to be three <i>perutot</i>?</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>The <i>tanna</i> derives</b> the cost of an offering brought in poverty <b>from</b> the case of <b>a woman after childbirth, who brings one bird instead of a lamb, as</b> a bird <b>is</b> worth <b>one thirty-second</b> of the value <b>of a lamb.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But until now, how much</b> was the offering brought in <b>extreme poverty</b> calculated to be worth? <b>One-sixteenth</b> of the value of the offering brought <b>in poverty.</b> And <b>from where</b> is this <b>derived?</b> It is derived <b>from</b> the value of <b>the lamb and</b> the <b>ram,</b> as explained earlier. If so, <b>until now,</b> the calculations lead to the conclusion that the offering brought in extreme poverty <b>is</b> worth <b>one and one-half <i>perutot</i>,</b> as one thirty-second of the value of a lamb is equal to one-eighth of a silver dinar rather than one-quarter, which means that the offering brought in poverty is worth twenty-four <i>perutot</i>, one-sixteenth of which is equal to one and one-half <i>perutot</i>.

### Part 15
Rather, <b>Rava said</b> a different answer: <b>The entire matter is derived from</b> the offering brought by <b>a woman after childbirth, and this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying:</b> It is derived <b>from</b> the fact that <b>the Merciful One has mercy upon</b> one who brings an offering <b>in poverty, in</b> that he may bring an offering <b>which is</b> worth <b>one thirty-second</b> of the value of the offering brought <b>in wealth.</b> Rava adds parenthetically: <b>And</b> from <b>what</b> case <b>is this</b> principle derived? From the case of <b>a woman after childbirth. So too, the Merciful One has mercy upon</b> one who brings an offering <b>in extreme poverty, in</b> that he may bring an offering <b>that is</b> worth <b>one thirty-second</b> of the value of the offering brought in moderate <b>poverty.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> the value should <b>be one <i>peruta</i> minus one-quarter,</b> i.e., three-quarters of a <i>peruta</i>. The Gemara explains: <b>Indeed</b> that is so, <b>but</b> it is <b>not proper conduct to bring</b> an offering worth <b>less than one <i>peruta</i> before God.</b>

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>What are</b> the differences <b>between</b> an espoused <b>maidservant and all those</b> others <b>with whom relations are forbidden?</b> The difference is <b>that</b> the status of the maidservant <b>is not equal to their</b> status, <b>neither with regard to punishment nor with regard to an offering, as</b> one who unwittingly engages in intercourse with <b>any of those with whom relations are forbidden</b> is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a sin offering, and</b> by contrast, one who unwittingly engages in intercourse with an espoused <b>maidservant</b> is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a guilt offering.</b> One who unwittingly engages in intercourse with <b>any of those with whom relations are forbidden</b> brings <b>a female</b> animal, <b>and</b> one who unwittingly engages in intercourse with an espoused <b>maidservant</b> brings <b>a male</b> animal, as a sin offering is a female and a guilt offering is a male.

### Part 18
Furthermore, with regard to engaging in intercourse with <b>any of those with whom relations are forbidden, both the man and the woman are equal with regard to</b> liability to receive <b>lashes</b> if they were forewarned, <b>and with regard to</b> liability to bring <b>an offering</b> if they did so unwittingly. <b>And in</b> the case of one who engages in intercourse with <b>a maidservant,</b> the Torah <b>did not equate the man with the woman with regard to lashes,</b> as she alone is flogged, as will be explained, <b>and</b> the Torah <b>did not equate the woman with the man with regard to</b> bringing <b>an offering,</b> as she does not bring an offering.

### Part 19
<b>With regard to</b> intercourse with <b>any of those with whom relations are forbidden,</b> the Torah <b>rendered</b> the halakhic status of <b>one who engages in the initial stage</b> of intercourse [<i>hame’areh</i>] to be <b>like</b> that of one who <b>completes</b> the act, <b>and one is liable</b> to bring a sin offering <b>for each and every</b> act of <b>intercourse</b> that he performs unwittingly. By contrast, in the case of relations with an espoused maidservant, one is liable only for completing the act of intercourse, and the man brings a single offering for several transgressions.

### Part 20
<b>This is a stringency</b> that the Torah <b>imposed with regard to the maidservant</b> relative to other individuals with whom relations are forbidden:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC