
### Part 1
<b>And was</b> just <b>one miracle performed with the anointing oil? But many miracles were performed with it, from its initial</b> preparation <b>to its end.</b> He explains: <b>Its initial</b> preparation <b>was only</b> the measure of <b>twelve <i>log</i>, and</b> even so <b>the Tabernacle and its vessels were anointed with it, and</b> likewise <b>Aaron and his sons</b> were anointed with it <b>all the seven days of inauguration, and High Priests and kings were anointed with it</b> throughout the generations, <b>and</b> yet despite the reduction in the amount of oil during its preparation process, as well as its multiple uses throughout history, <b>it all</b> remains <b>intact for</b> its use in <b>the future.</b>

### Part 2
Rabbi Yehuda adds that this is <b>as it is stated: “This [<i>zeh</i>] shall be a sacred anointing oil to Me throughout your generations”</b> (Exodus 30:31). The word <b><i>zeh</i> has a numerical value [<i>bigimatriya</i>]</b> of <b>twelve,</b> which teaches that the original twelve <b><i>log</i></b> of oil that existed at the outset <b>are</b> extant throughout all the generations. If so, i.e., if such miracles were performed in connection with the oil, it is no wonder that its initial preparation was miraculous.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the Tabernacle</b> and all that was in it and sanctified them” (Leviticus 8:10). <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>the anointing oil that Moses prepared in the wilderness, many miracles were performed with it, from its initial</b> preparation <b>to its end. Its initial</b> preparation <b>was only twelve <i>log</i>;</b> consider <b>how much</b> of it <b>a cauldron absorbs</b> from what is cooked inside it, <b>and how much</b> of it the <b>roots</b> of the plants <b>absorb, how much</b> of it <b>the fire burns, and</b> yet <b>the Tabernacle, and its vessels,</b> and <b>Aaron, and his sons were</b> all <b>anointed with it all seven days of the inauguration.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And High Priests and kings were anointed with it, and even a High Priest, the son of a High Priest, requires anointing</b> with the oil. <b>But one does not anoint a king, the son of a king. And if you say:</b> If so, <b>for what</b> reason <b>did they anoint King Solomon,</b> who was the son of King David? It was <b>due to the dispute</b> over the throne instigated by his older brother <b>Adonijah,</b> who attempted to usurp the monarchy. <b>And</b> similarly <b>Joash,</b> son of Ahaziah, was anointed king (see II Kings 11:12) <b>due to</b> the threat of <b>Athaliah,</b> his paternal grandmother, who attempted to seize the monarchy for herself (II Kings 11:1–3). <b>And Jehoahaz,</b> son of Josiah, was anointed as king (II Kings 23:30) <b>due to</b> the competition from <b>Jehoiakim, his brother, who was two years older than his brother,</b> i.e., Jehoahaz. Ordinarily the older brother succeeds the father, but Jehoahaz was more worthy of the throne.

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies several aspects of this <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> earlier: <b>And even a High Priest, the son of a High Priest, requires anointing.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And the anointed priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons”</b> (Leviticus 6:15). <b>Let the verse say</b> merely: <b>The priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons. What</b> is taught by the addition of the term <b>“anointed”? This teaches us that even</b> when the new High Priest is <b>from among</b> the <b>sons</b> of the previous High Priest, only <b>that</b> priest <b>who is anointed</b> with oil <b>is</b> the <b>High Priest, but if</b> he is <b>not anointed</b> with oil he <b>is not</b> the <b>High Priest.</b>

### Part 6
<b>The Master said</b> earlier: <b>But one does not anoint a king, the son of a king.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that this is <b>as it is written: In order that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his sons, all the days</b> in the midst of Israel (see Deuteronomy 17:20). The mention of a king’s sons teaches that the kingdom <b>is an inheritance,</b> which does not need to be confirmed by anointing.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> further taught: <b>And for what</b> reason <b>did they anoint King Solomon? Due to the dispute</b> over the throne instigated by his older brother <b>Adonijah.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> in a situation <b>where there is a dispute</b> the new king <b>requires anointing, and the</b> current <b>king cannot</b> simply <b>grant the kingship as an inheritance to whomever he desires? Rav Pappa said</b> that <b>the verse states:</b> “He and his children <b>in the midst of Israel”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:20). <b>At a time when there is peace in Israel</b> the monarchy transfers smoothly to the king’s son, but not when there is a dispute.

### Part 8
It was <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Also Jehu,</b> son of Jehoshaphat, <b>son of Nimshi, was anointed</b> by Elisha the prophet <b>only due to</b> the <b>dispute</b> with <b>Joram, son of Ahab,</b> who was the incumbent king, against whose reign Jehu rebelled (see II Kings 9:1–6). The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> is it necessary to state this reason? <b>Let</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>derive</b> that Jehu required anointing due to the fact <b>that he</b> was <b>the first king</b> of his lineage, as Jehu was not the son of a king. The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete, and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching: One anoints the kings of the house of David</b> with the anointing oil, but <b>one does not anoint the kings</b> from the kingdom <b>of Israel. And if you say: For what</b> reason <b>did</b> Elisha <b>anoint Jehu,</b> son of Jehoshaphat, <b>son of Nimshi?</b> This was <b>due to</b> the <b>dispute</b> with <b>Joram, son of Ahab.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Master said</b> earlier: <b>One anoints the kings of the house of David</b> with the anointing oil, but <b>one does not anoint the kings of Israel.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the anointing of David: <b>“Arise, anoint him; for this is he”</b> (I Samuel 16:12). <b>This</b> king, i.e., any king from the house of David, <b>requires anointing, but another</b> king, i.e., from the kingdom of Israel, whose kings were not descendants of the house of David, <b>does not require anointing.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The Master said</b> earlier that Jehu was anointed <b>due to</b> the <b>dispute</b> with <b>Joram.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And due to</b> the <b>dispute</b> with <b>Joram, son of Ahab, will we misuse</b> consecrated property by anointing someone unnecessarily <b>with the anointing oil,</b> which is called “a sacred anointing oil” (Exodus 30:31)? After all, kings of the kingdom of Israel do not require anointing. The Gemara answers: This is <b>as Rav Pappa said</b> with regard to Jehoahaz: They anointed him <b>with pure balsam</b> oil, rather than with the anointing oil. <b>Here too,</b> Elisha anointed Jehu <b>with pure balsam</b> oil, not the anointing oil.

### Part 11
It was further stated in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And Jehoahaz,</b> son of Josiah, was anointed <b>due to</b> the competition from <b>Jehoiakim, his brother, who was two years older than him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And was</b> Jehoiakim in fact <b>older</b> than Jehoahaz? <b>But isn’t it written: “And the sons of Josiah: The firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum”</b> (I Chronicles 3:15); <b>and Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The one who is called Johanan in that verse <b>is</b> also called <b>Jehoahaz,</b> and the one who <b>is</b> called <b>Zedekiah is</b> the same as the one called <b>Shallum.</b> If so, Jehoahaz is the eldest son, not Jehoiakim. Why, then, was it necessary to anoint Jehoahaz?

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, Jehoiakim</b> was <b>actually older</b> than Jehoahaz. <b>And why</b> does the verse <b>call</b> Jehoahaz the <b>firstborn?</b> This is referring to the fact <b>that</b> Jehoahaz was the <b>firstborn with regard to the monarchy,</b> i.e., he became king first. The Gemara asks: <b>And do we establish the younger</b> son as king <b>before the older</b> son? <b>But isn’t it written</b> with regard to Jehoshaphat: <b>“And he gave the kingdom to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn”</b> (II Chronicles 21:3)? The Gemara answers: Jehoram <b>was</b> one <b>who filled the place of his fathers,</b> i.e., he was fit to serve as king, and therefore as he was firstborn he received the kingship, whereas Jehoiakim was deemed unworthy of the honor, despite being the oldest among his brothers.

### Part 13
<b>The Master said</b> earlier: The one who <b>is</b> called <b>Shallum is</b> also called <b>Zedekiah.</b> The Gemara objects: <b>But the Torah counts</b> these individuals <b>in a row,</b> i.e., one after the other, as I Chronicles 3:15 mentions the first, second, third, and fourth sons. This indicates that they are different people. The Gemara answers: Shallum and Zedekiah are in fact one and the same, <b>and what</b> is the reason the verse <b>calls</b> Zedekiah the <b>third?</b> The reason is <b>that he is third of the sons,</b> i.e., the third in order of birth. <b>And what</b> is the reason the verse <b>calls</b> Shallum the <b>fourth?</b> The reason is <b>that he is fourth to the kingship, because Jeconiah reigned before him.</b> How so? <b>Initially Jehoahaz reigned, and afterward Jehoiakim</b> reigned, <b>and afterward Jeconiah</b> reigned, <b>and afterward Zedekiah</b> reigned. Accordingly, Zedekiah, called Shallum, was fourth to the kingship.

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The one who <b>is</b> called <b>Shallum is</b> also called <b>Zedekiah, and why was he called Shallum? Because he was perfect [<i>shalem</i>] in his</b> good <b>deeds. Alternatively,</b> he was called <b>Shallum because in his days the kingdom of the house of David was completed [<i>shalam</i>],</b> as he was the last king in the Davidic dynasty. <b>And what</b> was <b>his</b> true <b>name? Mattaniah</b> was <b>his name, as it is stated: “And the king of Babylonia made Mattaniah, his father’s brother, king in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah”</b> (II Kings 24:17).

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> explains: Why did the king of Babylonia, Nebuchadnezzar, call him by the name Zedekiah? The reason is <b>that</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to him: God will justify [<i>yatzdik</i>] the judgment over you if you rebel against me, as it is stated</b> with regard to Nebuchadnezzar and Jehoiachin: <b>“And brought him to Babylon”</b> (II Chronicles 36:10), and with regard to Zedekiah it is stated: <b>“And he also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God”</b> (II Chronicles 36:13).

### Part 16
§ The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to the statement that Jehoahaz was anointed: <b>And was there anointing oil</b> in the days of Jehoahaz? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Yoma</i> 2:15) that <b>from when</b> the <b>Ark was sequestered,</b> along with it <b>was sequestered the jar of manna</b> that was next to it (see Exodus 16:33), <b>and the flask of the anointing oil, and Aaron’s staff</b> with its <b>almonds and blossoms</b> (see Numbers 17:23).

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> also sequestered with the Ark was the <b>chest that the Philistines sent as a gift to the God of Israel</b> after they captured the Ark and were stricken by several plagues, <b>as it is stated: “And put the jewels of gold that you return to Him for a guilt offering, in a coffer by its side,</b> and send it away that it may go” (I Samuel 6:8). <b>And who sequestered</b> the Ark? <b>Josiah, king of Judah, sequestered it, as it is stated: And the king said to the priests: Put the sacred Ark</b> in the house that Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel, built (see II Chronicles 35:3).

### Part 18
<b>And Rabbi Elazar says:</b> How do we know that all these items needed to be sequestered together with the Ark? The <i>halakha</i> that the jar of manna was to be kept with the Ark is <b>derived</b> through a verbal analogy between the words <b>“there”</b> and <b>“there.”</b> The word “there” is stated with regard to the Ark: “Where I will meet with you there” (Exodus 30:6), and it is also stated with regard to the manna: “And put there” (Exodus 16:33).

### Part 19
The <i>halakha</i> that the anointing oil was to be kept together with the Ark is <b>derived</b> through a verbal analogy between the words <b>“generations”</b> and <b>“generations.”</b> This term is stated with regard to the jar of manna: “To be kept throughout your generations” (Exodus 16:33), and also with regard to the anointing oil: “This shall be a sacred anointing oil to Me throughout your generations” (Exodus 30:31).

### Part 20
Finally, the <i>halakha</i> that Aaron’s staff was to be kept together with the Ark is <b>derived</b> through a verbal analogy between the terms <b>“to be kept”</b> and <b>“to be kept.”</b> This term is stated with regard to the jar of manna, and also with regard to Aaron’s staff: “To be kept there, for a token against the rebellious children” (Numbers 17:25). All these items, which are connected through these verbal analogies, including the anointing oil, were kept by the side of the Ark, and therefore they were sequestered together with the Ark. If so, how was Jehoahaz anointed with the anointing oil? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> They did not anoint Jehoahaz with the anointing oil, but <b>with pure balsam.</b>

### Part 21
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One anoints the kings</b> by placing the oil around the head in a shape <b>similar</b> to <b>a crown, and one anoints the</b> High <b>Priests</b> by placing the oil upon the head in the shape <b>similar</b> to <b>chi.</b> In explanation of this statement, <b>Rav Menashya says:</b> It is placed in a shape <b>similar</b> to the <b>Greek</b> letter <b>chi,</b> which looks like the letter Χ. It <b>is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>First, one pours oil on</b> the <b>head of</b> the High Priest, <b>and afterward one places oil between his eyelashes. And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>First, one places oil between his eyelashes, and afterward one pours oil on his head.</b> The <i>baraitot</i> contradict each other.

### Part 22
The Gemara explains: This <b>is</b> a matter of dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as <b>there is</b> a <i>tanna</i> <b>who says: Anointing</b> between his eyelashes is <b>preferable</b> to pouring on the head and therefore comes first, <b>and there is</b> a <i>tanna</i> <b>who says</b> that <b>pouring</b> on the head is <b>preferable</b> to anointing between his eyelashes, and therefore comes first. <b>What is the reasoning of the one who says</b> that <b>pouring</b> on the head is <b>preferable? As it is stated: “And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron’s head</b> and anointed him to sanctify him” (Leviticus 8:12), which indicates that pouring is first, followed by anointing. <b>And</b> as for <b>the one who says</b> that <b>anointing</b> between his eyelashes is <b>preferable</b> to pouring on the head and precedes it, <b>he holds</b> that anointing is preferable <b>in that</b> its use <b>is increased,</b> i.e., it is performed <b>on the service vessels,</b> whereas pouring is not mentioned with regard to the service vessels.

### Part 23
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> according to the opinion that anointing is preferable, <b>isn’t it written: “He poured,” and ultimately: “He anointed”</b> (Leviticus 8:12)? The Gemara explains that <b>this</b> is what the verse <b>is saying: What is the reason</b> for <b>“he poured”?</b> This action was made possible <b>due to</b> the fact that he had already: <b>“Anointed him to sanctify him.”</b> In other words, the pouring came after the anointing, which is the primary act.

### Part 24
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“It is like the precious oil upon the head</b> descending upon the beard; the beard of Aaron, that descends upon the collar of his garments” (Psalms 133:2). <b>Two drops</b> of anointing oil shaped <b>like pearls hung from Aaron’s beard. Rav Kahana says</b> it is <b>taught: When</b> Aaron <b>would speak</b> his beard would move, and these drops <b>would</b> miraculously <b>rise and sit on the roots of his beard,</b> so that they would not fall to the ground. <b>And with regard to this matter Moses, our teacher, was concerned,</b> thinking: <b>Perhaps, God forbid, I misused the anointing oil</b> by pouring too much, which resulted in these two additional drops.

### Part 25
<b>A Divine Voice emerged and said:</b> “It is like the precious oil upon the head, descending upon the beard; the beard of Aaron, that descends upon the collar of his garments, <b>like the dew of the Hermon that comes down upon the mountains of Zion”</b> (Psalms 133:2–3). This comparison serves to teach: <b>Just as the Hermon’s dew is not subject to misuse</b> of consecrated property, as it is not consecrated but can be used by all, <b>so too,</b> the anointing <b>oil that descends upon Aaron’s beard is not subject to misuse</b> of consecrated property.

### Part 26
<b>And still Aaron himself was concerned,</b> thinking: <b>Perhaps Moses did not misuse</b> consecrated property <b>but I misused</b> the oil, as the additional oil is on my body and I derive benefit from it. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said to him: “Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity”</b> (Psalms 133:1). <b>Just as</b> your brother <b>Moses did not misuse</b> consecrated property, <b>so too, you did not misuse</b> consecrated property.

### Part 27
§ The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> which discusses the anointing of kings. <b>The Sages taught: One may anoint kings only next to a spring.</b> This is done as a fortuitous sign, <b>so that their kingdom should continue</b> uninterrupted just as the waters of the spring flow uninterrupted throughout the year. <b>As it is stated</b> with regard to the coronation of Solomon in the days of King David: <b>And the king said to Benaiah:</b> Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon my own mule, <b>and bring him down to Gihon. And</b> let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet <b>anoint him there</b> king over Israel (see I Kings 1:33–34). The Sages derived from here that all kings should be anointed near a spring.

### Part 28
Parenthetical to this matter of performing an act as a fortuitous sign, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rav Ami says: One who desires to know if he will</b> live <b>through</b> this current <b>year or not should bring</b> a lit <b>candle during those ten days between Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur and hang it in a house</b> through <b>which wind does not blow,</b> and he should watch it carefully: <b>If its light continues he shall know that he will live out his year.</b>

### Part 29
<b>And one who desires to conduct business and wants to know if</b> his <b>business will succeed or not should raise a rooster. If</b> the rooster <b>gets fat and beautiful he shall know that</b> the venture <b>will succeed.</b>

### Part 30
<b>This one who wishes to leave on a journey and wants to know whether he will return to his home should enter a dark house. If he sees</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC