
### Part 1
<b>I will</b> likewise <b>exclude</b> the <b>blood of creeping animals, which do not have a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity.</b> Impurity transmitted to a person by the carcass of a creeping animal does not render clothing impure, whereas impurity transmitted by the carcass of an animal or bird does render one’s clothing impure. <b>I will</b> also <b>exclude the blood of eggs, as</b> they <b>are not a type of meat,</b> and finally I will exclude <b>the blood of fish</b> and <b>the blood of grasshoppers, as they are entirely permitted,</b> as explained on 21b.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The verse states: “And you shall consume no manner of blood, <b>whether it is of bird or of animal,</b> in any of your dwellings” (Leviticus 7:26). The verse mentions both “bird” and “animal,” because <b>if</b> the verse had stated only “bird,” one might have said that <b>just as a bird</b> is a creature <b>concerning which</b> the prohibition of <b>diverse kinds</b> does <b>not</b> apply, as will be explained, <b>so too,</b> the prohibition against consuming blood applies only to <b>an animal concerning which</b> the prohibition of <b>diverse kinds</b> does <b>not</b> apply, whereas the blood of other animals is not forbidden. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Or of animal.”</b>

### Part 3
And <b>if</b> the verse had mentioned only “animal,” one might have said that <b>just as an animal is not</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against taking the <b>mother</b> bird <b>with</b> her <b>young</b> (see Deuteronomy 22:6–7), <b>so too, a bird</b> whose blood is forbidden is that <b>which is not</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against taking the <b>mother</b> bird <b>with the young,</b> i.e., non-kosher birds, whereas the blood of kosher birds is permitted. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Whether it is of bird or of animal.”</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But say</b> that the verse should be interpreted as follows: The phrase <b>“no manner of blood”</b> is <b>a generalization,</b> and the mention of <b>“bird or animal” is a detail.</b> This is <b>a generalization and a detail,</b> and the hermeneutical principle in such cases is that <b>the generalization includes only what</b> is mentioned <b>in the detail.</b> Consequently, with regard to <b>a bird and an animal, yes,</b> it is prohibited to consume their blood, but with regard to <b>anything else,</b> the prohibition does <b>not</b> apply.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains that when the next verse states: <b>“Whoever consumes any blood,</b> that soul shall be cut off from his people” (Leviticus 7:27), <b>it then generalized</b> again. Therefore, this is a case of <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization,</b> in which case the relevant hermeneutical principle dictates that <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail.</b> Accordingly, the verse includes everything that has the following three components, as stated above: The capacity for both a light form of ritual impurity and a severe form of ritual impurity; the possibility of being forbidden or permitted; and categorization as a type of meat.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: <b>But the last generalization is not similar to the first generalization. The first generalization,</b> where it states: “You shall consume no manner of blood,” indicates a regular <b>prohibition,</b> punishable by lashes, whereas <b>the last generalization,</b> where it states: “That soul shall be cut off from his people,” indicates that the prohibition is punishable by <b><i>karet</i>.</b> Consequently, the hermeneutical principle for cases of a generalization, a detail, and a generalization should not apply.

### Part 7
The Gemara responds: <b>This <i>tanna</i>,</b> whose opinion is recorded in this <i>baraita</i>, is of <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael,</b> who maintains that <b>we expound generalizations and details</b> even <b>in a case</b> like <b>this, even though the last generalization is not similar to the first generalization.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara further analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> that there is <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization,</b> and therefore <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail. Just as the detail is explicit</b> in that it is referring to <b>an item that has</b> the capacity for both <b>a light</b> form of <b>impurity and a severe</b> form of <b>impurity, and it has</b> the possibility of being <b>forbidden or permitted, and it is a type of meat, so too, every item that has</b> the capacity for both <b>a light</b> form of <b>ritual impurity and a severe form of ritual impurity,</b> and has the possibility of being forbidden or permitted, and is a type of meat, is included in the prohibition against consuming blood.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does this phrase: <b>So too every</b> item, <b>which</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches,</b> serve <b>to include</b> beyond birds and animals, which are mentioned explicitly in the verse? After all, the blood of human beings, creeping animals, fish, and grasshoppers have already been excluded from the prohibition.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Adda bar Avin said:</b> It serves <b>to include</b> the <b>blood of a <i>koy</i>,</b> an animal that is not definitively categorized as either a domesticated animal or an undomesticated animal. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does Rav Adda bar Avin <b>maintain</b> in this regard? <b>If he maintains</b> that <b>a <i>koy</i> is an uncertain</b> case, <b>is a verse necessary to teach</b> the <i>halakha</i> in a case of <b>uncertainty? Rather,</b> Rav Adda bar Avin <b>maintains</b> that the <i>koy</i> <b>is a distinct entity,</b> i.e., it is not in the category of domesticated animals or undomesticated animals, and therefore its <i>halakha</i> must be taught.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for the prohibition against consuming the <b>blood of</b> a <i>koy</i>. <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>its fat</b> is also forbidden? The Gemara answers that this is derived <b>from</b> the verse: “You shall not eat <b>any [<i>kol</i>] fat”</b> (Leviticus 7:23). The additional word “<i>kol</i>” serves to include the fat of a <i>koy</i> as being forbidden. The Gemara inquires further: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>its carcass</b> is prohibited? The Gemara answers that this is derived <b>from</b> the verse: “You shall not eat <b>any [<i>kol</i>] animal carcass”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:21). Here too, the additional word “<i>kol</i>” serves to include the carcass of a <i>koy</i> as being prohibited.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>the sciatic nerve</b> of a <i>koy</i> is prohibited? The Gemara answers that <b>the Merciful One rendered</b> the prohibition of the sciatic nerve <b>dependent on</b> the presence of <b>the spoon of the thigh,</b> as it is stated: “Therefore the children of Israel shall not eat the sciatic nerve which is upon the spoon of the thigh” (Genesis 32:33), <b>and this</b> <i>koy</i> <b>has a spoon [<i>kaf</i> ] of the thigh,</b> i.e., a round protrusion of flesh in its thigh that is shaped like a spoon.

### Part 13
The Gemara further asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive the <b>impurity</b> status of the carcass of a <i>koy</i>, <b>and</b> that ritual <b>slaughter</b> renders its meat permitted for consumption? The Gemara answers that these <i>halakhot</i> are derived by logical <b>reasoning: From</b> the fact <b>that in all</b> the <b>matters</b> mentioned above <b>the Merciful One included</b> the <i>koy</i> and rendered it <b>like a domesticated animal,</b> it is logical that the <i>halakhot</i> concerning <b>its impurity and its slaughter</b> are <b>also like</b> those concerning <b>a domesticated animal.</b>

### Part 14
§ The Gemara continues to analyze the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>I will</b> therefore <b>exclude</b> the <b>blood of bipeds, as they have</b> the capacity for <b>a severe</b> form of <b>impurity,</b> the impurity of a corpse, <b>but they do not have</b> the capacity for <b>a light</b> form of <b>impurity,</b> since the <i>halakhot</i> of the impurity of food do not apply to human flesh. <b>But</b> one can <b>raise a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Okatzin</i> 3:2): With regard to <b>one who cuts</b> flesh <b>from</b> a living <b>person</b> for food, there are two conditions under which it becomes impure with the impurity of food: First, the flesh <b>requires intent</b> to eat it or feed it to others, <b>and</b> second, it must <b>be rendered susceptible</b> to impurity by coming into contact with water or one of the other six liquids that render food items susceptible to impurity.

### Part 15
Before explaining the contradiction between this mishna and the <i>baraita</i> cited above, the Gemara seeks to clarify the mishna itself: <b>And</b> the following was <b>difficult for us: Why do I</b> need <b>intent? Let his</b> act of <b>cutting serve as intent</b> to eat the flesh. <b>And Reish Lakish said:</b> This is referring <b>to one who cuts</b> the flesh in order to feed it <b>to a dog, and intent</b> to feed it <b>to a dog is not</b> considered <b>intent</b> to use the flesh as food.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is intent to feed a dog <b>not</b> considered intent to use the flesh as food? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Teharot</i> 8:6): The Sages <b>stated a principle with regard to ritual impurity:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> food <b>that is</b> assumed to be <b>food designated</b> for <b>a person,</b> once it becomes impure with the impurity of food, it remains <b>impure until it is rendered unfit to be consumed by a dog?</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> mishna is referring <b>to removing impurity from it. Since</b> the food <b>was initially fit to</b> be eaten by <b>a person,</b> its status of <b>impurity</b> cannot be <b>removed from</b> it <b>until it is rendered unfit to be consumed by a dog.</b> By contrast, <b>here,</b> with regard to one who cuts flesh, the mishna is referring <b>to granting it</b> susceptibility to <b>impurity.</b> In this case, <b>if</b> it is <b>fit for a person</b> then it is <b>fit for a dog,</b> i.e., it is susceptible to the impurity of food; <b>if</b> it is <b>not fit for a person, it is not fit for a dog,</b> i.e., it is not susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 18
The Gemara addresses the contradiction between the mishna in <i>Teharot</i> and the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>In any case,</b> that mishna <b>teaches</b> that human flesh requires <b>intent, and intent is for a light</b> form of <b>ritual impurity,</b> i.e., this requirement of intent is necessary only for the flesh to become susceptible to ritual impurity as a food item. This apparently contradicts the claim of the <i>baraita</i> that the impurity of food items does not apply to human flesh. The Gemara answers: <b>This statement</b> of the mishna that human flesh is susceptible to impurity as a food item applies <b>while</b> the person <b>is alive. But after death</b> his corpse <b>is impure</b> by <b>a severe</b> form of <b>impurity</b> and is no longer susceptible to impurity as a food item, and that is the meaning of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 19
The Gemara objects: The <i>baraita</i> contrasts animals, which are susceptible to both light and more severe forms of impurity, and people, who are susceptible only to severe ritual impurity, and the Gemara has explained the <i>baraita</i> as referring to a human being after death. But <b>in the corresponding</b> situation <b>with regard to an animal after death, if</b> one is referring to its <b>meat,</b> then it <b>transmits impurity</b> by <b>a severe</b> form of <b>impurity,</b> the impurity of a carcass, <b>and if</b> one is referring to its <b>blood,</b> it likewise <b>transmits impurity</b> by <b>a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity,</b> and not a light form of ritual impurity.

### Part 20
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Eduyyot</i> 5:1): With regard to <b>the blood of</b> animal <b>carcasses, Beit Shammai deem</b> it <b>pure, and Beit Hillel deem</b> it <b>impure</b> just like the carcass itself, which transmits severe ritual impurity. Why, then, does the <i>baraita</i> differentiate between people and animals and indicate that dead animals are susceptible to a light form of ritual impurity?

### Part 21
The Gemara answers: The statement of the <i>baraita</i> that animals are susceptible to a light form of impurity after death while people are not <b>is necessary only for that which we learned</b> in a mishna with regard to the impurity of food (<i>Okatzin</i> 3:3): <b>A carcass of a non-kosher animal,</b> e.g., a horse or donkey, found <b>in any location,</b> and likewise an unslaughtered <b>carcass of a kosher bird</b> found <b>in villages,</b> where there are not many people and it is unlikely to be eaten, <b>require</b> express <b>intent</b> to be eaten in order for them to be considered food and susceptible to impurity of food. But <b>they are not required</b> to come into contact with a liquid in order to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity.

### Part 22
By contrast, <b>the carcass of a kosher animal anywhere, and the unslaughtered carcass of a kosher bird or</b> forbidden <b>fat</b> found <b>in marketplaces,</b> will presumably be eaten, and therefore they <b>require neither intent</b> to be eaten <b>nor</b> contact with liquid in order to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity.

### Part 23
<b>And Rav said to Rabbi Ḥiyya: Why do I</b> need <b>intent for</b> a carcass to be eaten so that it will be considered food and therefore susceptible to the impurity of food, which is <b>a light</b> form of <b>ritual impurity?</b> After all, the carcass <b>itself is</b> already impure with a severe form of <b>impurity.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to</b> Rav: It is necessary for a case <b>where there is less than an olive-bulk</b> of the <b>carcass,</b> which is not susceptible to the impurity of a carcass, <b>and one combined it with less than an egg-bulk</b> of <b>food,</b> so <b>that this and that</b> together <b>are an egg-bulk,</b> which is the minimum amount of food that is susceptible to food impurity.

### Part 24
Rav raised a difficulty to Rabbi Ḥiyya: <b>If so,</b> that less than an olive-bulk of an animal carcass does not transmit impurity, <b>it should also require</b> contact with a liquid in order to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity as a food. <b>As the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that with regard to the impurity of foods, the verse states: <b>“Upon any sowing seed which is to be sown”</b> (Leviticus 11:37), which teaches: <b>Just as seeds are unique</b> in <b>that they will not ultimately become impure</b> with <b>a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity and</b> they <b>require</b> contact with liquid in order to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity, <b>so too, anything that will not ultimately become impure</b> with <b>a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity requires</b> contact with liquid in order to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity.

### Part 25
Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to</b> Rav: <b>This statement</b> applies <b>to foods in general, which do not contain less than an olive-bulk of an animal carcass. But here, where</b> the food <b>does contain less than an olive-bulk of an animal carcass,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is different: <b>Since</b> it would be impure with a severe form of ritual impurity <b>if one were to add to</b> the amount of animal carcass so that there would be a full <b>olive-bulk,</b> it <b>does not require</b> contact with a liquid in order <b>to be rendered susceptible</b> to impurity. In any case, this <i>halakha</i> that less than an olive-bulk of a carcass combines with less than an egg-bulk of food to equal a full egg-bulk that is susceptible to food impurity, applies only to the flesh of an animal,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC