
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There are <b>thirty-six</b> cases <b>in the Torah</b> with regard to which one who performs a prohibited action intentionally is liable to receive <b>excision from the World-to-Come [<i>karet</i>].</b> They are: <b>One who engages in sexual intercourse with</b> his <b>mother; or with the wife of</b> his <b>father,</b> even if she is not his mother; <b>or with</b> his <b>daughter-in-law.</b> The same punishment is imposed on a man <b>who engages in intercourse with</b> another <b>male [<i>hazekhur</i>], or</b> who copulates <b>with an animal; and a woman who brings an animal upon her</b> to engage in bestiality. The same punishment is imposed on <b>one who engages in intercourse with a woman and her daughter, or</b> with <b>a married woman.</b> The same punishment is imposed on <b>one who engages in intercourse with his sister, or with his father’s sister, or with his mother’s sister, or with his wife’s sister, or with his brother’s wife, or with the wife of his father’s brother, or with the wife of his mother’s brother, or with a menstruating woman.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And</b> these too are liable to receive <i>karet</i>: <b>One who blasphemes</b> the name of Heaven, <b>and</b> one who <b>worships an idol, and one who gives of his children to <i>Molekh</i></b> (see Leviticus 20:1–5), <b>and a necromancer, and</b> one who <b>desecrates Shabbat. And</b> the same is the punishment of <b>one who is ritually impure who ate sacrificial</b> food; <b>and one who enters the Temple</b> while <b>ritually impure; and one who eats</b> forbidden <b>fat, or</b> consumes <b>blood, or</b> eats meat <b>left over from an offering after the time allotted for its consumption [<i>notar</i>], or</b> eats meat of <b>an offering that was sacrificed with the intent to consume it after its designated time [<i>piggul</i>]; and one who slaughters</b> offerings <b>and offers</b> them <b>up outside</b> the Temple.

### Part 3
<b>And</b> these too are liable to receive <i>karet</i>: <b>One who eats leavened bread on Passover, and one who eats or performs</b> prohibited <b>labor on Yom Kippur. And</b> the same is the punishment of <b>one who blends the</b> anointing <b>oil</b> according to the specifications of the oil prepared by Moses in the wilderness (see Exodus 30:22–33); <b>and one who blends the incense</b> according to the specifications of the incense used in the Temple service for purposes other than use in the Temple; <b>and one who applies the anointing oil</b> to his skin. <b>And</b> one is liable to receive <i>karet</i> for failure to fulfill the mitzva of bringing <b>the Paschal offering and the</b> mitzva of <b>circumcision,</b> which unlike the cases of prohibitions enumerated in the mishna, are <b>positive mitzvot.</b>

### Part 4
<b>For</b> any of <b>these</b> prohibitions, one is <b>liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for its intentional</b> violation <b>and</b> to bring <b>a sin offering for its unwitting</b> violation. <b>And for their</b> violation in a case where it is <b>unknown</b> to him whether or not he transgressed, he is liable to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering,</b> which provides provisional atonement until he discovers whether or not he transgressed. This is the <i>halakha</i> for all of the transgressions listed above <b>except for one who defiles the Temple,</b> i.e., he enters the Temple while ritually impure, <b>or</b> partakes of <b>its consecrated items</b> while ritually impure. In these cases he does not bring a provisional guilt offering <b>because he is</b> obligated <b>to</b> bring <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering for a definite transgression. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is the same <b>even</b> with regard to <b>the one who blasphemes, as it is stated</b> with regard to the sin offering: <b>“You shall have one law for him who performs the action unwittingly”</b> (Numbers 15:29), <b>excluding</b> one who <b>blasphemes, as he does not perform an action</b> but sins with speech.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC