
### Part 1
<b>Granted, if you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir</b> issued his ruling <b>as a stringency,</b> and that one is liable even if he ate the olive-bulk over a long period of time, <b>this</b> is the reason <b>that the</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that the Rabbis say: <b>Unless</b> the amount of time <b>he expends,</b> meaning: <b>Unless his expenditure</b> of time is no more than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, he is exempt.

### Part 2
<b>But if you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir</b> issued his ruling <b>as a leniency,</b> meaning that if one interrupts in the middle of eating he is exempt, the <i>tanna</i> <b>should</b> have stated: <b>And the Rabbis say: If he expended</b> more than the time it takes to eat a half-loaf, he is exempt, which would indicate that if he expended less than this amount of time he is liable, even if he interrupted his eating in the middle. <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from it</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir</b> issued his ruling <b>as a stringency?</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from it</b> that this is correct.

### Part 3
§ <b>Ravnai says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: With regard to</b> forbidden <b>fats and with regard to</b> an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass,</b> one is liable for eating an olive-bulk even with interruptions <b>unless</b> the time <b>he expends from beginning to end</b> is more than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis in the mishna. If he ate <b>impure foods</b> in the volume of a quarter-loaf of bread, or he ate <b>repugnant creatures or creeping</b> animals, <b>or</b> drank a quarter-<i>log</i> of impure <b>liquids,</b> he becomes impure and may not partake of <i>teruma</i>, <b>even</b> if consumption extended for <b>the entire day,</b> provided that they are eaten within the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Shmuel <b>saying? Rav Pappa said</b> that <b>this</b> is what he <b>is saying: Even</b> if he eats the quarter-loaf of food over the course of <b>the entire day</b> he becomes impure, <b>but that</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>where he ate</b> each <b>olive-bulk within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread.

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All</b> impure <b>foods combine</b> together <b>to disqualify</b> one’s <b>body</b> from eating <i>teruma</i> <b>if</b> he ate <b>a quarter-loaf</b> of the impure food. <b>What, is</b> this <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where he ate the quarter-loaf within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread? The Gemara explains: <b>No,</b> it is referring to a case <b>where he ate each olive-bulk within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, but he ate the full quarter-loaf in longer than that amount of time.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>All</b> impure <b>foods combine to disqualify</b> one’s <b>body</b> from eating <i>teruma</i> if he ate <b>a quarter-loaf</b> of the impure food <b>within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. <b>How so?</b> In a case where <b>he ate and then ate again, if from the beginning of the first</b> period of <b>eating until the end of the last</b> period of <b>eating there is</b> no more than the amount of time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>they combine</b> together. If the time spent eating is <b>more than that, they do not combine</b> together.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The Sages <b>did not permit</b> one <b>who ate less than the</b> minimum <b>measure</b> of impure foods, i.e., a quarter-loaf, <b>to descend and to immerse</b> in a ritual bath. If <b>he descended, immersed, ascended, and</b> then ate more impure food and thereby <b>completed</b> consumption of the full measure of a quarter-loaf, this second act <b>combines</b> with his previous consumption of impure food and renders the person unfit to consume <i>teruma</i>, despite the immersion in the interim. The Sages <b>permitted a pregnant woman to eat less than the</b> minimum <b>measure due to the danger</b> of her miscarrying.

### Part 8
<b>All</b> impure <b>liquids combine to disqualify</b> one’s <b>body</b> from eating <i>teruma</i> if one consumes <b>a quarter-</b><i>log</i> <b>within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread.<b>How so?</b> In a case where <b>he drank and then drank again,</b> and in total he drank a quarter-<i>log</i>, <b>if from the beginning of the first</b> act of <b>drinking until the end of the last</b> act of <b>drinking there is</b> no more than the amount of time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>they combine</b> together. But if the period of drinking is <b>more than that</b> amount of time, <b>they do not combine.</b>

### Part 9
With regard to a woman who has the status of first-degree impurity because she came into <b>contact</b> with one who was <b>impure</b> with impurity imparted by <b>a corpse,</b> the Sages <b>permitted her to nurse her child, and her child</b> remains <b>pure.</b> If the child touches <i>teruma</i> he does not render it disqualified, despite having consumed milk that presumably became impure upon leaving the body of the mother. This concludes the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains its objection from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> that <b>if from the beginning of the first</b> period of <b>eating until the end of the last</b> period of <b>eating there is</b> no more than the amount of time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>they combine</b> together. This apparently contradicts the opinion of Ravnai, who says that if one eats a quarter-loaf of impure food in total and ate each olive-bulk within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, his acts of eating combine together and he is disqualified from consuming <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara concludes: <b>The refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Ravnai</b> is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 11
§ The Gemara further discusses the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> above: The Sages <b>did not permit</b> one <b>who ate less than the</b> minimum <b>measure</b> of impure foods, i.e., a quarter-loaf, <b>to descend and to immerse</b> in a ritual bath. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying;</b> why is this prohibited?

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> If <b>he ate less than the</b> minimum <b>measure</b> that causes impurity, the Sages <b>did not permit him to descend and immerse. As, if he would descend and immerse and ascend and</b> eat more impure food and thereby <b>complete</b> the full measure of a quarter-loaf within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf, all the impure food he ate <b>would combine</b> together to disqualify him from eating <i>teruma</i>; <b>and</b> yet <b>he</b> might <b>come to say:</b> My <b>first immersion</b> following my first consumption of impure food <b>was effective for me,</b> and no additional immersion is required now that I ate merely another half-measure of impure food. <b>But</b> in fact, <b>he does not know that immersion is</b> effective in purifying him <b>only at the end,</b> and that if he now makes contact with <i>teruma</i> he will render it disqualified. Therefore, the Sages prohibited immersion in such a case to prevent one from reaching this erroneous conclusion.

### Part 13
The Gemara analyzes another statement from the <i>baraita</i>: It was <b>taught</b> that the Sages <b>permitted a pregnant woman to eat less than the</b> minimum <b>measure due to the danger</b> of her miscarrying. Under the assumption that she is permitted to eat only less than the measure but not a full measure, the Gemara objects: Since it is permitted for her <b>due to the danger, let her even eat a lot,</b> i.e., more than the measure. <b>Rav Pappa said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching: They permitted a pregnant woman</b> to eat <b>less than the measure</b> of an olive-bulk within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, <b>even</b> if she ultimately eats <b>a lot</b> in this manner, <b>due to the danger</b> of her miscarrying.

### Part 14
The Gemara further discusses the <i>baraita</i>: It was <b>taught</b> that with regard to a woman who came in <b>contact</b> with one who was <b>impure</b> due to <b>a corpse,</b> the Sages <b>permitted</b> her <b>to nurse her child, and her child</b> remains <b>pure</b> and may therefore be fed <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> is he <b>pure? Once he nurses</b> from <b>the milk</b> of his mother, <b>he becomes impure from the milk.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And if you would say</b> that the mother’s milk <b>was not rendered susceptible</b> to impurity because it never came into contact with a liquid, which is necessary in order to render a food item susceptible to impurity, that is not so, as <b>it</b> is <b>rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity <b>due to the drop</b> of milk that is <b>smeared on the nipple.</b> Since this drop is not consumed by the child, it attains the status of a liquid rather than a food, and it subsequently renders the rest of the milk that passes through the nipple susceptible to impurity. <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case where the child nursed <b>with one strong</b> suck, and therefore it did <b>not leave a drop</b> of milk <b>smeared on the nipple.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rava said:</b> There are <b>two refutations of</b> this <b>statement: One</b> is <b>that we see</b> that <b>the mouth of the infant is filled with milk,</b> which means that it is impossible for it to have sucked so powerfully that it immediately swallowed all the milk without leaving a drop on the nipple. <b>And furthermore,</b> the mother’s milk does not need to be rendered susceptible to impurity like other foods in order to become impure and transmit impurity. This is because <b>the location</b> from which <b>the milk</b> emerges <b>is a spring,</b> i.e., it has the same status as the woman’s body. Therefore, if the woman is impure, her milk is also impure.

### Part 17
Rava elaborates: <b>As</b> a mishna (<i>Makhshirin</i> 6:8) <b>teaches: A woman’s milk renders</b> food with which it comes into contact susceptible to <b>impurity, whether</b> it <b>emerges to</b> the <b>satisfaction</b> of the infant <b>or not to</b> its <b>satisfaction.</b> By contrast, the milk of <b>an animal renders</b> food susceptible <b>to impurity only</b> if it emerges <b>to</b> the <b>satisfaction</b> of the animal’s owner.

### Part 18
<b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that when the mishna states that the milk emerged <b>not to</b> the <b>satisfaction</b> of the infant, it means <b>that</b> the milk is <b>not amenable</b> to him at that time, <b>and</b> yet the mishna <b>teaches</b> that it <b>renders</b> food susceptible to <b>impurity?</b> Since liquids generally render foods susceptible to impurity only if they come in contact with the food with the owner’s approval, it is clear that a woman’s milk has a different status than other foods or liquids. This means that it need not come into contact with a liquid in order to become impure or to impart impurity to another item. The question therefore remains: Why does the child remain pure when he drinks this impure liquid?

### Part 19
<b>Rather, Rava said</b> that <b>this is the reason that her child</b> remains <b>pure:</b> The reason is <b>that</b> it is <b>uncertain</b> whether it <b>nursed the measure</b> of milk necessary to disqualify it from consuming <i>teruma</i>, <b>or</b> whether it did <b>not nurse</b> a sufficient amount of milk. <b>And</b> even <b>if you say</b> that it <b>nursed</b> a sufficient amount of milk, it is still <b>uncertain</b> whether it <b>nursed</b> the required amount of milk <b>within</b> the time it takes to <b>eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, or whether it <b>nursed</b> that amount <b>in more than</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread and therefore is not disqualified from consuming <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rava,</b> is it correct that <b>the location</b> from which the <b>milk</b> emerges <b>is</b> considered like <b>a spring, and</b> therefore if the woman is impure the milk is also impure, <b>and it does not need</b> to be <b>rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity by contact with a liquid?

### Part 21
<b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Kelim</i> 8:11): In the case of a menstruating <b>woman who had milk dripping from her nipples, and it fell into the airspace of an oven, the oven</b> becomes <b>impure. And</b> this poses <b>a difficulty for us: In what</b> way was the milk <b>rendered susceptible</b> to impurity, such that it can become impure or render the oven impure? <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It was rendered susceptible <b>by the drop</b> of milk <b>smeared on the nipple.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yoḥanan maintains that a woman’s milk must be rendered susceptible in order to contract impurity.

### Part 22
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>Rava does not hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> as one <i>amora</i> is permitted to disagree with another, <b>but isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>You are found saying</b> that there are <b>nine liquids with regard to a <i>zav</i>: The sweat, ill-smelling pus, and</b> liquid <b>excrement</b> are more <b>pure than all of them,</b> i.e., they do not become impure and do not render other items susceptible to impurity. <b>The tears</b> that emerge from his <b>eye, and the blood</b> that emerges from his <b>wound,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC