
### Part 1
that the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>old impurity,</b> where the witnesses said to him: You became impure yesterday, <b>what is different</b> about the cases of eating forbidden <b>fat and entering the Temple</b> while impure, <b>where</b> the Rabbis <b>concede to</b> Rabbi Yehuda that one is not liable to bring a sin offering even though his denial is contradicted by two witnesses? He is exempt <b>since if he wished, he could say: I</b> did so <b>intentionally.</b> Therefore, his denial can be interpreted to mean: My eating the forbidden fat or entering the Temple was not unwitting but intentional. If so, if he denies that he is in a state of <b>old impurity,</b> he can <b>also explain his statement, since if he wished, he could say</b> that he meant: <b>I did not remain in my</b> state of <b>ritual impurity, but</b> rather <b>I immersed</b> in a ritual bath.

### Part 2
<b>Ravina said: Actually,</b> the <i>baraita</i> can be referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>old impurity,</b> and nevertheless the Rabbis distinguish between one’s denial that he is impure and one’s denial that he ate or entered the Temple. The case is one <b>where the witnesses say to him: You ate sacrificial</b> meat while <b>in</b> a state of <b>physical impurity, and he says to them: I did not become impure.</b> The reason he is liable to bring an offering is <b>that here he cannot explain his statement, as one cannot say</b> that the phrase: I did not become impure, can be explained to mean: <b>I did not remain in</b> a state <b>of impurity but</b> rather <b>I immersed.</b>

### Part 3
Ravina elaborates: <b>What</b> would he <b>say to them</b> to explain his statement that he did not become impure? If he says: <b>I immersed and I ate,</b> then <b>when he says this to them, his initial statement has been contradicted in any event with regard to his impurity</b> imparted by <b>contact.</b> His initial claim that he did not become impure has not been adjusted with regard to this matter, and that claim was contradicted by the two witnesses.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> that even if two witnesses testify that a person became impure, and he claims that he did not become impure, he is deemed credible about himself more than the testimony of one hundred people. <b>Rav Yosef says:</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said</b> that he is deemed credible when he states that he is pure against the testimony of witnesses <b>only when</b> the person is <b>by himself and</b> only <b>with regard to himself,</b> but as far as others are concerned, he is regarded as impure.

### Part 5
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> Although according to Rabbi Meir one is liable to bring an offering based on the testimony of two witnesses that he ate forbidden fat even if he denied it, <b>Rabbi Meir concedes to the Rabbis that if two</b> witnesses <b>said to him: You engaged in sexual intercourse with an espoused maidservant, and he says: I did not engage in sexual intercourse, he is deemed credible, since if he wishes,</b> he can <b>say to them: I did not complete my</b> act of <b>intercourse,</b> in which case, as stated earlier (10b), he is not liable to bring a guilt offering.

### Part 6
Likewise, <b>Rav Sheshet says: Rabbi Meir concedes to the Rabbis in</b> the case of <b>an impure nazirite,</b> i.e., one <b>to whom two</b> witnesses <b>said: You became impure</b> and are therefore liable to bring a sin offering, <b>and he says: I did not become impure,</b> that he is <b>exempt, since if he wishes, he can say: I requested</b> from a halakhic authority to dissolve <b>my nazirite vow,</b> and he dissolved it. Therefore, it was permitted for me to become impure. Nazirites are prohibited from becoming impure with the impurity imparted by a corpse, whereas non-nazirites may come into contact with a corpse.

### Part 7
Likewise, <b>Abaye says: Rabbi Meir concedes to the Rabbis that if two</b> witnesses <b>said to</b> a person: <b>You know testimony about so-and-so, and he says: I do not know,</b> and he takes an oath to this effect, he is <b>exempt</b> from bringing an offering for taking a false oath of testimony. The reason is <b>that if he wishes,</b> he can <b>say:</b> I did witness the event, but <b>I had not intended to</b> offer <b>testimony,</b> in which case he is exempt from bringing an offering for taking a false oath of testimony.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that if one unwittingly <b>ate</b> an olive-bulk of forbidden <b>fat and</b> then ate another olive-bulk of forbidden <b>fat during one lapse of awareness,</b> he is liable to bring only one sin offering. <b>Rabbi Zeira objects to this: Why is he liable</b> to bring <b>only one sin offering? But didn’t he eat two olive-bulks of</b> forbidden <b>fat?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rabbi Zeira: One is liable to bring two sin offerings only when he ate the olive-bulks of forbidden fat during <b>separate lapses of awareness,</b> e.g., he ate forbidden fat when he was unaware that it was prohibited, and subsequently became aware of the prohibition and then forgot about it and ate another olive-bulk of forbidden fat. This is derived from the verse: “If his sin, which he has sinned, is known to him, then he shall bring for his offering a goat, a female without blemish, for his sin which he has sinned” (Leviticus 4:28). <b>But here there is</b> only <b>one lapse of awareness.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara cites a different version of the discussion between Rabbi Zeira and Abaye. <b>There are</b> those <b>who</b> claim that Rabbi Zeira <b>raised</b> his <b>difficulty</b> to Abaye <b>in this</b> manner: <b>The reason that</b> one is liable to bring only one sin offering for his two transgressions of eating forbidden fat is <b>that</b> both acts took place during <b>one lapse of awareness; but</b> if he ate forbidden fat <b>in two lapses of awareness,</b> he is liable to bring <b>two</b> sin offerings. But <b>why? It</b> is <b>one category</b> of prohibition of forbidden <b>fat</b> that he has violated, and therefore he should bring only one sin offering. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rabbi Zeira: With regard to bringing sin offerings, <b>separate lapses</b> of awareness render him liable to bring multiple offerings.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>one ate</b> forbidden <b>fat, and blood, and <i>piggul</i>, and <i>notar</i></b> in one lapse of awareness, he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering for each and every one of them. In a case where one ate half an olive-bulk and then ate another half olive-bulk during one lapse of awareness, if the two half olive-bulks were both from one type of forbidden food, he is liable to bring a sin offering. If they were from two types, he is exempt.

### Part 12
The Gemara raises a difficulty: The ruling that if one ate two halves of an olive-bulk <b>of one type</b> of food he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering is <b>obvious,</b> as he ate an olive-bulk of a forbidden food. <b>Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Tutini:</b> This is referring to a case <b>where he ate</b> them from <b>two dishes, and</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua, who says</b> that eating food from distinct <b>dishes differentiates</b> his acts of consumption and renders them separate transgressions.

### Part 13
This ruling was necessary <b>lest you say</b> that <b>when Rabbi Yehoshua says</b> that separate dishes render his acts separate transgressions, it <b>is no different</b> if this principle results in <b>a leniency and</b> it <b>is no different</b> if it results in <b>a stringency.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us that</b> if he ate two half olive-bulks from two dishes, he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering. <b>Evidently,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>says</b> that eating food from separate dishes renders his acts of consumption separate transgressions only when this principle produces <b>a stringency,</b> but he <b>did not say</b> it as <b>a leniency.</b>

### Part 14
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this discussion referred <b>to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: In a case where one ate half an olive-bulk and then ate another half olive-bulk during one lapse of awareness, if they were <b>from two types</b> of food, he is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious,</b> as he did not eat an entire olive-bulk of one type? <b>Reish Lakish said in the name of bar Tutini:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where</b> he ate an olive-bulk of one type, but <b>he ate it in two dishes, and</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua, who says</b> that eating food from separate <b>dishes differentiates</b> his acts of consumption and renders them separate transgressions.

### Part 15
This ruling was necessary <b>lest you say</b> that <b>when Rabbi Yehoshua says</b> that separate dishes render his acts separate transgressions, he <b>says</b> it only when it results in <b>a stringency,</b> but <b>he does not say</b> it when it results in <b>a leniency.</b> Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that if he ate an olive-bulk <b>from two types</b> of food, he is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> does the mishna mean when it states the case of eating <b>from two types</b> of food? <b>It</b> is actually a case of two half olive-bulks <b>from one</b> type of food; <b>and why</b> does the <i>tanna</i> <b>call it two types?</b> It is <b>because he ate it in two dishes,</b> half an olive-bulk in each dish, <b>and</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that he is <b>exempt. Evidently,</b> it <b>is no different</b> if it results in <b>a leniency and</b> it <b>is no different</b> if it results in <b>a stringency;</b> in both cases <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says</b> that separate dishes render one’s acts of consumption separate transgressions.

### Part 17
The Gemara objects: <b>From</b> the fact that in <b>the latter clause,</b> when the mishna refers to two types of food it actually means <b>one type</b> of food <b>but</b> the case is where one ate it from <b>two dishes,</b> one can infer that when <b>the former clause</b> states that if one ate two half olive-bulks of one type of food he is liable to bring a sin offering, it must mean that it is <b>one type</b> of food <b>and</b> one ate it from <b>one dish.</b> But if so, why is it necessary to state this <i>halakha</i>; isn’t it <b>obvious?</b>

### Part 18
<b>Ravina said:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where</b> he ate the two half olive-bulks but <b>he had</b> a period of <b>awareness in the interim,</b> e.g., he unwittingly ate half an olive-bulk of forbidden fat, then he became aware that he had done so, and subsequently he unwittingly ate another half an olive-bulk of forbidden fat. <b>And</b> the mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabban Gamliel, who says: There is no awareness for a half-measure.</b> If one unwittingly performed a half-measure of a prohibited act and then became aware of his transgression, and then again unwittingly performed another half-measure of the prohibited act, his awareness in the interim does not prevent the two acts from combining. Accordingly, in the case here, it is as though he ate a full olive-bulk during one lapse of awareness.

### Part 19
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shabbat</i> 105a): With regard to <b>one who writes two letters</b> on Shabbat, which is the minimum that one must write in order to be rendered liable for this prohibited labor, and he did so unwittingly <b>in two</b> separate <b>lapses of awareness, one</b> letter in <b>the morning and one</b> letter <b>in the afternoon, Rabban Gamliel deems</b> him <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering for writing on Shabbat, <b>and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 20
The basis of this dispute is that <b>Rabban Gamliel holds</b> that <b>there is no awareness for a half-measure.</b> Therefore, the fact that he became aware of his transgression after writing the first letter is of no significance. His awareness does not divide between the first act of writing a letter and the second act of writing a letter. <b>And the Rabbis hold: There is awareness for a half-measure.</b> Consequently, the two half-measures are considered to have been performed during separate lapses of awareness, and they do not combine to render him liable to bring a sin offering.

### Part 21
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>How much</b> time <b>can one expend</b> while eating an olive-bulk <b>of</b> forbidden <b>food</b> and still be liable for violating the prohibition? The duration is calculated <b>as though he were eating toasted grain,</b> which one eats one kernel at a time. If he eats the olive-bulk of forbidden food within the amount of time it would take to eat an olive-bulk of toasted grain, he is liable. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Unless</b> the amount of time <b>he expends from beginning to end</b> is more than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf [<i>peras</i>]</b> of bread, he is <b>liable.</b>

### Part 22
Likewise, one who <b>ate</b> a quarter-loaf of <b>ritually impure foods or drank</b> a quarter-<i>log</i> of <b>ritually impure liquids</b> within the amount of time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread is rendered unfit to partake of <i>teruma</i>, the portion of the produce designated for priests, until he becomes pure. Similarly, if one <b>drank a quarter</b>-<b><i>log</i> of wine and entered the Temple, and he remained</b> there for the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, he is <b>liable. Rabbi Elazar says: If he interrupted</b> his drinking of the quarter-<i>log</i> of wine <b>or if he placed any amount of water into</b> the wine, he is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 23
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Does <b>Rabbi Meir state</b> his opinion, that the duration of time is calculated as though one were eating toasted grain, <b>as a stringency or</b> does <b>he state</b> it <b>as a leniency?</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>Does he state it as a stringency, and this</b> is what he <b>is teaching:</b> The duration is calculated <b>as though he were eating toasted grain</b> a little at a time, and therefore <b>even</b> if it takes him <b>the entire day</b> to consume an olive-bulk of the forbiden food, <b>and even though from beginning to end</b> he expends <b>more than</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>since</b> he consumed a full olive-bulk in one <b>extended</b> act of <b>eating, he is liable; and the Rabbis said to him that unless he expends</b> less than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, <b>he is liable,</b> but if he expends <b>more than</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, he is <b>exempt?</b>

### Part 24
<b>Or perhaps</b> Rabbi Meir <b>says</b> his opinion <b>as a leniency, as this</b> is what he <b>is teaching:</b> The duration is calculated <b>as though he were eating toasted grain, which is</b> eaten continuously one kernel after another, and therefore he is liable only if <b>he did not interrupt</b> at all <b>in between</b> his bites. <b>But</b> if <b>he interrupted in between</b> them, then <b>although</b> the duration <b>from beginning to end</b> was less than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, he is <b>exempt; and the Rabbis said to him: Since</b> the amount of time <b>from beginning to end is</b> less than the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread, he is <b>liable,</b> despite the interruptions.

### Part 25
The Gemara suggests a resolution: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the mishna: <b>And the Rabbis say: Unless</b> the amount of time <b>he expends from beginning to end</b> is the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC