
### Part 1
The Gemara notes: <b>And yet</b> in the final case in the <i>baraita</i>, it <b>does not teach</b> that <b>in</b> a situation where he is <b>uncertain</b> whether he ate from <b>it he brings a provisional guilt offering. Whose</b> opinion is <b>this? If we say</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, let him also teach</b> in <b>the last clause: For</b> a case where he is <b>uncertain</b> whether he ate from <b>them he brings a provisional guilt offering, as we learned</b> in the mishna (22b) that <b>Rabbi Akiva deems</b> one <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a provisional guilt offering for uncertainty</b> about <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, isn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> who disagrees with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva and holds that one is not liable to bring a provisional guilt offering for uncertainty about misuse of consecrated property? <b>And it teaches</b> that one who eats <i>notar</i> from one offering cooked in five pots <b>during five</b> separate <b>lapses of awareness brings five sin offerings,</b> which indicates that if he did so during a single lapse of awareness he would be liable to bring only one sin offering, in accordance with the opinion stated by Rabbi Akiva in the mishna. <b>And</b> one can <b>conclude from</b> here that Rabbi Yehoshua <b>accepted</b> the refutation <b>from</b> Rabbi Akiva.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>But on the contrary,</b> one can infer otherwise <b>from the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>which teaches:</b> If he ate <b>from five</b> separate <b>offerings, even during one lapse of awareness,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring a separate sin offering <b>for each and every one.</b> One can <b>conclude from</b> this statement that Rabbi Yehoshua <b>did not accept</b> the refutation <b>from</b> Rabbi Akiva.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, what is there to say</b> about this <i>baraita</i>? It must be said that <b>it is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, that there is a <i>tanna</i></b> who maintains <b>that</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>accepted</b> Rabbi Akiva’s refutation, <b>and there is a <i>tanna</i></b> who maintains <b>that</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>did not accept it.</b>

### Part 5
But once the <i>baraita</i> is interpreted in accordance with two different <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>you</b> may <b>even say</b> that the earlier clause of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> and not Rabbi Yehoshua. <b>And this <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of Rabbi Akiva <b>in one</b> matter <b>and disagrees with his</b> opinion <b>in one</b> matter: <b>He holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of Rabbi Akiva <b>with regard to a lapse of awareness,</b> that if one eats from five offerings during a single lapse of awareness he is liable to bring only one sin offering. <b>But he disagrees with his</b> opinion <b>with regard to misuse</b> of consecrated property, as he does not deem one liable to bring a provisional guilt offering for uncertainty about whether he misused consecrated property.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that if one eats five pieces from a single offering, each of which was cooked in a separate pot, he is liable to bring five guilt offerings for misuse of consecrated property. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> which require <b>five</b> guilt offerings for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property? <b>Shmuel says:</b> The five pieces must be from separate parts of the offering, <b>like that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Me’ila</i> 15b) with regard to a different topic: <b>Five items from a burnt offering combine</b> to form an olive-bulk that renders one liable for sacrificing an offering outside the Temple: <b>The meat, and the</b> forbidden <b>fat, and the wine</b> from the libations of the burnt offering, <b>and the fine flour</b> from the meal offering brought with the libations, <b>and the oil</b> for mixing with the meal offering.

### Part 7
<b>Ḥizkiyya says:</b> The obligation to bring five guilt offerings applies in a case <b>where he ate from five</b> different <b>limbs</b> of one offering. <b>Reish Lakish says: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that he ate <b>from one limb,</b> and <b>you find</b> this <b>in</b> a case where he ate from <b>the shoulder</b> of an offering, which has several different sections. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa says:</b> It applies in a case <b>where he ate</b> pieces of meat prepared <b>as five</b> different <b>types of cooked dishes. Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It applies in a case <b>where he ate</b> five pieces of meat that had <b>five</b> different <b>flavors,</b> as they were prepared with different types of seasonings.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Akiva said: I asked Rabbi Eliezer with regard to</b> one who <b>performs multiple</b> prohibited <b>labors on several <i>Shabbatot</i>,</b> and all those labors were <b>subsumed</b> as subcategories of <b>one</b> primary category of prohibited <b>labor,</b> and he performed them <b>during one lapse of awareness. What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is he <b>liable</b> to bring <b>one</b> sin offering <b>for</b> unwitting performance of <b>all</b> these labors <b>or</b> is he <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering <b>for</b> violation of <b>each and every one</b> of the labors?

### Part 9
Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to</b> Rabbi Akiva: He is <b>liable</b> to bring a sin offering <b>for</b> violation of <b>each and every one</b> of the labors, and this is derived <b>from an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>Just as</b> in the case of <b>a menstruating woman, with regard to whom there are not multiple</b> actions that <b>result</b> in transgression <b>and</b> that result in <b>multiple sin offerings,</b> but rather only the prohibition against engaging in intercourse with her, and nevertheless <b>one</b> is <b>liable</b> to bring a separate sin offering <b>for each and every one</b> of his acts of unwitting intercourse; in the case of <b>Shabbat, with regard to which there are multiple</b> primary categories and subcategories of labor that <b>result</b> in transgression <b>and</b> that result in <b>multiple death</b> penalties or sin offerings, <b>is it not right that he will be liable</b> to bring a sin offering <b>for</b> performance of <b>each and every one</b> of the prohibited labors?

### Part 10
Rabbi Akiva continues: <b>I said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer that the inference is not valid: <b>If you said</b> one is liable to bring multiple sin offerings <b>in the</b> case of <b>a menstruating woman, with regard to whom there are two prohibitions, as</b> the man <b>is prohibited</b> from engaging in intercourse <b>with the menstruating woman and the menstruating woman is prohibited</b> from engaging in intercourse <b>with him, would you say</b> the same <b>in the</b> case of <b>Shabbat, with regard to which there is only one prohibition?</b>

### Part 11
Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to me:</b> The <i>halakha</i> of <b>one who engages in intercourse with minor</b> menstruating <b>girls will prove</b> this refutation is not valid, <b>as in</b> that case <b>there is only one prohibition,</b> because the minor is exempt from the mitzvot, <b>and</b> nevertheless the man is <b>liable</b> to bring a separate sin offering <b>for</b> intercourse for <b>each and every one</b> of the acts of intercourse.

### Part 12
Rabbi Akiva said: <b>I said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer that the cases of Shabbat and minor menstruating girls are not comparable. <b>If you said in the</b> case of <b>minor girls that although it is not</b> prohibited <b>for them at present it is</b> prohibited <b>for them after</b> the passage of <b>time,</b> when they reach majority, <b>would you say</b> the same <b>in the</b> case of <b>Shabbat, with regard to which there are neither</b> two prohibitions <b>at present, nor</b> will there be <b>after</b> the passage of <b>time?</b>

### Part 13
Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to me:</b> The <i>halakha</i> of <b>one who copulates with an animal will prove</b> this refutation is not valid, as there are never two prohibitions in that case, and nevertheless the person is liable to bring a sin offering for each and every act. Rabbi Akiva said: <b>I said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer that no proof can be cited from the case of an animal, as in my opinion the case of <b>the animal is like</b> that of <b>Shabbat;</b> there is uncertainty with regard to both cases.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> precise <b>dilemma</b> did Rabbi Akiva <b>raise</b> before Rabbi Eliezer? <b>If he raised a dilemma</b> about <b>whether</b> different <b><i>Shabbatot</i> are comparable to</b> separate <b>entities or not,</b> i.e., if performing one labor on several <i>Shabbatot</i> during one lapse of awareness is similar to engaging in intercourse with multiple menstruating women during one lapse of awareness, <b>let him raise</b> the <b>dilemma</b> as follows: If <b>one performs one</b> prohibited <b>labor on</b> each of <b>several <i>Shabbatot</i></b> during a single lapse of awareness, what is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 15
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps <b>he raised a dilemma</b> about <b>whether</b> different <b>subcategories of</b> a single prohibited <b>labor are comparable</b> to different <b>primary categories,</b> which would mean one is liable separately for each, <b>or not.</b> But if so, <b>let him ask raise</b> the <b>dilemma</b> in the following manner: In the case of <b>one who performs multiple</b> prohibited <b>labors,</b> all <b>subsumed</b> as subcategories of <b>one</b> primary category of <b>labor, on</b> a single <b>Shabbat,</b> during a single lapse of awareness, what is the <i>halakha</i>? Why did Rabbi Akiva specify a case of one who performed multiple prohibited labors on multiple <i>Shabbatot</i>?

### Part 16
<b>Rava said: They say</b> in <b>the school of Rav [<i>bei Rav</i>]</b> that Rabbi Akiva <b>raised two dilemmas before him: He raised a dilemma</b> about <b>whether <i>Shabbatot</i> are comparable</b> to separate <b>entities or whether</b> they are <b>not</b> comparable to separate entities, and he also raised a dilemma about whether different <b>subcategories of</b> a single prohibited <b>labor are comparable</b> to different primary categories of <b>labor,</b> or <b>whether</b> they are <b>not.</b> Rabbi Eliezer answered that multiple <i>Shabbatot</i> are comparable to separate entities, and that one who performs different subcategories of a single category of prohibited labor is like one who performs multiple primary categories of labor.

### Part 17
The Gemara raises another question with regard to the mishna: <b>And</b> in connection to the performance of the same category of prohibited labor on each of several <b><i>Shabbatot</i></b> during a single lapse of awareness, <b>what</b> is the precise case about which Rabbi Akiva <b>raises</b> his <b>dilemma?</b> If the individual was <b>unwitting</b> in that he was unaware that it was <b>Shabbat but</b> acted <b>intentionally</b> with regard to the prohibited <b>labors,</b> i.e., he knew that these labors are prohibited on Shabbat, perhaps it is <b>obvious to</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>that</b> the <b>intervening days</b> constitute <b>an awareness</b> of his sin, which serves <b>to differentiate</b> between the <i>Shabbatot</i> and render the individual liable to bring separate sin offerings for each Shabbat.

### Part 18
<b>And</b> if so, <b>it is</b> in reference to a case where the individual acts <b>intentionally</b> with regard to <b>Shabbat,</b> i.e., he knows that it is Shabbat, <b>but</b> he acts <b>unwittingly</b> in that he does not know that the prohibited <b>labors</b> he is performing are prohibited on Shabbat, <b>that</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>raises</b> his <b>dilemma.</b> His dilemma is <b>whether</b> the <i>Shabbatot</i> <b>are comparable</b> to separate <b>entities,</b> which would mean that he is liable to bring a separate sin offering for each Shabbat, or <b>whether</b> they are <b>not</b> comparable to separate entities and therefore he is liable to bring only one sin offering.

### Part 19
<b>Or perhaps</b> in the case where he acts <b>intentionally</b> with regard to <b>Shabbat and unwittingly</b> with regard to prohibited <b>labors,</b> it is <b>obvious to</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>that</b> the <i>Shabbatot</i> <b>are comparable</b> to separate <b>entities</b> and he is liable to bring a separate sin offering for each Shabbat. <b>And</b> it is in reference to a case where he acts <b>unwittingly</b> in that he does not know it is <b>Shabbat, but</b> he acts <b>intentionally</b> in that he knows that the <b>labors</b> he is performing are prohibited on Shabbat, <b>that</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>raises</b> his <b>dilemma.</b> His dilemma is whether the <b>intervening days</b> between the <i>Shabbatot</i> <b>are</b> considered <b>awareness</b> of his sin, which would serve <b>to differentiate</b> between one sin and the next, <b>or not.</b>

### Part 20
<b>Rabba said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC