
### passuk 1
<b>And conceal yourself.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Avert your eyes as if you don’t notice it.
<b>You may not observe . . . and conceal yourself.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>You may not observe it so as to conceal yourself. This is its plain meaning. <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>The Rabbis, however, comment: At times, you may conceal yourself, etc. 

### passuk 2
<b>Until your brother seeks.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Would it seem reasonable to return it to him before he seeks it? But, rather, inquire after him, lest he is a swindler. 
<b>When you must return it to him.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Provided there is a return — but not if it eats in your home the equivalent of its value, which you then claim from him. From here, they ruled: Everything which produces and eats, shall produce and eat; <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>which does not produce and eat, shall be sold. 

### passuk 3
<b>You may not conceal yourself.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>By averting your eyes as if you don’t notice it.

### passuk 4
<b>You must surely lift it up with him.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This refers to loading — to load the cargo which fell from it.
<b>With him.</b> [With] its owner. But if he walked off and sat down, and said to him, ‘Since you were commanded, load if you will,’ he is exempt. 

### passuk 5
<b>A man’s attire may not be on a woman.</b> So that she resembles a man, in order to mingle with men — this can only be for the purpose of promiscuous behavior. 
<b>Nor may a man wear a woman’s garment.</b> In order to take a place among women. Another interpretation: <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>He may not shave the pubic hairs, or under the armpits. 
<b>For the abomination.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>The Torah prohibited only garments leading to abomination.

### passuk 6
<b>If you should chance.</b> This excludes a nest owned beforehand.
<b>Do not take the mother.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>While on top of her young.

### passuk 7
<b>So that you will benefit . . .</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>If, with an easily fulfilled commandment, involving no financial loss, the Torah declares, “So that you will benefit and live long”; then certainly with the reward for the difficult commandments. 

### passuk 8
<b>When you build a new home.</b> If you fulfill the commandment of “sending from the nest,” you will ultimately build a new home and fulfill the commandment of [making] a fence, since one mitzvah engenders another mitzvah. And you will attain a vineyard, a field, and beautiful clothing. This is why these chapters adjoin each other. 
<b>A fence.</b> A fence around the roof. Onkelos translates תְּיָקָא, like תִּיק, “a container,” which protects its contents. 
<b>For someone who should fall may fall.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>He deserves to fall, but still, let his death not come about through you, <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>as benefit is brought about through the meritorious, and injury through the guilty. 

### passuk 9
<b>Mixed species.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Wheat, barley, and grapeseed, within a hand fling. 
<b>Lest . . . becomes obnoxious.</b> As Targum [Onkelos] renders, “becomes obnoxious.” Anything obnoxious to a person, whether laudable, as with sacred objects, or detestable, as with forbidden objects, is described by the term “obnoxious,” as in, “Do not approach me, for I have rendered you obnoxious.” 
<b>The expansion.</b> This refers to the fullness and enlargement generated by the seed.

### passuk 10
<b>You may not plow with an ox and a donkey.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This applies, as well, to any two species in the universe, and applies, as well, to leading them together, harnessed as a pair, in transporting any kind of burden. 

### passuk 11
<b>A mixture of threads.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>The meaning is “a mixture.” The Rabbis interpret, combed, spun, and woven. 

### passuk 12
<b>Make yourself pendant threads.</b> Even out of the כִּלְאַיִם mixture — this is why Scripture places them near each other.

### passuk 13
<b>He has relations with her and hates her.</b> he will ultimately . . .<i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>

### passuk 14
<b>berate her with calumnies.</b> One transgression engenders another. He transgressed “Do not hate” — he will ultimately reach the point of malicious slander.
<b>This woman.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>We derive from here that no statement may be made except in the presence of the defendant.

### passuk 15
<b>The girl’s father and mother.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Those who nurtured the evil branch must suffer humiliation over it.

### passuk 16
<b>The girl’s father should assert.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This teaches that a woman is not permitted to speak before a man.

### passuk 17
<b>Let them spread the cloth.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This is figurative — the matter is as clearcut as a cloth.

### passuk 18
<b>And chastise him.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Flogging.

### passuk 19

### passuk 20
<b>However, if the allegation is true.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Through witnesses, and with a pre-warning, that she committed adultery after her אֵירוּסִין — marriage. 

### passuk 21
<b>To the entrance of her father’s home.</b> Look at the branch you nurtured.
<b>The people of her city.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>In the presence of all the people of her city.
<b>Behaving promiscuously [in] her father’s house.</b> As if it had said “in” her father’s house.

### passuk 22
<b>Even both of them shall die.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This excludes lascivious activity from which the woman does not derive pleasure.
<b>Even.</b> <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>This adds those following them. (Another version of Rashi’s text: “those committing sodomy.”) <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>Another interpretation: “Even both of them” <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>adds the fetus — if she was pregnant, we do not wait until she gives birth. 

### passuk 23
<b>And a man encounters her in the city.</b> This is why he was intimate with her — the breach summons the thief. But if she had remained at home, this would not have occurred to her. 

### passuk 24

### passuk 25

### passuk 26
<b>For, just as if a man rises up, etc.</b> According to the plain interpretation, this is its meaning; ‘For she was coerced, he overpowered her, similar to a man who rises up against his fellow murderously.’ Our Sages expound, here, <i data-commentator="Siftei Chakhamim" data-label="⚬"></i>‘This appears to teach, but subsequently learns, etc.’ 

>Credit : primo.nli.org.il (metsudah)
>License : CC_BY