### Part 1
The vessel was <b>filled to overflow</b> with <b>incense. And it had a cover</b> to prevent spillage of the incense, <b>and there was a type of cloth</b> placed <b>upon it from above,</b> to preserve the fragrance of the incense.

### Part 2
MISHNA 5:5 The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>to</b> bring <b>the coal pan</b> with the coals from the outer altar to the incense altar in the Sanctuary <b>took the silver coal pan, ascended to the top of the</b> outer <b>altar, and cleared</b> the extinguished coals from the perimeter of the flame <b>to here</b> and to there. Then he <b>shoveled</b> four <i>kav</i> from the consumed inner coals, which were burned in the depths of the flame, into the coal pan. <b>He descended</b> from the altar <b>and emptied</b> the coals <b>into</b> the coal pan made <b>of gold. Approximately one <i>kav</i> of coals from it was</b> spilled and <b>scattered</b> on the courtyard floor, as the capacity of the gold pan was only three <i>kav</i>. <b>And</b> a priest <b>would sweep</b> the scattered coals <b>into</b> the Temple courtyard <b>drain</b> that passed through the courtyard to drain the waste outside the Temple.

### Part 3
<b>And on Shabbat,</b> when it is prohibited to extinguish fire, the priest would not sweep the coals into the canal; rather, <b>he would overturn a <i>pesakhter</i> upon them. And</b> the <b><i>pesakhter</i> was a large vessel</b> that <b>held a half-kor. And</b> since the <i>pesakhter</i> was a very heavy vessel, <b>there were two chains on it,</b> to facilitate its standard use, removal of ashes from the altar: <b>One</b> chain with <b>which</b> a priest would <b>pull</b> the vessel filled with ashes <b>down</b> the ramp, <b>and one</b> chain <b>that</b> another priest <b>would grasp from above, so that</b> the vessel would <b>not roll</b> down the ramp and the ashes would not spill.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> the <i>pesakhter</i> <b>would serve three purposes:</b> The priests would <b>overturn it upon</b> the <b>coals</b> that scattered in the Temple during the transfer from the silver to the gold coal pan on Shabbat, <b>and</b> they would overturn it <b>upon the</b> carcass of <b>a creeping animal</b> found in the Temple <b>on Shabbat, and</b> they would <b>take the ashes down from atop the altar in it.</b>

### Part 5
MISHNA 5:6 The priest with the spoonful of incense and the priest with the gold coal pan filled with coals <b>reached</b> the place <b>between the Entrance Hall</b> to the Sanctuary <b>and the</b> outer <b>altar,</b> on their way to the Sanctuary. <b>One</b> of them <b>took the shovel and threw it between the Entrance Hall and the</b> outer <b>altar. No person</b> could <b>hear the voice of another</b> speaking to him <b>in Jerusalem,</b> due <b>to</b> the <b>sound</b> generated by <b>the shovel.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> that sound <b>would serve three purposes:</b> Any <b>priest who hears its sound knows that his brethren the priests are entering to prostrate</b> themselves in the Sanctuary at that time, <b>and he</b> would <b>run and come</b> to prostrate himself with them. <b>And</b> any <b>Levite who hears its sound knows that his brethren the Levites are entering</b> the courtyard to stand on their platform <b>to recite the psalm</b> accompanying the libation, <b>and he</b> would <b>run and come</b> to sing with them. <b>And the head of the</b> non-priestly <b>watch,</b> which stands in the courtyard as the agents of the Jewish people, <b>would position the ritually impure</b> priests and singers <b>at the eastern gate</b> of the courtyard, to make it clear that those priests were not performing the Temple service due to their ritual impurity.

### Part 7
end of chapter

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> 6:1 The priest with the panful of incense and the priest with the gold coal pan filled with coals <b>began ascending</b> the twelve <b>stairs of the Entrance Hall.</b> The priests <b>who won</b> the rights <b>of the removal of ash from the inner altar and</b> the removal of ash from <b>the Candelabrum would precede them,</b> to remove the vessels that remained in the Sanctuary. The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>of the removal of ash from the inner altar entered</b> the Sanctuary <b>and took the basket</b> that he had left there after removing the ashes from the altar. <b>And</b> when he completed his tasks, he <b>prostrated</b> himself with his hands and feet spread <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.

### Part 9
The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>of the removal of ash from the Candelabrum entered</b> the Sanctuary, <b>and</b> if he <b>found</b> the <b>two western lamps,</b> i.e., the easternmost and the one immediately to its west, of the Candelabrum <b>burning,</b> he would <b>remove the ash from the easternmost</b> lamp and prepare it anew. <b>But</b> he would <b>leave burning the</b> lamp immediately <b>west</b> of the easternmost lamp, <b>as from</b> that lamp <b>he would kindle</b> the lamps of <b>the Candelabrum in the afternoon.</b> If <b>he found that</b> the lamp west of the easternmost lamp <b>was extinguished, he</b> would <b>remove the ashes and kindle it</b> from the fire on <b>the altar of the burnt offering.</b> He then <b>took the jug</b> in which he had placed the ashes and wicks of the Candelabrum <b>from</b> the <b>second stair</b> of the stone before the Candelabrum <b>and prostrated</b> himself <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.

### Part 10
MISHNA 6:2 The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>to</b> bring <b>the coal pan</b> filled with coals to the inner altar for the burning of the incense first <b>piled the coals on the</b> inner <b>altar and</b> then <b>flattened them,</b> distributing them evenly on the altar <b>with the bottom of the coal pan. And</b> when he finished distributing the coals, he <b>prostrated</b> himself <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.

### Part 11
MISHNA 6:3 The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>to</b> burn <b>the incense would take the smaller vessel</b> containing the incense <b>from within the spoon, and</b> would <b>give it to</b> a priest who is <b>his friend or his relative,</b> whom he designated to assist him, and enter the Sanctuary with him. If the incense <b>was scattered from</b> the smaller vessel <b>into</b> the spoon, the priest accompanying him would <b>give</b> the incense <b>to</b> the priest burning the incense <b>in his handfuls. And</b> the experienced priests would <b>teach</b> the priest burning the incense: <b>Be careful,</b> because if you are not careful <b>you might begin</b> scattering the incense on the side of the altar that is <b>before you;</b> rather, start scattering on the far side of the altar, <b>so</b> that <b>you will not be burned</b> by the burning incense when you are scattering it.

### Part 12
The priest <b>began flattening it,</b> distributing the incense evenly on the coals on the altar, <b>and</b> when the Sanctuary would become filled with the smoke of the incense, he would <b>emerge</b> from the Sanctuary. The priest <b>burning</b> the incense <b>would not burn</b> it until <b>the appointed</b> priest would <b>say to him: Burn</b> the incense. <b>And if it was the High Priest</b> who was burning the incense, <b>the appointed</b> priest would <b>say to him</b> deferentially: <b>My master,</b> the <b>High Priest, burn</b> the incense.

### Part 13
It is derived from the verse: “And there shall be no man in the Tent of Meeting when he goes in to make atonement in the Sanctuary, until he comes out” (Leviticus 16:17), that no one may be standing between the Entrance Hall and the outer altar when the priest burns the incense. Therefore, <b>the people,</b> i.e., the priests, <b>left</b> that area. <b>And</b> the priest <b>burned</b> the incense on the inner altar <b>and prostrated</b> himself <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.