
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> 7:1 After the priests concluded sacrificing the daily morning offering, they would enter the Sanctuary to prostrate themselves. <b>On occasions when the High Priest</b> would <b>enter</b> the Sanctuary <b>to prostrate</b> himself, he would enter before the other priests. When the High Priest enters the Sanctuary, <b>three</b> priests <b>hold him</b> to assist him and support him, in order to distinguish the service of the High Priest from that of the other priests entering the Sanctuary. <b>One</b> priest held <b>his right</b> hand <b>and one</b> priest held <b>his left</b> hand, <b>and one</b> priest stood behind the High Priest, holding <b>onto</b> the two <b>precious</b> onyx <b>stones</b> located on the shoulders of the High Priest, on the ephod.

### Part 2
<b>And once the appointed</b> priest <b>heard</b> the <b>sound</b> from the <b>feet of the High Priest,</b> produced by the bells attached to the bottom of his robe, he knew <b>that</b> the High Priest was <b>emerging</b> from the Sanctuary, and he <b>lifted the curtain</b> suspended at the opening of the Entrance Hall <b>for him,</b> to facilitate his exit. After the High Priest <b>entered and prostrated</b> himself <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary, <b>his brethren the priests entered, prostrated</b> themselves, <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.

### Part 3
MISHNA 7:2 After the priests emerged from the Sanctuary, <b>they came and stood on the</b> twelve <b>stairs</b> before <b>the Entrance Hall. The first</b> five priests <b>stood to</b> the <b>south</b> of <b>their brethren, the priests,</b> who had taken the limbs of the daily offering up to the altar. <b>And</b> those five priests had <b>five vessels in their hands: The basket</b> with the ashes from the inner altar was <b>in the hands of one</b> priest; <b>and the jug</b> with the ashes from the Candelabrum was <b>in the hands of one</b> priest; <b>and the coal pan</b> was <b>in the hands of one</b> priest; <b>and the</b> smaller <b>vessel,</b> the bowl that held the incense, was <b>in the hands of one</b> priest, who had burned the incense; <b>and</b> the <b>spoon and its cover</b> were <b>in the hands of one</b> priest, the friend or relative of the one who burned the incense.

### Part 4
The priests placed their vessels on the ground <b>and</b> then <b>blessed the people,</b> reciting <b>one blessing.</b> The Priestly Benediction was recited outside the Temple as well, <b>but</b> in the Temple, it was recited differently, <b>as in</b> the rest of <b>the country</b> the priests would <b>recite it</b> as <b>three blessings,</b> and the listeners would answer amen after each blessing. <b>But in the Temple</b> they would recite it as <b>one blessing,</b> and the listeners would not respond to each blessing. Rather, at the conclusion of the entire Priestly Benediction they would answer: Blessed are You Lord, God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. <b>In the Temple,</b> the priests <b>would recite the name</b> of God <b>as it is written,</b> with the letters <i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>heh</i>, whereas <b>in</b> the rest of <b>the country</b> the priests would recite the name of God <b>by His appellation,</b> <i>alef</i>, <i>dalet</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>yod</i>.

### Part 5
Furthermore, <b>in</b> the rest of <b>the country,</b> while reciting the Priestly Benediction <b>the priests lift their hands opposite their shoulders, and in the Temple</b> they raise them <b>above their heads.</b> That is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to all priests in the Temple, <b>except for</b> the <b>High Priest, who does not raise his hands above the frontplate</b> on his forehead, as the name of God is written on the frontplate. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> the <b>High Priest</b> would <b>raise his hands above the frontplate</b> while reciting the Priestly Benediction in the Temple, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the Priestly Benediction recited by Aaron the High Priest: <b>“And Aaron lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them”</b> (Leviticus 9:22).

### Part 6
MISHNA 7:3 The High Priest is entitled to sacrifice any offering brought to the Temple, at his discretion. <b>When the High Priest wishes to burn</b> the limbs of the daily offering and the accompanying meal offering, he <b>would ascend the ramp</b> to the altar, <b>and the deputy</b> High Priest would walk <b>to his right.</b> When he <b>reached half</b> the height of <b>the ramp, the Deputy</b> would <b>hold his right</b> hand <b>and take him up</b> to the altar at the top of the ramp.

### Part 7
<b>And the first</b> of the nine priests who took the limbs up to the altar <b>handed</b> the High Priest <b>the head and the hind leg</b> of the offering, <b>and</b> the High Priest <b>placed his hands upon them and</b> then <b>threw them</b> onto the altar fire. Next <b>the second</b> of the nine priests <b>handed the two forelegs</b> of the offering <b>to the first</b> priest. He <b>gave them to the High Priest,</b> who <b>placed his hands upon them and</b> then <b>threw them</b> onto the altar fire. At that point, <b>the second</b> priest <b>slipped away and left. And</b> in <b>that</b> manner the priests <b>would hand</b> the High Priest <b>the rest of all the limbs, and he</b> would <b>place his hands upon them and</b> then <b>throw them</b> onto the altar fire. <b>And when he wishes, he places his hands and others throw</b> the limbs onto the fire.

### Part 8
When the High Priest, who was at the top of the ramp on the south side of the altar, <b>came to circle the altar</b> to reach the southwestern corner, where he would pour the libation of wine, <b>from where does he begin?</b> He begins <b>from the southeastern corner</b> and continues to the <b>northeastern</b> corner, then to the <b>northwestern</b> corner, and ultimately reaches the <b>southwestern</b> corner. At that point, the priests <b>gave him wine to pour.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Deputy stands</b> at the High Priest’s side <b>at the corner</b> of the altar <b>and the cloths</b> are <b>in his hand,</b> so that he can wave them to signal to the Levites to begin singing when the High Priest pours the libation. <b>Two priests stand at the</b> marble <b>table of the fats,</b> where the limbs and fats were placed before being taken to the altar, <b>and</b> there were <b>two</b> silver <b>trumpets in their hands.</b> These two priests <b>sounded a <i>tekia</i>,</b> a long continuous blast; they then <b>sounded a <i>terua</i>,</b> a series of staccato blasts; <b>and</b> lastly they <b>sounded</b> another <b><i>tekia</i></b> to alert the Levites to prepare to recite the psalm.

### Part 10
The priests with the trumpets <b>came and stood near ben Arza,</b> the title given to the person who was tasked with striking the cymbals, <b>one to his right and one to his left.</b> Then the High Priest <b>stooped to pour</b> the libation, <b>and the Deputy waved the cloths, and ben Arza struck the cymbals, and the Levites recited the psalm</b> of that day of the week. Each psalm was divided into three sections. Whenever the Levites <b>reached the</b> end of one <b>section</b> of the psalm, the priests <b>sounded a <i>tekia</i>, and the people</b> in the courtyard <b>prostrated</b> themselves. <b>At</b> the end of <b>each section</b> there was <b>a <i>tekia</i>, and for every <i>tekia</i></b> there was <b>a prostration. That is the procedure for</b> the sacrifice of <b>the daily offering in the service of the House of our God; may it be</b> His <b>will that it will be speedily rebuilt in our day, amen.</b>

### Part 11
MISHNA 7:4 The following is a list of each daily <b>psalm that the Levites would recite in the Temple. On the first day</b> of the week <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: “A psalm of David. <b>The earth is the Lord’s and all it contains, the world and all who live in it”</b> (Psalms, chapter 24). <b>On the second</b> day <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: “A song; a psalm of the sons of Korah. <b>Great is the Lord and highly to be praised in the city of God, on His sacred mountain”</b> (Psalms, chapter 48). <b>On the third</b> day <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: “A psalm of Asaph. <b>God stands in the divine assembly; among the judges He delivers judgment”</b> (Psalms, chapter 82). <b>On the fourth</b> day <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: <b>“O Lord God, to Whom vengeance belongs, God to Whom vengeance belongs, shine forth”</b> (Psalms, chapter 94). <b>On the fifth</b> day <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: “For the leader; upon the Gittith, a psalm of Asaph. <b>Sing for joy to God, our strength; shout aloud to the God of Jacob”</b> (Psalms, chapter 81). <b>On the sixth</b> day <b>they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: <b>“The Lord reigns: He is robed in majesty; the Lord is robed,</b> girded with strength” (Psalms, chapter 93). <b>On Shabbat they would recite</b> the psalm beginning: <b>“A psalm, a song for Shabbat day”</b> (Psalms, chapter 92). This is interpreted as <b>a psalm, a song for the future, for the day that will be entirely Shabbat and rest for everlasting life.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC