### Part 1
<b>of gold. Although</b> the lamb <b>was examined</b> and deemed unblemished earlier <b>in the evening,</b> the priests <b>examine it</b> now <b>by the light of the torches.</b>

### Part 2
MISHNA 3:5 The priests <b>who won</b> the privilege <b>of the removal of ash from the inner altar and of the removal of ash from the Candelabrum would precede</b> the other priests <b>and</b> would hold <b>four vessels in their hands: The basket, and the jug, and</b> the <b>two keys. The basket is similar to</b> a large <b>gold</b> vessel with a capacity of <b>three <i>kav</i> [<i>letarkav</i>],</b> but it <b>holds</b> only <b>two and a half <i>kav</i>. And the jug is similar to a large flask [<i>lekitton</i>] of gold. And</b> as for the <b>two keys,</b> with <b>one</b> of them the priest <b>would lower his arm to his armpit</b> through a small opening in the door and open the lock that was at the bottom of the door on the inside, and he would pass through that door into a compartment. <b>And</b> the other <b>one</b> is the key with <b>which</b> the priest <b>opened</b> the lock on the inner door of the compartment, through which he entered the Sanctuary, and that lock he opened <b>directly.</b>

### Part 3
MISHNA 3:6 The priest <b>came to the northern wicket. There were two wickets for the large gate, one in the northern</b> part of the gate <b>and one in the southern</b> part. Through the wicket <b>that was in the southern</b> part, <b>no person entered. In its regard,</b> the wicket’s status <b>is clarified by</b> the prophet <b>Ezekiel, as it is stated:</b> “Then he brought me back the way of the outer gate of the Sanctuary, which looks toward the east; and it was shut. <b>And the Lord said unto me: This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, neither shall any man enter in by it, for the Lord, the God of Israel, has entered in by it; and it shall be shut”</b> (Ezekiel 44:1–2).

### Part 4
The priest <b>took the key, opened the wicket</b> north of the gate, <b>and entered the compartment.</b> He went <b>from the compartment to the Sanctuary</b> and continued <b>until</b> he would <b>reach the large gate.</b> Once <b>he reached the large gate,</b> which was locked from the inside, <b>he moved the bolt and the locks</b> fixing the bolt in place <b>and opened</b> the gate. The priest <b>who slaughters</b> the daily offering <b>would not slaughter</b> the animal <b>until he</b> would <b>hear that the large gate</b> had been <b>opened.</b>

### Part 5
MISHNA 3:7 <b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear</b> the <b>sound</b> indicating <b>that the large gate</b> had been <b>opened. From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear</b> the <b>sound</b> produced in the Temple by the instrument that had the form of <b>a shovel. From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of the song</b> of the Levites in the Temple. <b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of ben Arza clashing the cymbals</b> in the Temple. <b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of the flute</b> that was played in the Temple twelve days each year.

### Part 6
<b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the voice of Gevini</b> the Temple <b>crier,</b> who would proclaim in the Temple each day: Arise, priests, to your service, and Levites to your platform, and Israelites to your non-priestly watch. <b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of the wood that ben Katin crafted</b> into <b>a mechanism</b> of pulleys <b>for the Basin. From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of the song</b> of the Levites in the Temple. <b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would hear the sound of the shofar</b> that was sounded several times each day in the Temple. <b>And some say</b> that in Jericho the people would hear <b>even the voice of the High Priest at the moment that he mentioned the</b> ineffable <b>name</b> of God <b>on Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 7
<b>From Jericho</b> the people <b>would smell the fragrance</b> emanating from <b>the preparation of the incense</b> in the Temple. <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Diglai said: There were goats</b> belonging <b>to my father</b> that grazed <b>in the cities of Mikhvar,</b> located at a distance from Jerusalem, <b>and they would sneeze from the fragrance of the preparation of the incense</b> that they smelled.

### Part 8
MISHNA 3:8 The priest <b>who won</b> the lottery <b>to</b> slaughter <b>the daily offering pulled</b> the lamb, <b>and</b> he would <b>go to the slaughterhouse</b> to slaughter it as the daily offering. <b>And</b> the priests <b>who won</b> the right <b>to</b> take <b>the limbs</b> up to the ramp would <b>go with him. The slaughterhouse was to the north of the altar. Adjacent to it</b> there were <b>eight low</b> stone <b>pillars. And cedarwood squares</b> were affixed <b>upon them, and iron hooks were fixed in</b> the wooden squares. <b>And</b> there were <b>three rows</b> of hooks <b>on each and every one</b> of those wooden squares, <b>upon which</b> the priests would <b>suspend</b> the animal after it was slaughtered. <b>And they</b> would <b>flay</b> the animal’s hide <b>onto marble tables that</b> were positioned <b>between the pillars.</b>

### Part 9
MISHNA 3:9 The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>of the removal of ash from the inner altar entered</b> through the Sanctuary gate, <b>and</b> he <b>took the basket</b> with him <b>and placed it before him</b> on the floor between him and the altar. <b>And</b> he <b>would take handfuls</b> of ashes from upon the altar <b>and place</b> them <b>in</b> the basket. <b>Ultimately,</b> when only a small amount of ashes remained on the altar, <b>the priest swept the rest into</b> the basket, <b>and placed</b> the basket back on the Sanctuary floor, <b>and emerged</b> from the Sanctuary.

### Part 10
The priest <b>who won</b> the right <b>of the removal of ash from the Candelabrum entered</b> the Sanctuary. <b>And</b> if <b>he found</b> in the Candelabrum the <b>two easternmost lamps</b>, the second of which is called the <b>western</b> lamp, still <b>burning,</b> he would first <b>remove the ashes</b> and the burned wicks <b>from the rest</b> of the lamps and place them in the jug, and place new wicks and oil in those lamps. <b>And</b> he would <b>leave these</b> two lamps <b>burning in their</b> own <b>place.</b> If <b>he found that</b> the two easternmost lamps <b>were extinguished,</b> he would <b>remove the ashes</b> and the burned wicks from <b>them and kindle them from the</b> lamps that were still <b>burning.</b> If none were still burning, he would kindle them from the fire on the outer altar. <b>And afterward,</b> the priest would <b>remove the ashes</b> and the wicks <b>from the rest</b> of the lamps.

### Part 11
<b>And there was a stone in front of the Candelabrum and in it there</b> were <b>three stairs upon which</b> the <b>priest</b> would <b>stand and prepare the lamps</b> for kindling. Since the Candelabrum was eighteen handbreadths high, it was necessary for the priest to stand on an elevated surface to reach the lamps. <b>And</b> after he placed the ashes and the wicks from the five westernmost lamps in the jug, he would <b>place the jug on</b> the <b>second stair</b> of that stone, <b>and</b> then he <b>emerged</b> from the Sanctuary. When the priest later returned to prepare the two easternmost lamps for kindling, he would remove the jug with the ashes from the Candelabrum, and together with the priest removing the basket with the ashes from the inner altar would pour the ashes from the jug and the basket at the side of the altar.

### Part 12
end of chapter

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In preparing the lamb of the daily offering for sacrifice, the priests <b>would not tie the lamb</b> by fastening all four of its legs together; <b>rather, they would bind it</b> by fastening each hind leg to the corresponding foreleg. The priests <b>who won</b> the right <b>to</b> take <b>the limbs</b> up to the ramp would <b>hold</b> the lamb in place while it was being slaughtered. <b>And this was</b> the manner of <b>its binding:</b> The animal would be stood in the northern part of the courtyard while <b>its head</b> would be directed <b>to the south,</b> toward the altar, <b>and its face</b> would be turned <b>to the west,</b> toward the Sanctuary. <b>And the slaughterer</b> would <b>stand to</b> the <b>east</b> of the animal, <b>and his face</b> would be <b>to the west.</b>

### Part 14
Twenty-four rings were affixed to the courtyard floor north of the altar, designated for placement of the animal’s neck during its slaughter. The daily offering <b>of the morning was slaughtered at the northwest corner</b> of the altar, <b>at</b> the <b>second ring.</b> The daily offering <b>of the afternoon was slaughtered at the northeast corner</b> of the altar, <b>at</b> the <b>second ring.</b>

### Part 15
After <b>the slaughterer has slaughtered</b> the lamb <b>and the receiver has received</b> its blood in a vessel to sprinkle on the altar, the priest <b>comes to</b> the <b>northeast corner</b> of the altar <b>and places</b> the first sprinkling in such a manner that the blood will reach the <b>eastern</b> and <b>northern</b> sides of the altar. Next, the priest comes to the <b>southwest</b> corner of the altar <b>and places</b> a second sprinkling in a manner such that the blood will reach the <b>western</b> and <b>southern</b> sides of the altar. With regard to <b>the remainder of the blood,</b> the priest <b>would pour</b> it <b>at</b> the <b>southern base</b> of the altar, at its southwest corner.