
### Part 1
from a mishna that deals with the offering of <b>a woman who miscarries</b> on <b><i>or</i> of the eighty-first</b> day after her previous childbirth: The Torah obligates a woman to bring an offering after childbirth, including a miscarriage. However, one offering suffices for any births or miscarriages that occur within eighty days of the original birth, as the halakhic ramifications of that birth last eighty days (see Leviticus 12:1–6). The mishna cited addresses the borderline case of a woman who miscarries on the night of the eighty-first day following the birth. <b>Beit Shammai exempt</b> her <b>from</b> bringing another <b>offering,</b> as the offering she brought for the previous childbirth exempts her from bringing another for the miscarriage. <b>And Beit Hillel obligate</b> her to bring a second offering.

### Part 2
<b>Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: What is different</b> between <b><i>or</i> of the eighty-first and the day of the eighty-first? If they are equal</b> with regard <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>ritual impurity,</b> i.e., the blood of this woman is no longer ritually pure and all of the standard strictures of ritual impurity apply to her, <b>will</b> the two time periods <b>not be equal</b> with regard <b>to the offering</b> as well? In terms of the meaning of <i>or</i>, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: What is different</b> between <b><i>or</i> of the eighty-first and the day of the eighty-first, learn from it that <i>or</i> is night.</b> Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that <i>or</i> means night.

### Part 3
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> with regard to the meaning of the word <i>or</i> from a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that a peace-offering, which may be eaten for two days, <b>may</b> also <b>be eaten</b> on <b><i>or</i> of the third</b> day. <b>And</b> it is <b>a logical derivation</b> that leads to that conclusion. How so? Other <b>offerings,</b> e.g., sin-offerings, <b>are eaten for one day, and peace-offerings are eaten for two days. Just as there,</b> with regard to other offerings, the <b>night follows the</b> previous <b>day,</b> i.e., the offering may be eaten during the day and the subsequent night, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to peace-offerings, say that the <b>night follows the day,</b> and rule that they may be eaten on the night after the second day.

### Part 4
Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And when you sacrifice a peace-offering to God, you shall sacrifice it of your own will. <b>It shall be eaten the same day you sacrifice it, and on the next day; and if any remains until the</b> third <b>day,</b> it shall be burnt with fire” (Leviticus 19:5–6). This verse means that <b>it</b> may <b>be eaten while it is still day,</b> i.e., during the second day, <b>and it</b> may <b>not be eaten</b> on <b><i>or</i> of the third</b> day.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If a peace-offering may not be eaten beyond the second day, one <b>might</b> have thought that it should <b>be burned immediately</b> after the conclusion of the second day, <b>and this</b> too is the conclusion of <b>a logical derivation:</b> Other <b>offerings are eaten for one day and night, and peace-offerings are eaten for two days and one night. Just as there,</b> the offerings are <b>burned immediately</b> after their permitted time <b>for eating</b> concludes, on the morning of the second day, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to peace-offerings, one could say that they must be <b>burned immediately after</b> their permitted time for <b>eating</b> concludes, at night after the second day.

### Part 6
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And if any remains of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day, it shall be burnt with fire”</b> (Leviticus 7:17), meaning: <b>You</b> must <b>burn it during the day, and you do not burn it at night.</b> With regard to the meaning of <i>or</i>, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>states:</b> One might have thought that <b>it may be eaten</b> on <b><i>or</i> of the third</b> day, <b>apparently <i>or</i> is evening.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that <i>or</i> is evening.

### Part 7
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof: On <b><i>or</i> of Yom Kippur, one recites seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> prayer <b>and confesses</b> his sins; in <b>the morning prayer, one recites seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses; in the additional prayer, one recites seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses; in the afternoon prayer, one recites seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses; in the evening</b> prayer, <b>one recites</b> an <b>abridged</b> version of the standard <i>Amida</i> prayer of <b>eighteen</b> blessings, as the people are weary from fasting. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel says in the name of his forefathers: One recites the eighteen complete</b> blessings, <b>due to</b> the fact that <b>he is required to recite <i>havdala</i> in</b> the fourth blessing of the <i>Amida</i>: Who graciously grants knowledge. It cannot be inserted in the abridged version. <b>Apparently, <i>or</i> is evening.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that <i>or</i> means evening.

### Part 8
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof, <b>as it was taught</b> in <b>the school of Shmuel: On the evening of the fourteenth</b> of Nisan, <b>one searches for leavened bread by candlelight. Apparently, <i>or</i> is evening,</b> as this <i>baraita</i> replaces <i>or</i> with the word evening.

### Part 9
It is clear from these proofs that the expression <i>or</i> in the mishna means the evening before the day. How, then, could the <i>amora’im</i> dispute whether it is referring to the morning or evening? <b>Rather,</b> the Gemara rejects its previous assumption with regard to the dispute, <b>as everyone, both Rav Huna and Rav Yehuda, agrees</b> that <b><i>or</i> is evening, and they do not disagree</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i>. However, this <b>Master</b> stated the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the expression accepted in <b>his place, and</b> that <b>Master</b> stated the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the expression accepted in <b>his place. In Rav Huna’s place, they call</b> the evening <b>light, and in Rav Yehuda’s place they call it night,</b> although both terms refer to the same period.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna, <b>what is the reason</b> that he <b>didn’t</b> explicitly <b>teach: The night</b> of the fourteenth, as it was taught in the school of Shmuel? The Gemara answers: <b>He employed a euphemism.</b> Since the <i>tanna</i> of our mishna did not want to mention darkness, he preferred the term <i>or</i> to refer to the night of the fourteenth. <b>And</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> a statement of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi. As Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: A person should never express a crude matter, as the</b> formulation of <b>a verse</b> was <b>distorted</b> by the addition of <b>eight letters rather than</b> have it <b>express a crude matter, as it is stated: “From the pure animals and from the animals that are not pure [<i>asher einena tehora</i>]”</b> (Genesis 7:8). To avoid using the Hebrew term for impure [<i>teme’a</i>], which is four letters: <i>Tet</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>alef</i>, <i>heh</i>, the verse replaced the term with the euphemism meaning “that are not pure,” which is spelled with twelve letters: <i>Alef</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>reish</i>; <i>alef</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>; <i>tet</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>reish</i>, <i>heh</i>.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b> A different verse added <b>nine</b> letters, <b>as it is stated: “If there be among you any man who is not ritually pure [<i>asher lo yihye tahor</i>] by reason of that which happened to him by night”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:11). To avoid using the three-letter Hebrew word for impure, <i>tameh</i>, spelled <i>tet</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>alef</i>, the verse employs the twelve-letter phrase “who is not ritually pure,” spelled: <i>Alef</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>reish</i>; <i>lamed</i>, <i>alef</i>; <i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>; <i>tet</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>reish</i>. <b>Ravina said:</b> The verse actually adds <b>ten</b> letters because of the letter <b><i>vav</i> of</b> the word <b><i>tahor</i>,</b> as the word is spelled in its plene form. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> Yet another verse adds <b>sixteen</b> letters, <b>as it is stated: “For he said, something has happened to him, he is not ritually pure; surely he is not ritually pure [<i>bilti tahor hu ki lo tahor</i>]”</b> (I Samuel 20:26). To avoid using the three-letter word <i>tameh</i>, the verse employs the nineteen-letter phrase “he is not ritually pure; surely he is not ritually pure,” spelled: <i>Beit</i>, <i>lamed</i>, <i>tav</i>, <i>yod</i>; <i>tet</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>reish</i>; <i>heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>alef</i>; <i>kaf</i>, <i>yod</i>; <i>lamed</i>, <i>alef</i>; <i>tet</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>reish</i>.

### Part 12
Likewise, a <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught</b> in <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael: A person should always converse euphemistically, as</b> one finds in the following verses. The first: “And whichever saddle that the <i>zav</i> rides upon shall be ritually impure” (Leviticus 15:9), which discusses the impurity imparted by <b>a <i>zav</i></b> to an object on which he sits, <b>calls</b> this action <b>riding. And</b> the verse: “And anyone who touches anything on which she sat” (Leviticus 15:22), which discusses the parallel ritual impurity <b>of a woman,</b> a <i>zava</i>, <b>calls</b> the action <b>sitting.</b> Since riding is slightly demeaning for a woman, as it involves an immodest splaying of the legs, the verse avoids the term riding and opts to convey the more modest image of sitting. <b>And it says</b> in another verse: <b>“And you choose the language of the crafty”</b> (Job 15:5), meaning that one should be clever when speaking and avoid inappropriate phrases. <b>And it says</b> in another verse: “My words shall utter the uprightness of my heart; <b>and that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely”</b> (Job 33:3).

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the need for the proofs from the two additional verses introduced by the phrase: <b>And it says?</b> The <i>baraita</i> already proved its point from the verses with regard to <i>zav</i> and <i>zava</i>. The Gemara answers: The additional verses are necessary, <b>lest you say: This</b> requirement to use clean language <b>applies only in</b> the language written in <b>the Torah, but in rabbinic</b> formulations, <b>no,</b> there is no obligation to use clean language. To counter this argument, the <i>tanna</i> says, <b>come</b> and <b>hear: And it says: “And you choose the language of the crafty,”</b> which indicates that this principle extends beyond the language of the Torah. <b>And lest you say that this</b> requirement <b>applies only to rabbinic</b> language, <b>but</b> when it comes <b>to ordinary speech, no,</b> one need not speak euphemistically, the <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And it says: “And that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely,”</b> i.e., one must speak euphemistically in every situation.

### Part 14
With regard to the above <i>baraita</i> taught in the school of Rabbi Yishmael, the Gemara asks: <b>And with regard to a woman, is</b> the term <b>riding not written</b> in the Torah? <b>But isn’t it written: “And Rebecca and her damsels arose and they rode upon camels”</b> (Genesis 24:61)? The Gemara answers: <b>There, due to fear of camels, that is standard conduct.</b> Since a camel’s back is high off the ground, a woman cannot sit on it sidesaddle; consequently, she may ride on it without being considered immodest. The Gemara cites another relevant verse. <b>But isn’t it written: “And Moses took his wife and his children and rode them upon his donkey”</b> (Exodus 4:20)? The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> despite the fact that his wife was also on the donkey, the verse employs the language of riding

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC