
### Part 1
With regard to a garden <b>bed that is six by six handbreadths</b> in area, <b>one</b> may <b>plant in it five</b> different types of <b>seeds, four</b> types <b>on the four sides of the bed and one</b> type <b>in the middle.</b> This mishna teaches that it is permitted to plant different types of seeds in one garden bed, provided that one maintains the appropriate distance between them. The Gemara explains: Rav’s statement is nevertheless necessary. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>that applies only to seeds, but with regard to vegetables, no,</b> it is prohibited to plant them in a single garden bed even if this separation is maintained, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that it is permitted to plant in this manner with vegetables as well.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that vegetables are stronger</b> in the level of their prohibition <b>than seeds? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna in <i>Kilayim</i>: With regard to <b>multiple types of seeds, one</b> may <b>not plant</b> them together <b>in one</b> garden <b>bed,</b> even if there is space between them; <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>multiple types of vegetables, one</b> may <b>plant</b> them together <b>in one bed?</b> This mishna apparently indicates that the <i>halakha</i> is stricter concerning seeds. The Gemara answers: Rav’s statement is necessary. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>these bitter herbs are a type of seed,</b> not a vegetable, and therefore it is prohibited to plant them in a bed with other seeds, Rav <b>teaches us</b> that all the various bitter herbs are classified as types of vegetables.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Could it</b> even <b>enter your mind</b> that bitter herbs are types of <b>seeds? But didn’t we learn</b> the word <b>vegetables</b> in a mishna? <b>And bar Kappara</b> likewise <b>taught: Vegetables. And</b> furthermore, the Sage of <b>the school of Shmuel taught: Vegetables.</b> The Gemara explains: It was <b>necessary for</b> Rav to mention the status of <b><i>ḥazeret</i>. It could enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since</b> <i>ḥazeret</i> <b>ultimately hardens</b> into a type of seed, <b>one</b> must therefore <b>give it more space</b> in a garden bed than other vegetables. Rav’s statement indicates that this is not the case.

### Part 4
The Gemara offers support for this contention: <b>Didn’t Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, say:</b> With regard to <b>a stalk of cabbage that has hardened, one</b> must <b>allow a <i>beit rova</i></b> of space <b>for it,</b> in which no other seeds may be planted. <b>Apparently, since it will ultimately harden, one</b> must <b>give it more space. Here too,</b> in the case of the <i>ḥazeret</i>, it might have been thought that <b>one</b> is required to <b>give it more space.</b> Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that all types of bitter herbs, even lettuce, may be planted together in one bed without leaving additional space between each species.

### Part 5
The mishna taught that one can <b>fulfill</b> his <b>obligation</b> to eat bitter herbs <b>with</b> these types of vegetables, <b>whether</b> they are <b>fresh</b> or <b>whether</b> they are <b>dried. Rav Ḥisda said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard <b>to the stem. However,</b> with regard <b>to the leaves,</b> if they are <b>moist, yes,</b> they may be used as bitter herbs, but if they are <b>dry, no,</b> they may not serve as bitter herbs.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that it is taught</b> in <b>the last clause</b> of the mishna: <b>In their stems,</b> it may <b>be inferred that the first clause</b> of the mishna refers to the <b>leaves.</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>is explaining</b> his statement in the first clause of the mishna: <b>When</b> he <b>taught</b> that one may eat herbs <b>whether</b> they are <b>fresh</b> or <b>whether dried,</b> the <i>tanna</i> was referring <b>to the stem,</b> not the leaves.

### Part 7
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: One can <b>fulfill</b> the obligation <b>with</b> the bitter herbs themselves <b>or with their stems, whether</b> they are <b>fresh</b> or <b>whether</b> they are <b>dried;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> With regard to <b>fresh</b> bitter herbs, one can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with them;</b> however, with regard to <b>dry</b> bitter herbs, one <b>cannot fulfill</b> the obligation <b>with them. And everyone agrees that</b> one can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with them</b> if they are <b>withered</b> and are no longer fresh. <b>However,</b> one may <b>neither</b> use bitter herbs that have been <b>pickled, nor over-boiled, nor boiled.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>The principle is: Anything that has the taste of bitter herbs,</b> one can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with it; but anything that does not have the taste of bitter herbs, one cannot fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with it.</b> This <i>baraita</i> indicates that neither Rabbi Meir nor the Rabbis distinguish between the leaves of these herbs and their stems. The Gemara answers: <b>Interpret</b> Rabbi Meir’s statement, that one can fulfill the obligation with both fresh and dried bitter herbs, as referring <b>to the stem</b> but not to the leaves. <b>The Sages taught:</b> One <b>cannot fulfill</b> the obligation <b>with them</b> when they are <b>withered. They said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok:</b> One can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with them</b> even when they are <b>withered.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rami bar Ḥama raised a dilemma: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the possibility <b>that a person</b> can <b>fulfill his obligation with bitter herbs of second-tithe</b> produce <b>in Jerusalem? In accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> who permits one to fulfill the obligation to eat <i>matza</i> with second-tithe produce because it can be eaten anywhere if it becomes ritually impure, <b>do not raise this dilemma. Now</b> that it has been mentioned that in the case <b>of <i>matza</i>,</b> where the obligation applies <b>by Torah</b> law, one can <b>fulfill</b> his <b>obligation</b> with second tithe in this manner, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to mention that one can use second tithe for <b>bitter herbs, which</b> nowadays applies <b>by rabbinic</b> law, as there is no Paschal lamb?

### Part 10
<b>When you raise the dilemma,</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> who maintains that one cannot fulfill his obligation with <i>matza</i> of second-tithe produce. <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to bitter herbs? The Gemara explains the two sides of this dilemma: Does Rabbi Yosei HaGelili say <b>it is</b> only <b>with regard to <i>matza</i></b> of second-tithe produce, where the obligation applies <b>by Torah</b> law, that one does <b>not fulfill</b> the mitzva; <b>however,</b> with <b>bitter herbs,</b> a mitzva that applies <b>by rabbinic</b> la<b>w,</b> one can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation with this second-tithe produce?

### Part 11
<b>Or perhaps, everything that the Sages instituted, they instituted</b> in a manner <b>similar</b> to the model provided <b>by Torah</b> law. If this principle is accepted, it would mean the following: Just as one may not use second-tithe produce for <i>matza</i>, so too, one may not use second tithe as bitter herbs, despite the fact that the obligation to eat them is rabbinic. <b>Rava said: It stands to reason</b> that since the verse juxtaposes <b><i>matza</i> and bitter herbs,</b> similar restrictions apply to both mitzvot. Consequently, just as according to Rabbi Yosei HaGelili one cannot use second-tithe produce for <i>matza</i>, so too, one cannot use this produce for bitter herbs.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One</b> may <b>not soak coarse bran for</b> feeding <b>chickens,</b> lest it be leavened. <b>However, one</b> may <b>pour boiling water</b> onto the bran before feeding it to the chickens, as it will not become leavened from this brief exposure to water. <b>A woman</b> may <b>not soak coarse bran to bring by hand to the bathhouse</b> for use as a cleanser; <b>however, she</b> may <b>rub</b> coarse bran <b>on her dry skin.</b> Likewise, the Sages said: <b>A person</b> may <b>not chew wheat and place it on his wound, due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the wheat <b>will be leavened</b> from the saliva and his chewing.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: The following</b> foods <b>do not come to</b> a state of <b>leavening:</b> Foods that have already been <b>baked, or boiled, or over-boiled in hot water.</b> With regard to the statement that <b>boiled</b> food will not become leavened, the Gemara asks: Why not? <b>When it is boiled it will become leavened.</b> The Gemara answers that <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> merely <b>said</b> that if <b>it was</b> first <b>baked and</b> afterward <b>boiled,</b> it will not be leavened; however, if it was initially boiled it will become leavened.

### Part 14
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> In the case of <b>flour into which</b> water is <b>dripping, even</b> if the water drips <b>the entire day</b> the flour <b>will not come to</b> a state of <b>leavening,</b> as the ceaseless dripping prevents fermentation. <b>Rav Pappa said: And that is</b> the case only <b>if one drop drips into the other,</b> i.e., the dripping is continuous, preventing the mixture from settling.

### Part 15
<b>The school of Rabbi Sheila say: <i>Vatika</i>,</b> a pastry prepared from a mixture of different liquids, is <b>permitted</b> on Passover. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b><i>vatika</i> is forbidden?</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that <i>vatika</i> is permitted, is referring to a case <b>in which it was prepared with oil and salt,</b> whereas <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> forbade <i>vatika</i> <b>prepared with water and salt,</b> as that dish will become leavened.

### Part 16
<b>Mar Zutra said: A person should not line</b> the edge <b>of a pot with roasted flour, lest</b> some of the flour <b>was not properly roasted and it will come to</b> a state of <b>leavening</b> in the pot. <b>Rav Yosef said: A person should not scald</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC