
### Part 1
<b>but a man of understanding will draw it out”</b> (Proverbs 20:5). <b>Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; that is</b> a reference to <b>Ulla,</b> who had a thought but did not articulate it. <b>But a man of understanding will draw it out; that is</b> a reference to <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana,</b> who understood the allusion even though it was not articulated. The Gemara asks: <b>And in accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>do</b> Ulla and Rabba bar bar Ḥana <b>hold,</b> leading them to reject Rabbi Abba’s statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion? The Gemara answers: They hold <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One recites the blessing over fire both at the conclusion of Shabbat and at the conclusion of Yom Kippur. And that is</b> how <b>the people act.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which was previously taught: <b>One recites a blessing over fire only at the conclusion of Shabbat</b> and not at the conclusion of Festivals or Yom Kippur, <b>since</b> the conclusion of Shabbat <b>is</b> the time of <b>its original creation.</b> And once <b>he sees it, he recites the blessing immediately. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> One does not recite the blessing immediately; rather, he waits and <b>arranges</b> and recites the blessings over fire and spices <b>over the cup</b> of wine that accompanies the recitation of havdala. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> How does Rabbi Yoĥanan explain the baraita?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> where Rabbi Yoḥanan said that one recites the blessing at the conclusion of Yom Kippur, it is referring to <b>fire that rested</b> on Yom Kippur, i.e., fire for which no prohibition was involved in its kindling, either because it was kindled before Yom Kippur or because it was kindled in a permitted manner, e.g., for a dangerously ill person. <b>There,</b> where Rabbi Yoḥanan said that the blessing is recited only at the conclusion of Shabbat, it is referring to fire <b>generated from wood and from stones</b> after Shabbat, similar to the primordial fire, which was created at the conclusion of Shabbat.

### Part 4
It was <b>taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>fire generated from wood and stones, one recites a blessing over it; and</b> it was <b>taught</b> in <b>one</b> other <i>baraita</i>: <b>One does not recite a blessing over it.</b> This apparent contradiction is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> where the <i>baraita</i> states that one recites a blessing, it is referring <b>to the conclusion of Shabbat. There,</b> where the <i>baraita</i> states that one does not recite a blessing, it is referring <b>to the conclusion of Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi would <b>distribute</b> the blessings over the fire and the spices, reciting each when the opportunity arose. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> would <b>collect them,</b> reciting all the blessings at the same time in the framework of <i>havdala</i>. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said: Even though Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>distributes them</b> and recites each blessing at his first opportunity, <b>he repeats</b> the blessings <b>and arranges</b> and recites <b>them over the cup</b> of wine <b>in order to discharge the obligation of his children and the members of his household.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara stated that fire was originally created at the conclusion of Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>Was fire created at the conclusion of Shabbat? Wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ten</b> miraculous <b>phenomena were created</b> in heaven <b>on Shabbat eve during twilight,</b> and were revealed in the world only later? <b>They were:</b> Miriam’s <b>well, and the manna</b> that fell in the desert, <b>and the rainbow, writing [<i>ketav</i></b>], <b>and</b> the <b>writing instrument [<i>mikhtav</i>], and the tablets</b> of the Ten Commandments, <b>and the grave of Moses, and the cave in which Moses and Elijah stood, the opening of the mouth of</b> Balaam’s <b>donkey, and the opening of the earth’s mouth to swallow the wicked</b> in the incident involving Korah.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Neḥemya said in the name of his father: Even the fire and the mule,</b> which is a product of crossbreeding, were created at that time. <b>Rabbi Yoshiya said in the name of his father: Even the ram</b> slaughtered by Abraham in place of Isaac, <b>and the <i>shamir</i></b> worm used to shape the stones for the altar, were created at that time. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even the tongs</b> were created at this time. <b>He would say: Tongs</b> can be <b>fashioned</b> only <b>with</b> other <b>tongs, but who fashioned the first tongs? Indeed,</b> the first pair of tongs <b>was fashioned at the hand of Heaven.</b> An anonymous questioner <b>said to him: It is possible to fashion</b> tongs <b>with a mold and align it</b> without the need for other tongs. <b>Indeed,</b> the first tongs <b>were a creation of man.</b> In any event, fire was originally created before Shabbat, not at the conclusion of Shabbat.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to our fire, and that</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to the fire</b> of <b>Gehenna.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Our fire</b> was created <b>at the conclusion of Shabbat,</b> but <b>the fire of Gehenna was created on Shabbat eve.</b> The Gemara proceeds to ask: <b>Was the fire of Gehenna created on Shabbat eve? Wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Seven phenomena were created before the world was created, and they are: Torah, and repentance, and the Garden of Eden, and Gehenna, and the Throne of Glory, and the Temple, and the name of Messiah.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara provides sources for the notion that each of these phenomena was created before the world was. <b>Torah</b> was created before the world was created, <b>as it is written: “The Lord made me as the beginning of His way,</b> the first of His works of old” (Proverbs 8:22), which, based on the subsequent verses, is referring to the Torah. <b>Repentance</b> was created before the world was created, <b>as it is written: “Before the mountains were brought forth,</b> or ever You had formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, You are God,” <b>and it is written</b> immediately afterward: <b>“You return man to contrition; and You say: Repent, children of man”</b> (Psalms 90:2–3).

### Part 10
<b>The Garden of Eden</b> was created before the world was created, <b>as it is written: “And God planted the Garden of Eden in the east [<i>mikedem</i>]”</b> (Genesis 2:8). The term: In the east [<i>mikedem</i>] is interpreted in the sense of: Before [<i>mikodem</i>], i.e., before the world was created. <b>Gehenna</b> was created before the world was created, <b>as it is written: “For its hearth is ordained of old”</b> (Isaiah 30:33). The hearth, i.e., Gehenna, was created before the world was created.

### Part 11
<b>The Throne of Glory and the Temple</b> were created before the world was created, <b>as it is written: “Your Throne of Glory on high from the beginning, in the place of our Sanctuary”</b> (Jeremiah 17:12). <b>The name of Messiah</b> was created before the world was created, <b>as it is written</b> in the chapter discussing the Messiah: <b>“May his name endure forever; his name existed before the sun”</b> (Psalms 72:17). The name of Messiah already existed before the creation of the sun and the rest of the world. This <i>baraita</i> states that Gehenna was created before the world was created and not during twilight before the first Shabbat. 

### Part 12
<b>They say</b> in answer: The <b>void</b> of Gehenna <b>was created before the world, but its fire was created on Shabbat eve.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And was its fire created on Shabbat eve? Wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: The fire that the Holy One, Blessed be He, created on the second day of the week will never be extinguished, as it is stated: “And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men who have rebelled against Me; for their worm shall not die, nor will their fire be extinguished;</b> and they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh” (Isaiah 66:24)? <b>And Rabbi Bana’a, son</b> of <b>Rabbi Ulla, said: Why doesn’t the verse state: That it was good,</b> at the end of the <b>second day of the week</b> of Creation, as it does on the other days? It is <b>because on</b> that day <b>the fire of Gehenna was created. And Rabbi Elazar said</b> that <b>even though: That it was good, was not stated with regard to</b> the creations of the second day, <b>He later included it</b> on the <b>sixth day, as it is stated: “And God saw all that He had done and behold, it was very good”</b> (Genesis 1:31).

### Part 14
<b>Rather, the void</b> of Gehenna was created <b>before the world was created, and its fire</b> was created only <b>on the second day of the week. And</b> the thought <b>arose</b> in God’s <b>mind to create our fire on Shabbat eve;</b> however, <b>it was not</b> actually <b>created until the conclusion of Shabbat, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The thoughts of <b>two phenomena arose in</b> God’s <b>mind on Shabbat eve, but were not</b> actually <b>created until the conclusion of Shabbat. At the conclusion of Shabbat, the Holy One, Blessed be He, granted Adam, the first</b> man, creative <b>knowledge similar to divine</b> knowledge, <b>and he brought two rocks and rubbed them against each other, and</b> the first <b>fire emerged from them. Adam</b> also <b>brought two animals,</b> a female horse and a male donkey, <b>and mated them with each other, and</b> the resultant offspring that <b>emerged from them</b> was <b>a mule. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> disagrees and <b>says</b> that the first <b>mule was in the days of Anah, as it is stated:</b> “And these are the children of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah; <b>this is Anah who found the mules in the wilderness,</b> as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his father” (Genesis 36:24).

### Part 15
<b>The interpreters</b> of Torah <b>symbolism [<i>ḥamurot</i>] would say: Anah was</b> the product of an incestuous relationship, and as a result he was spiritually <b>unfit</b> to produce offspring. <b>Therefore,</b> he <b>brought</b> an example of <b>unfitness,</b> i.e., an animal physically unfit to produce offspring, <b>into the world, as it is stated: “These are the sons of Seir the Horite,</b> the inhabitants of the land: Lotan, and Shoval, and Zibeon, and Anah” (Genesis 36:20). <b>And it is</b> also <b>stated: “And these are the sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah”</b> (Genesis 36:24). One verse describes both Anah and Zibeon as sons of Seir, meaning that they are brothers, while the other verse describes Anah as Zibeon’s son. <b>Rather, this teaches that Zibeon cohabited with his mother,</b> the wife of Seir, <b>and fathered Anah from her.</b> He is called Seir’s son although in fact he was the offspring of Seir’s son and Seir’s wife.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps there were two</b> people named <b>Anah,</b> one the son of Zibeon and the other the son of Seir? <b>Rava said: I will state a matter</b> that even <b>King Shapur did not state. And who is</b> this King Shapur? This cannot be a reference to Shapur, king of Persia; rather, it must be an epithet for someone else. He is <b>Shmuel,</b> whose legal rulings were accepted by the public like the edicts of a king by his subjects. <b>Some say</b> a different version, that it was <b>Rav Pappa</b> who <b>said: I will state a matter</b> that even <b>King Shapur did not state. And who is he</b> that Rav Pappa is referring to by the epithet King Shapur? He is <b>Rava. The verse said: “This is Anah</b> who found the mules,” indicating that <b>he is</b> the same <b>Anah</b> mentioned <b>initially</b> in the earlier verse.

### Part 17
<b>The Sages taught: Ten phenomena were created on Shabbat eve during twilight, and they were:</b> Miriam’s <b>well, and manna, and</b> the <b>rainbow, writing, and the writing instrument, and the tablets, the grave of Moses, and the cave in which Moses and Elijah stood, the opening of the mouth of</b> Balaam’s <b>donkey, and the opening of the mouth of the earth to swallow the wicked</b> in the time of Korah. <b>And some say</b> that <b>even Aaron’s staff</b> was created then with <b>its almonds and its blossoms. Some say</b> that <b>even the demons</b> were created at this time. <b>And some say</b> that <b>even</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC