
### Part 1
<b>What, is it not</b> the case <b>that they eat</b> the Paschal lamb <b>on the roof and say</b> <i>hallel</i> <b>on the roof,</b> which would mean that roofs have the sanctity of Jerusalem? The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> there is no proof from here, as it is possible <b>that they eat on the ground and say</b> <i>hallel</i> <b>on the roof.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>We do not conclude after</b> eating <b>the Paschal lamb with <i>afikoman</i>, and Rav said</b> that this means that after eating the Paschal lamb one may not say: <i>Afikoman</i>, which refers to removing the utensils in order to go eat somewhere else, because <b>they may not uproot</b> themselves <b>from</b> one <b>group to</b> another <b>group.</b> This would indicate that one must complete the entire Passover seder in one place. The Gemara answers: <b>It is not difficult. Here,</b> where it says that one may not change places, it is <b>during the time of eating. There,</b> where it says they would say <i>hallel</i> on the roof, it is <b>not during the time of eating.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara attempts to bring another proof with regard to this issue. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this issue based upon the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Abba Shaul says: The upper story of the chamber of the Holy of Holies is more stringent</b> with regard to the prohibition to enter it <b>than the chamber of the Holy of Holies</b> itself. How so? With regard to <b>the chamber of the Holy of Holies, the High Priest would enter it once a year</b> on Yom Kippur in order to offer the incense and sprinkle the blood between the staves of the ark, whereas <b>the upper story of the chamber of the Holy of Holies is not entered except</b> for <b>once in seven years; and some say twice in seven years, and some say</b> just <b>one time in a Jubilee,</b> i.e., once in fifty years, <b>to see what it needs</b> in case there are renovations that must be done. This indicates that the sanctity of the upper story was even greater than that of the Sanctuary itself.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef said: Can a person get up and ask</b> based on the <b>Sanctuary? The Sanctuary is different, as it is written: “Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the Entrance Hall of the Temple, and of its houses, and of its treasuries, and of its upper rooms, and of its inner chambers, and of the place of the ark cover”</b> (I Chronicles 28:11), <b>and it is written</b> with regard to the plans for the construction of the Temple: <b>“All this is put in writing by the hand of the Lord, Who has instructed me”</b> (I Chronicles 28:19). Therefore, the general rules of sanctity of roofs do not apply to the Sanctuary, as the details of its construction were determined through divine inspiration.

### Part 5
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another possible proof based on the following mishna: With regard to <b>the chambers</b> in the Temple <b>that were built in the sanctified</b> area <b>and open to the unsanctified</b> area of the Temple Mount, <b>their interiors are unsanctified and their roofs are sanctified.</b> This states explicitly that the roofs are sanctified. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Ḥisda interpreted it</b> as referring to chambers that were built under the Temple courtyard, and <b>their roofs were level with the ground of the courtyard.</b> In this case, the reason their roofs were sanctified is because they were part of the courtyard itself.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, say the latter clause</b> of the mishna as follows: If the chambers were <b>built in the unsanctified</b> area <b>and open to the sanctified</b> area, <b>their interiors are sanctified and their roofs are unsanctified. And if it should enter your mind</b> to say that this is referring to chambers <b>whose roofs were level with the ground of the courtyard,</b> such chambers <b>would be tunnels, and Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that <b>the tunnels were not sanctified.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that, he was referring <b>to</b> tunnels that were <b>open to the Temple Mount; when that <i>baraita</i>,</b> which says that the interiors were sanctified <b>was taught,</b> it was referring <b>to</b> rooms that <b>open to the</b> Temple <b>courtyard</b> itself.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The tunnels under the Sanctuary are unsanctified?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When that <i>baraita</i> was taught,</b> it was pertaining to tunnels <b>that open to the unsanctified</b> area, which are considered unsanctified, as stated previously.

### Part 8
The Gemara attempts another proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from the same source cited above: It says in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>the roof</b> of the Sanctuary <b>was sanctified,</b> and the roof of the Sanctuary is not mentioned in the plans for the Temple laid out in the book of Chronicles. Therefore, the answer mentioned earlier, that everything in those plans was based upon divine inspiration, is not relevant. In that case, one should be able to derive that all the roofs were sanctified.

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: <b>And</b> how <b>can you understand</b> it that way? <b>Isn’t it teaching:</b> In the case of <b>these roofs</b> of the courtyard and the chambers located there, <b>one may not eat offerings of the most sacred order and one may not slaughter offerings of lesser sanctity there</b> because they do not have the sanctity of the courtyard? <b>However, that is difficult.</b> It contradicts the previous statement that <b>the roof is sanctified. Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said:</b> The roof of the Sanctuary was considered sanctified only because <b>those two</b> measuring rods used to measure <b>cubits</b> were stored there.

### Part 10
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>There were two</b> rods for measuring <b>cubits in</b> the chamber called <b>Shushan the Capital, one in the northeast corner and one in the southeast corner. The one in the northeast corner was longer than</b> the cubit mentioned in the Torah from the time <b>of Moses,</b> which was six handbreadths, by <b>half a fingerbreadth, and the one in the southeast corner was longer than that by</b> another <b>half a fingerbreadth. Consequently,</b> the second measuring rod was <b>longer than Moses’</b> cubit <b>by</b> a full <b>fingerbreadth.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And why</b> did they construct two measures for cubits, <b>one large and one small?</b> It was <b>so that the artisans</b> who were working in the Temple <b>would take</b> payment according the amount of work they did, as measured <b>by the small</b> cubit, <b>and return</b> it to the Temple through their work, as measured <b>by the large</b> cubit, <b>so they would not come to misuse consecrated property.</b> If they would accept any payment that they did not deserve, they would be misusing consecrated property. Therefore, this system of measuring was instituted in order to slightly reduce their payment and prevent accidental misuse of Temple funds. The Gemara asks: <b>And why do I</b> need <b>two</b> large cubits? The Gemara answers: <b>One,</b> the shorter of the two, was <b>for silver and gold,</b> so that the artisans would not lose too much, <b>and one was for construction.</b>

### Part 12
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>The</b> space within the <b>windows and the thickness of the wall were</b> considered to be <b>inside.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to the windows, <b>you will find it</b> to be sanctified with the sanctity of the Temple courtyard <b>when it is level with the ground of the courtyard. But</b> with regard to <b>the thickness of the wall,</b> which must have been significantly above the ground, under <b>what circumstances</b> can <b>you find</b> it to be level with the ground of the courtyard? Even the roofs of chambers in the courtyard were not sanctified; therefore, if the thickness of the wall was not level with the floor of the courtyard, it would certainly not have been sanctified.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>You find it in</b> the case of <b>the low wall</b> on the Temple Mount, which was the same height as the floor of the courtyard. This low wall is mentioned in the Bible, <b>as it is written: “He has made the rampart and wall mourn”</b> (Lamentations 2:8), <b>and Rabbi Aḥa said, and some say</b> it in the name of <b>Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> that this double language of both rampart and wall in the verse is referring to <b>a wall and a low wall</b> that were next to each other. This low wall was the same height as the floor of the courtyard.

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Two groups that were eating</b> one Paschal lamb <b>in one house</b> need not be concerned that they will appear to be one group. Rather, <b>these turn their faces this way and eat, and these turn their faces that way and eat. And</b> it is permissible for them to have <b>the boiler</b> from which they pour hot water <b>in the middle,</b> so that the waiter can easily serve both groups. <b>When the attendant</b> who is serving both groups <b>gets up to pour</b> for the group of which he is not a member, <b>he must close his mouth and turn his face</b> so that he does not accidentally eat with the other group, <b>until he reaches his group</b> again <b>and eats</b> with it. <b>And the bride,</b> who is embarrassed to eat in the presence of men she does not know, <b>turns her face</b> away from her group <b>and eats,</b> although this may make it seem as though she is part of a different group.

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the mishna?</b> The Gemara answers: I<b>t is Rabbi Yehuda. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“Upon the houses wherein they shall eat it”</b> (Exodus 12:7). This <b>teaches that</b> one <b>Paschal lamb may be eaten in two</b> separate <b>groups,</b> even if the groups eat it in separate houses. I <b>might</b> have thought that one person <b>who eats</b> from it <b>may eat</b> it <b>in two</b> separate <b>places; therefore, the Torah states: “In one house shall it be eaten [<i>ye’akhel</i>]”</b> (Exodus 12:46).

### Part 16
<b>From here they stated</b> that if <b>an attendant</b> who was registered for a Paschal lamb <b>ate an olive-bulk</b> of it <b>next to the oven</b> in which it is being roasted, and thereby made himself into an independent group at that location, <b>if he is prudent he will fill his stomach with it</b> because when the Paschal lamb is moved to a different location he will no longer be able to eat it. <b>And if the members of the group wanted to do him a favor</b> so that he may continue eating, <b>they would come and sit at his side.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> that the verses should be understood in the opposite manner: <b>“Upon the houses wherein they shall eat it” teaches that</b> one person <b>who eats</b> the Paschal lamb <b>may eat</b> it <b>in two places.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC