
### Part 1
<b>He holds</b> that with regard to the case of the <b>blasphemer</b> mentioned in the verse: “That person blasphemes the Lord and that soul shall be cut off [<i>karet</i>] from among his people” (Numbers 15:30), <b>this is</b> identical to the case of <b>one who blesses the name</b> of God, a euphemism for cursing God’s name. <b>And it is written with regard to one who blesses the name</b> of God: “Whoever curses his God <b>shall bear his sin”</b> (Leviticus 24:15). Therefore, the punishment of <i>karet</i> applies to a sin about which the Torah states: Shall bear his sin.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>learned</b> the meaning of <b>this</b> phrase: “And he shall bear <b>his sin,”</b> stated <b>here,</b> with regard to one who did not sacrifice the Paschal lamb, by way of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the phrase: “Shall bear <b>his sin”</b> stated <b>there,</b> with regard to the blasphemer. <b>Just as later,</b> with regard to the blasphemer, it is referring to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>, so too here,</b> with regard to the Paschal lamb, it is referring to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>.</b> This concludes the Gemara’s explanation of the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Natan holds</b> that the verse should be understood differently. In the verse: <b>“And refrains from offering the Paschal lamb,</b> that soul <b>shall be cut off</b> from his people; because [<i>ki</i>] he did not bring the offering of the Lord in its appointed season” (Numbers 9:13), <b>this</b> word <b><i>ki</i></b> has the <b>meaning of: Because. And this is</b> what <b>the Torah is saying: “Because he did not bring the offering of the Lord in its appointed season,”</b> referring to participating in the Paschal lamb on <b>the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>, he is liable to receive <i>karet</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>that</b> part of the verse which says: <b>He shall bear his sin, what does</b> Rabbi Natan <b>do with it?</b> The Gemara answers: Rabbi Natan <b>holds</b> that <b>the</b> case of the <b>blasphemer is not</b> identical with the case of one who <b>blesses the name</b> of God; blasphemy refers instead to one who sings praises to false gods. Thus, the Torah does not specify the punishment of one who curses God. <b>He learned</b> the meaning of <b>that</b> phrase <b>“his sin,” there,</b> with regard to one who curses God, by way of a verbal analogy <b>from this</b> phrase <b>“his sin” here,</b> in the case of one who did not offer the Paschal lamb. <b>Just as here,</b> with regard to the Paschal lamb, the punishment is <b><i>karet</i>, so too there,</b> with regard to one who curses God, the phrase: He shall bear his sin, is a reference to the punishment of <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya holds</b> that the word <i>ki</i> in the verse should be rendered: If, as Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi interpreted it, but the verse should be understood as follows: <b>“And refrained from participating</b> in the offering of <b>the Paschal lamb,</b> that soul <b>shall be cut off</b> from his people <b>if he did not bring the offering of the Lord in its appointed season,”</b> which is <b>on the second</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>that</b> phrase: <b>“He shall bear his sin,” what does</b> Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya <b>do with it?</b> The Gemara answers: He uses it in the same way as Rabbi Natan, <b>as we said</b> above, to derive the punishment for one who curses God.

### Part 7
<b>Therefore,</b> if one <b>intentionally</b> refrained from offering the Paschal lamb <b>on both</b> the first and second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>all agree</b> that he is <b>liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i>. If one <b>unwittingly</b> forgot <b>on both</b> the first and second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>all agree</b> that he is <b>exempt</b> from <i>karet</i>.

### Part 8
If one <b>intentionally</b> refrained from offering the Paschal lamb <b>on the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>and unwittingly</b> forgot <b>on the second,</b> according <b>to</b> the opinions of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and Rabbi Natan he</b> is <b>liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i>, because he intentionally refrained from offering the sacrifice on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> and did not rectify his mistake on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>; however, according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya</b> he is <b>exempt,</b> because he holds that one is liable only if he intentionally refrained both times from offering the Paschal lamb.

### Part 9
If one <b>unwittingly</b> forgot <b>on the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>and intentionally</b> refrained from bringing the offering <b>on the second</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>, according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>he is liable,</b> because Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi considers the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> an independent Festival that is mandatory for all those who did not offer the Paschal lamb on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>. According <b>to</b> the opinions of <b>Rabbi Natan and Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya,</b> who hold that the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> is a chance to redress the sin of the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>, since he did not intentionally fail to offer the Paschal lamb on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>, he is <b>exempt</b> from the punishment of <i>karet</i> even if he intentionally failed to offer the Paschal lamb on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>What is the</b> definition of <b>a distant journey</b> that exempts one from observing the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>? Anywhere <b>from the</b> city of <b>Modi’im and beyond, and</b> from anywhere located an equal <b>distance</b> from Jerusalem and beyond <b>in every direction;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Eliezer says: From the threshold of the</b> Temple <b>courtyard and beyond</b> is considered a distant journey; therefore, anyone located outside the courtyard at the time that the Paschal lamb is slaughtered is exempt from observing the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>. <b>Rabbi Yosei said to him: Therefore,</b> the word is <b>dotted over the</b> letter <b><i>heh</i></b> in the word “distant [<i>reḥoka</i>]” <b>to say</b> that the meaning of the word should be qualified: It should be understood that <b>it is not because he is really distant; rather,</b> it includes anyone located <b>from the threshold of the</b> Temple <b>courtyard and beyond.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Ulla said:</b> The distance <b>from the</b> city of <b>Modi’im to Jerusalem is fifteen <i>mil</i>. He held like this</b> following opinion <b>that Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: How</b> far <b>can an</b> average <b>person walk on an</b> average <b>day?</b> One can walk <b>ten parasangs [<i>parsaot</i>],</b> which are forty <i>mil</i>. This is divided in the following way: <b>From dawn until sunrise</b> one can walk a distance of <b>five <i>mil</i>,</b> and <b>from sunset until the emergence of the stars</b> one can walk another <b>five <i>mil</i>.</b> There are <b>thirty</b> <i>mil</i> <b>remaining</b> that one can walk in a day: <b>Fifteen from the morning until midday, and fifteen from midday until evening.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara explains that <b>Ulla</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning</b> below, <b>as Ulla said: What is</b> the definition of <b>a distant journey?</b> It is <b>any</b> distance from which <b>one is unable to</b> reach Jerusalem and <b>enter</b> the Temple <b>by the</b> earliest <b>time of the slaughter</b> of the Paschal lamb. The obligation to slaughter the Paschal lamb begins at noon; therefore, if one is a distance of fifteen <i>mil</i> from the Temple in the morning, he will not be able to arrive there before the time that the offering may be slaughtered.

### Part 13
The Gemara addresses the previously mentioned discussion: <b>The Master said</b> that <b>from dawn until sunrise</b> one can walk a distance of <b>five <i>mil</i>. From where do we</b> derive this? <b>As it is written: “And when the morning arose, the angels hastened Lot,</b> saying: Arise, take your wife and your two daughters that are here, lest you be swept away in the iniquity of the city” (Genesis 19:15), <b>and it is written: “The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot came to Zoar”</b> (Genesis 19:23). Therefore, the distance between Sodom and Zoar is the distance one can walk between dawn and sunrise, <b>and Rabbi Ḥanina said: I myself saw that place, and it is</b> a distance of <b>five <i>mil</i>.</b> This serves as a biblical proof that one can walk five <i>mil</i> between dawn and sunrise.

### Part 14
The Gemara discusses <b>the matter</b> of the above statement <b>itself. Ulla said: What is</b> the definition of <b>a distant journey; any</b> journey of a distance from which <b>one is unable to</b> reach Jerusalem and <b>enter</b> the Temple <b>by the</b> earliest <b>time of the slaughter</b> of the Paschal lamb. <b>And Rav Yehuda said: Any</b> journey of a distance from which <b>one is unable to</b> reach Jerusalem, where the Paschal lamb is eaten, and <b>enter during the time of the eating,</b> the following night.

### Part 15
<b>Rabba said to Ulla:</b> According <b>to your</b> opinion it is <b>difficult, and</b> according <b>to Rav Yehuda’s</b> opinion it is <b>difficult.</b> According <b>to your</b> opinion it is <b>difficult, as you said</b> that <b>any</b> journey of a distance from which <b>one is unable to</b> reach Jerusalem and <b>enter</b> the Temple courtyard <b>by the time of the slaughter</b> of the Paschal lamb is considered a distant journey. <b>Yet</b> with regard to <b>one who is ritually impure</b> due to contact with a dead <b>creeping animal, who is unable to enter</b> the Temple courtyard <b>at the time of the slaughter</b> due to his impurity, <b>you said: One</b> may <b>slaughter</b> the Paschal lamb <b>and sprinkle</b> its blood <b>on</b> behalf of <b>one who is ritually impure</b> due to contact with a dead <b>creeping animal,</b> even though he will only become pure after nightfall, when the Paschal lamb is eaten.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> according <b>to Rav Yehuda’s</b> opinion it is <b>difficult, as he said</b> that <b>any</b> journey of a distance from which <b>one is unable to enter</b> Jerusalem <b>during the time of the eating</b> is considered a distant journey; <b>yet</b> with regard to <b>one who is ritually impure</b> due to contact with a dead <b>creeping animal, who</b> is able to <b>enter</b> Jerusalem and participate in consuming the offering <b>at the time of the eating, he said</b> the opposite: <b>One</b> may <b>not slaughter</b> the Paschal lamb <b>and sprinkle</b> its blood <b>on</b> behalf of <b>one who is ritually impure</b> due to contact with a dead <b>creeping animal,</b> even though he will be able to immerse and become ritually pure by nightfall, when the offering is to be eaten.

### Part 17
Ulla <b>said to him: According to my</b> opinion it is <b>not difficult, and according to Rav Yehuda’s</b> opinion it is <b>not difficult. According to my</b> opinion it is <b>not difficult</b> because I hold that the concept of <b>a distant journey</b> applies only <b>to one who is ritually pure, and the</b> principle of a <b>distant journey</b> does <b>not</b> apply <b>to one who is ritually impure.</b> If one is ritually impure at the time of the slaughter, his obligation is immediately deferred to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> regardless of the fact that he will become ritually pure in time to eat the offering at nightfall.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC