
### Part 1
<b>That is</b> the reason <b>that</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for the Torah to write: <b>It shall not be found,</b> to indicate that there is a <i>halakha</i> unique to leaven. In this case, it is considered as though it were in his possession. <b>However, according to the one who said:</b> The legal status of an object that effects monetary loss <b>is like</b> that of <b>money, why do I</b> need the phrase: <b>It shall not be found?</b> Obviously, the leaven is prohibited, as it is considered his property. The Gemara answers: It is nonetheless <b>necessary,</b> as <b>it could enter your mind to say: Since when</b> the leaven <b>is intact it returns</b> to the gentile <b>in its pure,</b> unadulterated form, it retroactively did <b>not stand in</b> the Jew’s <b>possession</b> and the Jew did not violate the prohibition against having leaven found on his property. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that it is considered as though the leaven belonged to the Jew.

### Part 2
<b>They raised a dilemma before Rava:</b> Is the owner of <b>an animal</b> born into a herd from which <b>the royal tax [<i>arnona</i>]</b> is collected <b>obligated in</b> the mitzva to give <b>the firstborn</b> animal to a priest, as the animal still belongs to a Jew? <b>Or</b> perhaps he is <b>not obligated</b> to give <b>the firstborn</b> animal to the priest, as the obligation does not take effect on an animal partly owned by a gentile. The Gemara elaborates on the parameters of raising the dilemma: In <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> the Jew <b>could dismiss</b> the gentile tax collector <b>with money</b> in lieu of the animals, <b>we do not raise the dilemma, as</b> he is clearly <b>obligated</b> in the mitzva of the firstborn. The authorities own no part of the animal; the Jew merely owes them a monetary debt. Therefore, the animal is the property of the Jew exclusively.

### Part 3
The situation <b>when we</b> do <b>raise the dilemma</b> is specifically <b>where</b> the Jew <b>cannot dismiss</b> the gentile tax collector <b>with money. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> is this case? <b>He said to them:</b> The owner is <b>exempt</b> from the mitzva of the firstborn. The Sages raised a difficulty: <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that he is <b>obligated</b> in the mitzva of the firstborn? He replied: <b>There</b> it is speaking of a case <b>where</b> the Jew <b>could dismiss</b> the gentile tax collector with money.

### Part 4
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Rava said:</b> The owner of <b>an animal</b> born into a herd from which <b>the royal tax</b> is collected <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b>a firstborn, even though</b> the Jew <b>could dismiss</b> the gentile tax collector with money. However, the owner of <b>dough</b> from which <b>the royal tax</b> is collected <b>is obligated in <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> despite the fact that the owner of dough partially owned by a gentile is generally not obligated. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though</b> the Jew <b>cannot dismiss</b> the gentile tax collector by paying him the value of the dough.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for the difference between the <i>halakha</i> of a firstborn animal and the <i>halakha</i> of <i>ḥalla</i>? <b>An animal</b> generates <b>publicity;</b> as everyone knows that this Jew’s animal was confiscated by the authorities, no one will suspect him of intentionally refraining from fulfilling the mitzva. In contrast, <b>dough</b> does <b>not</b> generate <b>publicity.</b> Since not everyone knows that the dough is partially owned by a gentile, those who see a Jew failing to separate <i>ḥalla</i> will suspect him of neglecting the mitzva.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a gentile who enters the courtyard of a Jew with his dough in his hand,</b> the Jew <b>need not remove</b> the leaven by evicting the gentile from his property. However, if the gentile <b>deposited</b> the leaven <b>with him,</b> and the Jew accepted responsibility, <b>he must remove</b> it. If <b>he designated</b> a room in his <b>house for</b> the gentile to place his leavened food, <b>he need not remove</b> it, <b>as it is stated: “It shall not be found”</b> (Exodus 12:19).

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>saying?</b> How does the verse: It shall not be found, prove this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> The verse cited <b>is referring to the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and this is</b> what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying:</b> If the gentile <b>deposited</b> the leavened dough <b>with</b> the Jew, <b>he,</b> i.e., the Jew, <b>must remove</b> the dough from his property, <b>as it is stated: It shall not be found.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ashi said: Actually</b>, the verse cited <b>is referring to the last clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and this is</b> what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying:</b> If <b>he designated</b> a room in his <b>house for</b> the gentile to place the leavened dough, <b>he need not remove it, as it is stated: It shall not be found in your houses, and that</b> house <b>is not his; since when the gentile brings</b> the dough <b>into</b> the house, <b>he brings</b> it <b>into his</b> own <b>house,</b> as the space was designated for his use.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that rental</b> denotes that the renter <b>acquires</b> the rented space as he would a full-fledged acquisition with regard to responsibility for that space? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>Even in a place</b> with regard to <b>which they said</b> it is permitted for a Jew <b>to rent</b> houses to gentiles, e.g., in Syria, <b>they did not say</b> that one may rent it <b>for</b> use as <b>a residence, because</b> the gentiles will <b>bring idolatry into it. And if it enters your mind</b> to say <b>that rental</b> denotes that the renter <b>acquires</b> the rented space as he would a full-fledged acquisition, <b>when</b> the gentile <b>brings</b> the idols <b>into</b> the house <b>he brings them into his own house.</b> Why, then, is it prohibited for the owner to rent it to a gentile?

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: It is <b>different here</b> with regard to leaven, <b>as the Merciful One expresses it</b> using <b>the language: It shall not be found,</b> meaning, <b>that which is found in your possession</b> is prohibited, <b>excluding this</b> leaven, <b>which is not found in your possession.</b> However, with regard to other prohibitions, one who rents a place to others remains somewhat responsible for his property, despite the fact that he does not live there.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: One who finds leavened bread in his house on the Festival,</b> i.e., the first day of Passover, <b>covers it with a vessel</b> and burns it at the conclusion of the Festival day. <b>Rava said: If</b> that leaven <b>is consecrated, he need not</b> cover it. <b>What is the reason</b> for this difference? The reason is that people <b>distance</b> themselves <b>from</b> consecrated food in any case, due to the severity of the prohibition against misuse of consecrated property. Therefore, there is no concern that he will eat it.

### Part 12
<b>And Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If <b>leavened bread belonging to a gentile</b> is in a Jew’s house, he, i.e., the Jew, should <b>erect a barrier ten handbreadths</b> high around <b>it</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan, <b>as a conspicuous marker,</b> so that he will not mistakenly eat it. <b>And if</b> the leaven <b>is consecrated, he need not</b> do so. <b>What is the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? Since <b>people distance</b> themselves <b>from</b> consecrated food, they will not mistakenly eat it.

### Part 13
<b>And Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>one who sets sail, or one who departs in a caravan</b> traveling to a distant place; if he did so <b>before</b> it was <b>thirty days</b> prior to Passover, he <b>need not remove</b> the leaven from his possession. If he departs <b>within thirty days</b> of the Festival, <b>he must remove</b> the leaven. <b>Abaye said: That</b> which <b>you said,</b> that <b>within thirty days one must remove</b> the leaven, <b>we only said</b> this in a case <b>where his intention is to return</b> home adjacent to Passover (Ran). <b>However,</b> in a case <b>where it is not his intention to return</b> before Passover, <b>he need not remove</b> the leaven.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said to him: But if he intends to return</b> home shortly before the Festival, <b>even</b> if he was gone <b>from Rosh HaShana,</b> shouldn’t he remove the leaven, as failure to do so will lead to his arriving home and discovering leaven in his house just before the Festival? <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> According to <b>that</b> which <b>you said,</b> i.e., that if he leaves <b>before</b> it was <b>thirty days</b> prior to Passover <b>he need not remove</b> the leaven, <b>we said</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only if he does not intend to return</b> before Passover. <b>However,</b> if <b>he intends to return, even</b> if he was gone <b>from Rosh HaShana, he must remove</b> the leaven.

### Part 15
<b>And Rava followed his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> stated elsewhere, as Rava maintains that one must remove all leaven from his possession within thirty days of Passover, even if he will not be there on the Festival itself. <b>As Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>one who turns his house into a storehouse,</b> and there is leaven beneath the stored grain, if he does so <b>before</b> it was <b>thirty days</b> prior to Passover, <b>he need not remove</b> the leaven. Since the leaven is concealed, it is considered removed after the fact. If it is <b>within thirty days, he must remove</b> the leaven, as it is not considered removed <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> even if this occurred <b>before</b> it was <b>thirty days</b> prior to Passover, <b>we only said</b> that he is not obligated to remove the leaven if <b>it is not his intention to clear away</b> the stored grain before Passover. <b>However,</b> if <b>his intention is to clear away</b> the grain before Passover, <b>he must remove</b> the leaven <b>even before</b> it was <b>thirty days</b> prior to Passover, as perhaps he will not have time to remove the leaven before the Festival.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the purpose of this</b> period of <b>thirty days</b> that renders it significant? The Gemara answers: <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One asks</b> about <b>and teaches the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover thirty days before Passover. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One begins studying those <i>halakhot</i> <b>two weeks</b> before the Festival. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason for the</b> opinion of the <b>first <i>tanna</i>,</b> that one begins studying the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover thirty days before the Festival?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC