
### Part 1
However, if one eats <i>matza</i> <b>before</b> these other foods, <b>no,</b> one may not start eating other foods after <i>matza</i>. The mishna apparently supports Rav Yehuda’s opinion. The Gemara rejects this proof: The <i>Tosefta</i> is stated in the style of: Needless to say. Needless to say, one fulfills his obligation if he eats <i>matza</i> <b>before</b> other foods, <b>as he eats it with an appetite. However,</b> if one eats <i>matza</i> <b>after</b> eating other foods, <b>perhaps he will come to eat it</b> in the manner of <b>excessive eating,</b> as he is compelled to eat when he is not hungry. Consequently, <b>you</b> might <b>say</b> that one does <b>not</b> fulfill his obligation if he eats <i>matza</i> after all those other foods. Therefore, the <i>Tosefta</i> <b>teaches us</b> that one may eat <i>matza</i> even after consuming those foods.

### Part 2
<b>This is</b> how <b>Mar Zutra taught</b> this discussion: <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One</b> may <b>conclude after the <i>matza</i> with an <i>afikoman</i>.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>supports his</b> opinion: <b>One does not conclude after the Paschal lamb with an <i>afikoman</i>.</b> The Gemara infers: It is <b>after the Paschal lamb that</b> one may <b>not</b> conclude with an <i>afikoman</i>; <b>however, after <i>matza</i> one</b> may <b>conclude</b> with an <i>afikoman</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this contention: The mishna is stated in the style of: Needless to say. Needless to say, one may not conclude with an <i>afikoman</i> <b>after</b> eating <b><i>matza</i>, as the taste</b> of <i>matza</i> <b>is slight; however, after the Paschal lamb,</b> one might <b>say</b> that this prohibition does <b>not</b> apply. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that it is prohibited to conclude with an <i>afikoman</i> after the Paschal lamb as well.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection:</b> With regard to unleavened <b>sponge cakes, cakes fried in oil and honey, and honey cakes, a person</b> may <b>fill his stomach with them</b> on Passover night, <b>provided that he eats an olive-bulk</b> of <b><i>matza</i> after</b> consuming them. The Gemara infers from here that if he eats <i>matza</i> <b>after</b> those cakes, <b>yes,</b> this is permitted; however, if one eats <i>matza</i> <b>before</b> these other foods, <b>no,</b> this is not an acceptable practice.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: As explained above, the <i>Tosefta</i> is stated in the style of: Needless to say. Needless to say, one fulfills his obligation if he eats <i>matza</i> <b>before</b> other foods, <b>as he eats it with an appetite. However,</b> if he eats <i>matza</i> <b>after</b> eating other foods, <b>when he</b> might <b>come to eat it</b> in the manner of <b>an excessive eating, you</b> might <b>say</b> that one does <b>not</b> fulfill his obligation if he eats <i>matza</i> after all those other foods. Therefore, the <i>Tosefta</i> <b>teaches us</b> that one may eat <i>matza</i> even after consuming those foods.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said:</b> The mitzva of <b><i>matza</i> nowadays,</b> even after the destruction of the Temple, applies by <b>Torah</b> law; <b>but</b> the mitzva to eat <b>bitter herbs</b> applies <b>by rabbinic</b> law. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> the mitzva of <b>bitter herbs different from</b> <i>matza</i>? <b>As it is written,</b> with regard to the Paschal lamb: “They shall eat it <b>with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11), from which it is derived: <b>When there is</b> an obligation to eat <b>the Paschal lamb, there is</b> likewise a mitzva to eat <b>bitter herbs; and when there is no</b> obligation to eat <b>the Paschal lamb, there is</b> also <b>no</b> mitzva to eat <b>bitter herbs.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: But if so, the same reasoning should apply to <b><i>matza</i> as well,</b> as <b>it is written: “With <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs.”</b> The mitzva of <i>matza</i> should also depend on the obligation of the Paschal lamb. The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>The verse repeats</b> the obligation to eat <b><i>matza</i>,</b> as it states: “In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month <b>in the evening, you shall eat <i>matzot</i>”</b> (Exodus 12:18). This verse establishes a separate obligation to eat <i>matza</i>, unrelated to the Paschal lamb. <b>And Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> Nowadays, <b>both this,</b> the mitzva to eat <i>matza</i>, <b>and that,</b> the mitzva to eat bitter herbs, apply <b>by rabbinic</b> law, as the Torah obligation to eat these foods is in effect only when the Paschal lamb is sacrificed.

### Part 8
The Gemara challenges: <b>But isn’t it written: “In the evening, you shall eat <i>matzot</i>”?</b> The Gemara answers: Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov <b>needs that</b> verse for the following <i>halakha</i>: When the Temple was standing, one who was <b>ritually impure or</b> one <b>who was on a distant road</b> was nonetheless obligated to eat <i>matza</i>. <b>As it could enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since</b> these two categories of people <b>do not eat</b> the Paschal lamb on <b>the</b> first <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>they also do not eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs.</b> According to Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov, this verse <b>teaches us</b> that even one who was ritually impure and one who was on a distant road are obligated to eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs, as these mitzvot do not depend on one’s eligibility to sacrifice the Paschal lamb on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rava,</b> who maintains that it is a mitzva from the Torah to eat <i>matza</i> nowadays, how could he respond to that interpretation of the verse? Rava could have <b>said to you:</b> I do <b>not require</b> a special <b>verse</b> to teach that <b>a ritually impure person and a person who was on a distant road</b> are obligated to eat <i>matza</i>. These people are obligated because they <b>are no worse than an uncircumcised</b> man <b>or an alien,</b> i.e., one who does not observe the <i>mitzvot</i>, who are obligated to eat <i>matza</i> despite the fact that they do not sacrifice the Paschal lamb. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“But no uncircumcised man shall eat from it”</b> (Exodus 12:48). <b>“From it”</b> indicates that he may <b>not eat from</b> the Paschal lamb; <b>however, he does eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs.</b> The same is true for anyone else who is prevented from eating the Paschal lamb.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other,</b> Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov, how does he respond to this argument? The Gemara answers: According to Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov, the <i>halakha</i> that one must eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs despite being unable to partake of the Paschal lamb <b>was written with regard to this</b> person, an uncircumcised man, <b>and it was written</b> also <b>with regard to that</b> one, a ritually impure person, <b>and</b> both verses <b>are necessary.</b> We cannot learn the <i>halakha</i> of a ritually impure person from that of an uncircumcised man, or vice versa, as is explained in several places.

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: It <b>was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava: “Six days you shall eat <i>matzot</i>, and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the Lord your God”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:8). <b>Just as</b> eating <i>matza</i> on the <b>seventh</b> day is merely <b>optional,</b> i.e., there is no obligation to eat <i>matza</i> on the last day of Passover, but only to avoid eating leavened bread, as the verse states: “Six days you shall eat <i>matzot</i>,” <b>so too,</b> eating <i>matza</i> during the first <b>six days</b> is <b>optional.</b>

### Part 12
<b>What is the reason</b> that it is optional to eat <i>matza</i> on the first six days of Passover as well as the seventh? The seventh day of Passover <b>is something that was included in a generalization but was explicitly singled out to teach.</b> According to the rules of exegesis, <b>it was intended to teach not just about itself but about the entire generalization.</b> In other words, the seventh day of Passover was initially included in the verse: “You shall eat <i>matzot</i> for seven days” (Exodus 12:15), but was excluded from this generalization by the verse: “Six days you shall eat <i>matzot</i>.” In accordance with the above principle, the <i>halakha</i> of the seventh day applies to all the other days of Passover as well. That means there is no obligation to eat <i>matza</i> for all seven days of the Festival, but only on the first day.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: I <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> the mitzva to eat <i>matza</i> on <b>the first night</b> of Passover is included by the above principle, and it too is merely <b>optional;</b> therefore, <b>the verse states: “They shall eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11).

### Part 14
<b>I have</b> derived <b>nothing other</b> than that one is obligated to eat <i>matza</i> <b>when the Temple is standing. From where</b> is it derived that one is obligated to eat <i>matza</i> on the first night of Passover even <b>when the Temple is not standing? The verse states: “In the evening you shall eat <i>matzot</i>.” The verse</b> here <b>establishes</b> the mitzva of <i>matza</i> as <b>obligatory,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rava.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>If some of</b> the participants at the seder <b>fell asleep,</b> thereby interrupting their meal, <b>they</b> may <b>eat</b> from the Paschal lamb when they awake. If the <b>entire</b> company fell asleep, <b>they</b> may <b>not eat</b> any more. If they all fall asleep, this is considered a complete interruption, and if they were to resume their meal it would be akin to eating the offering in two different places.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC