
### Part 1
he <b>signaled</b> contemptuously <b>with his hand</b> and said: <b>If goat is better, let</b> it be <b>sacrificed as the daily offering.</b> The daily offering is a lamb, proving that its meat is preferable to that of a goat. <b>The king said: Since he</b> not only disagrees with me but <b>has no reverence</b> for <b>the monarchy,</b> as evident from his contempt, <b>sever his right</b> hand. <b>He gave a bribe and</b> the official <b>severed his left hand. The king heard</b> that Yissakhar had deceived him <b>and</b> had the official <b>sever his right hand</b> as well. <b>Rav Yosef said: Blessed is God Who took retribution [<i>mitarpesei</i>] from Yissakhar of Kfar Barkai in this world</b> and did not wait to punish him more severely in the next world. His punishment fit the crime; because he would not dirty his hands with sacrificial blood and was overzealous in keeping his hands clean, both his hands were severed.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Ashi said: Yissakhar of Kfar Barkai did not study</b> the <b>Mishna</b> and was an ignoramus who did not know that this <i>halakha</i> is stated explicitly in the mishna. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Lambs take precedence</b> over <b>goats in every place</b> they are mentioned in the Bible. I <b>might</b> have thought that this is <b>because it is a</b> more <b>select species.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “If he brings a lamb as his offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:32). The Torah passage where bringing a lamb as a sin-offering is discussed appears after the passage describing the sin-offering of a goat. The inconsistent order <b>teaches that both</b> these animals <b>are equal. Ravina said:</b> Yissakhar did not <b>even read the Bible</b> properly, <b>as it is written: “If a lamb”</b> (Leviticus 4:32), <b>“if a goat”</b> (Leviticus 3:12), teaching: <b>If one wishes let him bring a lamb; if one wishes let him bring a goat.</b> There is no clear preference.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC