
### Part 1
One <b>who lets blood and does not wash his hands will be afraid for seven days.</b> One <b>who cuts his hair and does not wash his hands will be afraid for three days.</b> One <b>who cuts his nails and does not wash his hands will be afraid for one day, and he will not know what is frightening</b> him. Placing one’s <b>hand on</b> his <b>nostrils</b> is <b>a way to</b> become <b>afraid.</b> Placing one’s <b>hand on his forehead is a way</b> to fall <b>asleep.</b>

### Part 2
A Sage <b>taught:</b> If <b>food and drink</b> are <b>under</b> one’s <b>bed, even if they are covered with iron vessels, an evil spirit rests upon them. The Sages taught: A person</b> should <b>not drink water on Tuesday nights or on Shabbat nights,</b> i.e., Friday nights. <b>And if he drinks</b> water, <b>his blood is upon his</b> own <b>head, due to</b> the <b>danger.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> this <b>danger?</b> The Gemara answers: The danger of the <b>evil spirit</b> that rules on these days.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And if he is thirsty, what is his remedy?</b> What should he drink? The Gemara answers: <b>He</b> should <b>say</b> the <b>seven voices that David said over the water, and afterward he</b> may <b>drink. As it is stated: “The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; God of glory thunders, even the Lord upon many waters. The voice of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of majesty. The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars; the Lord breaks in pieces the cedars of Lebanon.</b> He makes them also skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild ox. <b>The voice of the Lord hews out flames of fire. The voice of the Lord shakes the wilderness; the Lord shakes the wilderness of Kadesh. The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to calve, and strips the forests bare; and in His temple all say: Glory”</b> (Psalms 29:3–9).

### Part 4
<b>And if</b> he does <b>not</b> remember that verse, <b>he</b> should <b>say as follows: Lul, Shafan, Anigron, Anirdafin,</b> which are names of demons, <b>I sit between the stars, I walk between thin</b> and <b>fat</b> people, take any of them if you wish but leave me alone. <b>And if</b> he does <b>not</b> recall this incantation, <b>if there is</b> another <b>person with him, he</b> should <b>wake him and say to him: So-and-so, son of so-and-so, I thirst for water; and then</b> he may <b>drink. And if</b> there is <b>no</b> other person with him, he should <b>knock the cover on the cup and then drink. And if</b> he is <b>not</b> able to do this, <b>he</b> should <b>throw some</b> object <b>in it and then drink.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught: A person</b> should <b>not drink water from rivers or from ponds at night. And if he drank, his blood is upon his</b> own <b>head due to the danger.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is</b> this <b>danger? The danger of blindness.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And if he is thirsty, what is his remedy? If there is</b> another <b>person with him, he</b> should <b>say to him: So-and-so, son of so-and-so, I thirst for water. And if</b> there is <b>no</b> one else with him, <b>he</b> should <b>say to himself: So-and-so, my mother said to me</b> to <b>beware of <i>shavrirei</i>,</b> the demon of blindness. He should continue to say the following incantation, in the first part of which the demon’s name gradually disappears: <b><i>Shavrirei berirei rirei yiri ri</i>; I thirst for water in white</b> earthenware <b>cups.</b> This is an incantation against those demons.

### Part 6
The Gemara returns to the statement of the mishna that on Passover one must drink no less than four cups of wine: <b>And</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even</b> if the poor person accepts funds <b>from the charity plate.</b> The Gemara asks: It is <b>obvious</b> that this is the case. If there is a mitzva to drink these four cups, they must be provided for him.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is necessary only</b> to teach that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who said: Make your Shabbat</b> like an ordinary <b>weekday and do not be beholden to</b> other <b>beings.</b> If one is unable to honor Shabbat without financial help from others, it is better for him to save money and eat his Shabbat meals as he would on a weekday rather than rely on other people. <b>Here,</b> in the case of the four cups, Rabbi Akiva <b>concedes</b> that it is appropriate for a poor person to request assistance from the community, <b>due to</b> the obligation <b>to publicize the miracle.</b>

### Part 8
With regard to this issue, <b>the school of Eliyahu taught</b> that <b>although Rabbi Akiva said: Make your Shabbat</b> like <b>a weekday and do not be beholden to</b> other <b>beings; however, one</b> should nevertheless <b>perform some small</b> alteration <b>in his house</b> to distinguish Shabbat from a weekday. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>this</b> alteration? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> For example, one should serve <b>small, fried fish. As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima says: Be bold like a leopard, light like an eagle, run like a deer, and</b> be <b>strong like a lion to perform the will of your Father in Heaven.</b> This statement teaches that one should exert every effort to perform a mitzva.

### Part 9
The Gemara cites the full source of Rabbi’s Akiva statement with regard to Shabbat preparations. <b>The Sages taught: Rabbi Akiva commanded Rabbi Yehoshua, his son,</b> about <b>seven matters: My son, do not sit at the high point of a city,</b> where many people pass, <b>and study</b> there, as the passersby will interrupt you. <b>And do not live in a city whose leaders are Torah scholars,</b> as they are too busy studying to govern properly.

### Part 10
Rabbi Akiva continued: <b>And do not enter your house suddenly,</b> without knocking first; <b>all the more so</b> do not enter <b>the house of another,</b> as he might not be ready to receive you. <b>And do not withhold shoes from your feet,</b> as it is disgraceful to go barefoot. <b>Wake up and eat, in the summer due to the heat,</b> as it is best to eat before it grows hot, <b>and in the winter due to</b> the strength you will need to tolerate <b>the cold. And make your Shabbat</b> like <b>a weekday and do not be beholden to</b> other <b>beings. And exert yourself</b> to join together <b>with a person upon whom the hour smiles,</b> i.e., a successful person.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa said</b> in explanation of this last statement: <b>Do not buy from him and do not sell to him.</b> If he is the beneficiary of good fortune, he will profit from any business transaction and you will suffer from it. <b>Rather, form a partnership with him. And now</b> we have heard <b>that Rav Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You have blessed the work of his hands”</b> (Job 1:10)? This means that <b>anyone who took a <i>peruta</i> from Job would be blessed,</b> even if he received it via a business transaction. This shows that one should engage in business with a person who is blessed, for <b>even if</b> he wishes <b>to buy from him or to sell to him it is well,</b> i.e., he will share in the good fortune of the other.

### Part 12
The Gemara continues to cite similar advice dispensed by Rabbi Akiva. <b>Rabbi Akiva commanded Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai</b> to do <b>five matters when</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>was imprisoned.</b> Beforehand, Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him: Rabbi, teach me Torah.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said</b> to him: <b>I will not teach you,</b> as it is dangerous to do so at the present time. Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him</b> in jest: <b>If you will not teach me, I will tell Yoḥai</b> my <b>father, and he will turn you over to the government.</b> In other words, I have no means of persuading you; you are already in prison. Rabbi Akiva <b>said: My son,</b> know that <b>more than the calf wishes to suck, the cow wants to suckle,</b> but I am afraid of the danger. Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him: And who is in danger? Isn’t the calf in danger,</b> as you are in jail and I am the one at risk?

### Part 13
Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him:</b> If so, I will tell you a few matters. First of all, <b>if you wish to strangle yourself, hang yourself on a tall tree.</b> This proverb means that if one wants others to accept what he has to say, he should attribute his statement to a great man. <b>And when you teach your son, teach him from a corrected text.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>that</b> statement? <b>Rava said, and some say Rav Mesharshiya</b> said: Rabbi Akiva was referring <b>to</b> learning <b>a new</b> topic, for <b>once a mistake enters</b> one’s mind, it has <b>entered</b> there and is difficult to put right.

### Part 14
Rabbi Akiva further told Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: <b>Do not cook in a pot in which your colleague cooked</b> his food. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>this</b> statement? The Gemara explains: Rabbi Akiva is referring to marrying <b>a divorced woman in the lifetime of her</b> former <b>husband. As the Master said:</b> If <b>a divorced man marries a divorced woman, there are four minds in the bed</b> during intimacy. Each person thinks about his current and former spouse, which verges on illegitimacy. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that this advice holds true <b>even with regard to</b> marrying <b>a widow, as</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC