
### Part 1
with regard <b>to the matter of leavened bread on Passover</b> one should <b>also</b> be liable for eating a prohibited substance joined together with a permitted substance.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, indeed it is so, and</b> the prohibition mentioned by Ze’eiri against sacrificing leaven in offerings was only <b>to exclude</b> the statement <b>of Abaye, who said: There is</b> significance to <b>offering less than an olive-bulk</b> of leaven on the altar, and one is flogged for sacrificing an offering of that kind. By noting that one is liable because permitted substances combine with prohibited substances, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us that an offering</b> of <b>less than an olive-bulk</b> is <b>not</b> considered an offering, and therefore sacrificing it is not punishable by lashes.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Dimi sat and stated this <i>halakha</i></b> that a permitted substance does not join together with a prohibited substance to constitute the requisite measure, except in the case of a nazirite. <b>Abaye said to Rav Dimi: And</b> is it true that with regard to <b>all</b> other <b>prohibitions in the Torah, a permitted</b> substance <b>does not join together with a prohibited</b> substance?

### Part 4
<b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: With regard to thick <b>soup</b> prepared <b>with <i>teruma</i></b> produce whose <b>garlic and oil</b> are <b>of non-sacred</b> produce, <b>and one who immersed himself during that day touched some of</b> the ingredients, <b>he disqualified all</b> the contents of the pot, as they are subsumed within the <i>teruma</i> soup. However, if the thick <b>soup</b> was prepared <b>with non-sacred</b> produce <b>and the garlic and the oil were of <i>teruma</i>, and one who immersed himself during that day touched some of them, he disqualifies only</b> the ingredients in the <b>place that he touched.</b>

### Part 5
Abaye continues. <b>And we discussed this</b> issue: <b>Why</b> are the ingredients in the <b>place that he touched disqualified?</b> The <b>spices,</b> i.e., the garlic or oil, <b>are nullified by the majority.</b> Since the major portion of the dish is composed of non-sacred produce, it should not be disqualified by contact with one who immersed himself during that day. <b>And Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> in reply: <b>What is the reason</b> that it becomes disqualified? It is <b>since a non-priest is flogged for</b> eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of the soup, as anything into which <i>teruma</i> is mixed is considered <i>teruma</i> by Torah law. <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this ruling that a non-priest is flogged? Is it <b>not due to</b> the fact <b>that the permitted</b> substance <b>joins together with the prohibited</b> substance?

### Part 6
Rav Dimi rejects this contention: <b>No; what is</b> the meaning of <b>an olive-bulk</b> in this mishna? It means <b>that there is</b> sufficient <i>teruma</i> in the mixture that when one eats from the mixture he will consume <b>an olive-bulk</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. In that case one is liable for punishment for eating this olive-bulk, as if he ate the <i>teruma</i> alone.

### Part 7
Abaye asked him: <b>Is</b> eating <b>an olive-bulk in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread prohibited <b>by Torah</b> law, and one is punished for it? He <b>said to him: Yes.</b>

### Part 8
Abaye asked in response: <b>If so, why do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer with regard to</b> eating <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a dip that contains flour, on Passover? The Rabbis maintain that one is not punished by Torah law for eating a mixture containing leaven. Although the Rabbis do not derive from the word: Anything [<i>kol</i>], that leaven in a mixture is prohibited, they should nonetheless hold one liable for eating an olive-bulk of a prohibited substance in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread.

### Part 9
Rav Dimi said: <b>Rather, what</b> conclusion must be drawn; the reason that a non-priest is flogged for eating the <i>teruma</i> soup is <b>due to</b> the fact that <b>a permitted</b> substance <b>joins together with a prohibited</b> substance? If so, <b>ultimately, why do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer with regard to</b> eating <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>? Rather, leave Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>, as</b> in eating that mixture <b>there is no</b> possibility that one will consume <b>an olive-bulk</b> of the leaven <b>in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. <b>If</b> he <b>eats</b> <i>kutaḥ</i> <b>in its pure,</b> unadulterated form, <b>by swallowing it</b> as food, not as a dip, <b>his intention is</b> rendered <b>irrelevant by</b> the opinions of <b>all</b> other <b>people.</b> It is unusual for a person to eat a pungent dip by itself, all the more so, for him to eat it so quickly. One receives no punishment for conduct that anomalous. <b>And if he dips</b> other food into the <i>kutaḥ</i> <b>and eats</b> it, he will <b>not</b> consume <b>an olive-bulk in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. Due to the pungency of the dip, one needs to add only a small portion to his food.

### Part 10
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rav Dimi from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>two pots, one of non-sacred</b> produce <b>and</b> the other <b>one of <i>teruma</i>, before which</b> were <b>two mortars,</b> one in <b>which non-sacred</b> produce was pounded, <b>and one</b> in <b>which <i>teruma</i></b> produce was pounded, <b>and</b> the contents of <b>these</b> mortars <b>fell into these</b> pots, but it is unknown which produce fell into which pot, <b>it is</b> all <b>permitted.</b> The reason for this ruling is <b>as I say,</b> since there is no definitive proof to the contrary, that the <b><i>teruma</i> fell into the <i>teruma</i> and</b> the <b>non-sacred produce fell into</b> the <b>non-sacred produce.</b>

### Part 11
Abaye explains his objection: <b>And if you say</b> that eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of a prohibited substance <b>in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread is prohibited <b>by Torah</b> law, <b>why do we say</b> this principle: <b>As I say that</b> the <b><i>teruma</i></b> fell <b>into</b> the <i>teruma</i>, <b>etc.?</b> If the <i>teruma</i> produce fell into the pot containing non-sacred produce, one who eats from the mixture will consume an olive-bulk of <i>teruma</i> within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, and he will thereby violate a Torah prohibition. Rav Dimi <b>said to him: Leave <i>teruma</i></b> separated from <b>spices,</b> which is <i>teruma</i> <b>by rabbinic</b> law. By Torah law one is required to separate <i>teruma</i> only from grain, wine and oil. The Sages are lenient with regard to <i>teruma</i> by rabbinic law.

### Part 12
Abaye <b>raised</b> another <b>objection</b> from a similar <i>baraita</i>: In a case where there are <b>two baskets, one</b> filled with <b>non-sacred</b> produce <b>and the other</b> filled with <b><i>teruma</i>, and before them</b> were <b>two</b> vessels each containing a <b><i>se’a</i></b> of produce, <b>one</b> filled with <b>non-sacred</b> produce <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> filled <b>with <i>teruma</i>, and these,</b> the contents of each of the baskets, <b>fell into those,</b> each of the <i>se’a</i> vessels. It is possible that the <i>teruma</i> fell into the non-sacred produce, and it is prohibited for non-priests to eat a mixture of <i>teruma</i> and non-sacred produce. Nevertheless, the contents of the <i>se’a</i> vessel containing the non-sacred produce are <b>permitted, as I say</b> that <b>the non-sacred produce fell into the non-sacred produce and the <i>teruma</i> fell into the <i>teruma</i>.</b> The obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> from grain is by Torah law, <b>and if you say</b> that eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of forbidden food <b>in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread is prohibited <b>by Torah</b> law, <b>why do we say</b> the principle: <b>As I say</b> the non-sacred grain fell into the non-sacred grain? Why aren’t the Sages concerned that one might eat an olive-bulk of <i>teruma</i> in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf, which is prohibited by Torah law?

### Part 13
<b>He said to him: Leave <i>teruma</i> in modern times,</b> as it is in effect <b>by rabbinic</b> law. Once the Jewish people were exiled from their land, the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>teruma</i> and tithes apply by rabbinic law, not Torah law. This is the basis for the lenient ruling in the case of this mixture.

### Part 14
The Gemara returns to its discussion of Rabbi Abbahu’s statement with regard to the meaning of the word soaked in the verse: “He shall abstain from wine and strong drink; he shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, nor shall he drink anything soaked in grapes,” and whether or not a permitted substance combines with a prohibited one. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>this</b> word: <b>Soaked, come to</b> teach <b>that</b> mixtures are prohibited in this case? That verse <b>is required to</b> derive <b>that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> elsewhere: <b>Soaked,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC