
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one who is registered for a Paschal lamb unilaterally <b>registers another</b> person <b>with him in his portion</b> of the Paschal lamb, the other <b>members of</b> his <b>group are permitted to give him,</b> i.e., the one who included the additional person, only <b>his</b> portion, which was originally allotted to him. <b>And he,</b> the additional person, <b>eats from his</b> portion, i.e., the portion of he who added him; <b>and they,</b> the other members of the group, <b>eat from theirs.</b> This is because they did not agree to the inclusion of the additional person.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If there is among the <b>members of a group one of them who has fine hands,</b> a euphemism for one who always hastens to take a large quantity of food, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning whether <b>they can say to him: Take your</b> allotted <b>portion</b> to eat <b>and leave;</b> and don’t take any more from the other’s members portions? <b>Do we say</b> that <b>he can say to them: You accepted me</b> in the group without preconditions, and you therefore have no right to limit how much I can take now? <b>Or perhaps they can say to him: When we accepted you, it was</b> only <b>for the preparation of the offering,</b> to ensure that enough people would be registered to guarantee that the entire offering would be eaten with none left over. However, <b>we did not accept you</b> with <b>the understanding that you would eat</b> considerably <b>more than us.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to the dilemma from what we learned in the mishna: If one who registered for a Paschal lamb <b>registers other</b> people <b>with him in his portion,</b> the other <b>members of the group are permitted to give him</b> only <b>his</b> portion. <b>And</b> then <b>he</b> and the additional people <b>eat from his</b> portion, <b>and they,</b> the other members of the group, <b>eat from theirs. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Is it not because it is comparable to</b> a case where <b>one of them has fine hands,</b> because in the case of one who adds a person, he and the additional person together eat more than one portion? <b>And if it could enter your mind</b> to say that one with <b>fine hands can say to them: You accepted me</b> without preconditions, then <b>this</b> person, who registered an additional person to join him, <b>should be</b> considered <b>as though he had fine hands,</b> and he should be able to take a double portion. Therefore, the mishna rules that the group can limit the quantity of food he takes. It is apparent that the claim of one with fine hands is not accepted.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>They say: No,</b> a comparison should not be drawn. Including additional people of individual <b>minds is different. Even if both of them</b> together would <b>eat</b> a quantity <b>equivalent to a single member of the group,</b> the other members of the group <b>can</b> nonetheless <b>say to him: It is not pleasant for us</b> to have <b>a strange person among us.</b> Therefore, no proof can be offered from the mishna.

### Part 5
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to the question from another mishna: In the case of <b>an attendant who ate an olive-bulk of meat</b> of the Paschal lamb <b>next to the oven</b> in which it is being roasted, <b>if he were judicious, he should</b> continue eating there to <b>fill his stomach with it.</b> By eating <b>an olive-bulk,</b> he has established his current location as his place for eating his Paschal lamb, and he may not eat any more in an additional location. <b>If the members of the group wanted to do him a favor</b> so that he may continue eating, <b>they can come and sit at his side and eat</b> there; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b> The Gemara makes the following inference: <b>If they wanted</b> to do him a favor, <b>yes;</b> but <b>if they did not want</b> to do so, <b>no. But why</b> should this be left to their discretion? <b>Let him say to them: You accepted me</b> unconditionally into the group, and therefore you have no right to prevent me from continuing to eat. The latter claim is not accepted, as is apparent by the mishna’s ruling that it is left to the group’s discretion

### Part 6
<b>It is different there,</b> in the case of an attendant, <b>for they</b> can <b>say to him: When we accepted you, it was with the understanding that you would exert yourself before us</b> and provide our needs by serving as our waiter; but <b>for us to exert ourselves</b> by moving to a place that is convenient <b>for you, we did not accept you.</b> Therefore, no proof can be derived from the mishna.

### Part 7
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an explicit resolution to this question from the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Members of a group in which one of</b> the group <b>had fine hands are permitted to say</b> to him: <b>Take your</b> allotted <b>portion</b> to eat <b>and leave;</b> don’t take any more from the other members’ portions. <b>And not only</b> is this true of a group sharing a Paschal lamb, <b>but even five</b> people <b>who made a shared meal of friends [<i>sibolet</i>]</b> throughout the year <b>are permitted to say</b> to one who has fine hands: <b>Take your portion and leave.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that that is the ruling.

### Part 8
The Gemara discusses the text of the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>What</b> new ruling is introduced by the expression: <b>And not only?</b> The <i>Tosefta</i> <b>is speaking</b> employing the style of: <b>There is no need.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>There is no need to state</b> this rule in the case of a group sharing a Paschal lamb, since they have a strong claim, <b>as they can say to him: When we accepted you, it was</b> only <b>for the preparation of the offering,</b> to ensure that there would be enough people to guarantee that the entire offering would be eaten. It is therefore immediately understood that the group retains a right to limit the size of the portion he takes. <b>Rather,</b> the <i>Tosefta</i> emphasizes that <b>even</b> with regard to <b>a shared friendly meal, which is for</b> the sake of <b>companionship only, they are permitted to say to him: Take your portion and leave.</b>

### Part 9
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>this</b> question concerning what a group may say to a member who has fine hands <b>is not our dilemma. Rather, this is our dilemma:</b> Are <b>members of a group permitted to divide up</b> into smaller separate groups, <b>or are they not allowed to divide up</b> if there is no special reason to do so?

### Part 10
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution: <b>Members of a group</b> in which <b>one of them had fine hands are permitted to say to him: Take your portion and leave,</b> which is equivalent to instructing him to form his own group, albeit of only one person. This indicates that only if <b>his hands are fine, yes,</b> they may divide into separate groups, but if <b>his hands are not fine, no,</b> they may not. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that they are not allowed to divide up into separate groups for no reason.

### Part 11
Incidental to this discussion, the Gemara recounts a related incident: <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, mixed</b> their <b>bread together</b> in order to share it between them. <b>By the time Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, ate one</b> slice, <b>Rav Pappa ate four</b> slices. Rav Huna <b>said to him:</b> Let us stop sharing. Instead, <b>divide</b> the meal <b>with me</b> so that I can eat my portion. <b>He said to him: You accepted</b> my companionship, and it is improper to now retract.

### Part 12
Rav Huna <b>raised all these objections</b> mentioned previously, <b>and</b> Rav Pappa <b>answered</b> him <b>as we answered</b> that those cases dealt with exceptional circumstances. Rav Huna then <b>raised an objection</b> from the mishna with regard to the <b>members of a group</b> sharing a Paschal lamb. Rav Pappa <b>said to him: There,</b> they are permitted to limit his portion only because <b>they</b> can <b>say to him: When we accepted you it was for the preparation of the sacrifice,</b> but when friends share a meal it is with the understanding that each one will fully participate regardless of how much he eats. Rav Huna finally <b>raised an objection</b> from the ruling of the <i>Tosefta</i> concerning <b>a shared meal.</b> Rav Pappa accepted the proof and <b>divided</b> the meal <b>with him.</b>

### Part 13
On another occasion Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, <b>went and mixed</b> his bread <b>together with Ravina. By the time Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, ate one</b> slice, <b>Ravina ate eight.</b> Rav Huna <b>said</b> jokingly: It is better to eat together with <b>one hundred Pappas and not</b> with <b>one Ravina,</b> because Ravina eats significantly more.

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who registers others with him for his Paschal lamb</b> or <b>for his Festival peace-offering</b> for the fourteenth of Nisan and takes money from them for their share, <b>the money in his hand</b> that he took for them <b>is non-sacred. And one who sells his burnt-offering</b> or <b>peace-offerings</b> to another person <b>has not done anything;</b> the sale is completely invalid, <b>and any money</b> he receives for the transaction <b>should go</b> to the Temple fund to be used <b>for</b> the purchase of public <b>free-will offerings</b> which will be sacrificed as burnt<b>-</b>offerings.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But since he has not done anything,</b> the sale being completely invalid, <b>why does the money fall</b> to the fund used <b>for free-will offerings?</b> The money should remain non-sacred. <b>Rava said: It is a fine</b> that the Sages imposed to dissuade people from attempting to purchase others’ offerings. <b>And what is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>And any</b> money? It indicates that, <b>although</b> these offerings <b>were worth only four</b> <i>zuz</i> <b>and they</b> mistakenly <b>gave him five</b> <i>zuz</i>, <b>even</b> with regard to <b>that extra</b> <i>zuz</i> <b>the Sages also fined him.</b> They required it to be used for free-will offerings rather than considering the extra money a gift to the seller.

### Part 16
<b>Ulla said, and some say it was Rabbi Oshaya:</b> Is it <b>possible</b> that <b>our Babylonian friends know the reason of this</b> following <b>matter: This</b> person <b>designated a lamb for his Paschal lamb,</b> consecrating it as such; <b>and this</b> other person <b>designated money</b> to give to the owner of the lamb in order to register <b>with his Paschal lamb,</b> consecrating the money for that purpose. The sanctity endowed in the money can be removed from it only when transferred to the lamb upon purchasing a portion in it. Ulla questions the rationale for this: <b>How does</b> the <b>sanctity</b> of the money <b>take effect upon</b> and transfer to the Paschal lamb, which is itself already <b>sacred,</b> as implied by the <i>baraita</i> <b>that teaches that the money in his hand is non-sacred,</b> clearly indicating that the sanctity was indeed transferred from the money? Surely, if it is already sacred, no more sanctity can be transferred to it.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC