
### Part 1
<b>Let us say</b> that <b>there are three <i>tanna’im</i></b> who dispute this point: The two unattributed opinions, each of which is referring to two vegetables, and the opinion common to Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Shimon that includes all three vegetables. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, there are</b> only <b>two <i>tanna’im</i></b> who dispute the point, <b>and the first <i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion appears before the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon is Rabbi Yosei. And the first <i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion appears before the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei is Rabbi Shimon. And what</b> is the meaning of the word <b>even</b> in both their statements? They agree with regard to <b>the first</b> vegetable, turnips; however, they disagree with regard to the second, and replace it with another vegetable.

### Part 2
The Gemara cites an episode from the <i>Tosefta</i>. <b>The Sages taught: The son</b> of a man named <b>Bohayan designated</b> for the poor <b>the</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> in a garden <b>of vegetables, and his father</b> Bohayan <b>found the poor laden</b> with <b>vegetables and standing at the opening of the garden</b> on their way out. <b>He said to them: My sons, cast</b> the vegetables that you have gathered <b>from upon yourselves and I will give you twice</b> the amount in <b>tithed</b> produce, and you will be no worse off. <b>Not because I begrudge</b> you what you have taken. <b>Rather, it is because the Sages say: One does not designate</b> for the poor <b>the</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> in a garden <b>of vegetables.</b> Therefore, the vegetables that you took require tithing.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> was it necessary <b>for him to say to them: Not because I begrudge</b> you what you have taken? It would have been sufficient to offer them tithed produce. The Gemara answers that he said it <b>so they would not say: He is putting us off,</b> taking what we collected now, but later he will not fulfill his commitment.

### Part 4
Apropos the people of Jericho, the Gemara relates that powerful people would steal wood from them. <b>The Sages taught: Initially,</b> the priests <b>would place the hides</b> that were flayed from animals <b>consecrated</b> as offerings of the most sacred order, which were given to the priests, <b>in the Parva chamber. In the evening, they would distribute them to the members of the family</b> of priests serving in the Temple that day. <b>And the powerful</b> priests among them would <b>take them by force</b> before they could be distributed. The Rabbis <b>decreed that they would distribute them each Shabbat eve,</b> because then <b>all the</b> families of both priestly <b>watches came and took</b> their part <b>together.</b> All the families from both the watch that was beginning its service and the one ending its service were together when they divided the hides. The powerful priests were unable to take the hides by force.

### Part 5
<b>Yet still the prominent priests</b> by virtue of their lineage <b>would take them by force.</b> Due to their prominence, the members of the rest of the watch dared not challenge them. When they realized that there was no equitable distribution, <b>the owners</b> of the sacrifices (<i>Me’iri</i>) <b>arose and consecrated</b> the hides <b>to Heaven</b> so the priests could not take them.

### Part 6
The Sages <b>said: Not a few days passed before they had plated the entire sanctuary with golden tablets</b> with the proceeds from the redemption and sale of the hides. These plates <b>were one cubit by one cubit and as thick as a golden dinar. And</b> when the people assembled <b>for the</b> Festival <b>pilgrimage they would remove</b> the tablets <b>and place them on a stair of the Temple Mount so that the pilgrims would see that the craftsmanship</b> of the tablets <b>was beautiful and without flaw [<i>dalam</i>].</b> Afterward they replaced the tablets in the Sanctuary.

### Part 7
<b>It was</b> similarly <b>taught</b> that <b>Abba Shaul says: There were sycamore tree trunks in Jericho, and powerful people would take them</b> from their owners <b>by force. The owners stood and consecrated</b> these trunks <b>to Heaven.</b> It was with regard to these trunks and the branches that grew from them that the residents of Jericho acted against the will of the Sages.

### Part 8
<b>With regard to</b> the prominent priests <b>and those like them, Abba Shaul ben Batnit said in the name of Abba Yosef ben Ḥanin: Woe is me due to</b> the High Priests of <b>the house of Baitos, woe is me due to their clubs. Woe is me due to</b> the High Priests of <b>the house of Ḥanin; woe is me due to their whispers</b> and the rumors they spread. <b>Woe is me due to</b> the High Priests of <b>the house of Katros; woe is me due to their pens</b> that they use to write lies. <b>Woe is me due to</b> the servants of the High Priests of <b>the house of Yishmael ben Piakhi; woe is me due to their fists.</b> The power of these households stemmed from the fact <b>that</b> the fathers <b>were High Priests, and their sons were</b> the Temple <b>treasurers, and their sons-in-law were</b> Temple <b>overseers [<i>amarkalin</i>]. And their servants strike the people with clubs,</b> and otherwise act inappropriately.

### Part 9
Apropos the critique of several prominent priests, the Gemara relates that <b>the Sages taught:</b> The people in <b>the</b> Temple <b>courtyard</b> all <b>cried four cries,</b> as they were in agreement over various issues (<i>Pardes Rimonim</i>). The <b>first</b> cry was: <b>Leave here, sons of Eli, who defiled God’s Sanctuary</b> (see I Samuel 2:22). Subsequently the priesthood was transferred to the house of Zadok. <b>And an additional cry: Leave here, Yissakhar of Kfar Barkai, who honors himself and desecrates</b> the items <b>consecrated</b> to <b>Heaven.</b> Due to his delicate nature and his disrespect for the Temple service, he would <b>wrap</b> his hands <b>in silk [<i>shirai</i>] and perform the service.</b> This would invalidate the service because the silk was an interposition between his hands and the Temple vessels. Furthermore, his conduct demeaned the Temple service, as he demonstrated that he was unwilling to dirty his hands for it.

### Part 10
<b>And</b> the people in <b>the</b> Temple <b>courtyard cried additionally: Lift your heads, O gates, and let</b> the righteous <b>Yishmael ben Piakhi, the student of Pinehas</b> ben Elazar the priest, <b>enter and serve as High Priest,</b> although the members of this family were violent. <b>And</b> the people in <b>the</b> Temple <b>courtyard cried additionally: Lift your heads, O gates, and let Yoḥanan ben Narbbai, the student of Pinkai, enter and fill his belly with</b> meat <b>of offerings</b> consecrated to <b>Heaven,</b> as he is worthy to eat offerings.

### Part 11
<b>They said about Yoḥanan ben Narbbai that he</b> and his household <b>would eat three hundred calves, and drink three hundred jugs of wine, and eat forty <i>se’a</i> of doves for dessert. They said:</b> Throughout <b>all the days of Yoḥanan ben Narbbai there was no leftover</b> sacrificial meat <b>in the Temple,</b> as he would make certain that someone ate it. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> ultimately <b>happened to Yissakhar of Kfar Barkai? They said: The king and the queen were sitting</b> and talking. <b>The king said</b> that <b>goat</b> meat <b>is better</b> food, <b>and the queen said lamb</b> meat is <b>better</b> food. <b>They said: Who can prove</b> which one of us is correct? <b>The High Priest</b> can, <b>as he offers sacrifices all day</b> and tastes their meat. The High Priest had the right to take a portion from any sacrifice offered in the Temple, and therefore was well acquainted with the tastes of different meat. Yissakhar of Kfar Barkai <b>came,</b> and when they asked him this question,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC