
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira,</b> who agrees in principle with Beit Shammai’s opinion, <b>says:</b> With regard to <b><i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a dip that contains leavened breadcrumbs, <b>and all types of <i>kutaḥ</i>, it is prohibited to sell</b> it to a gentile <b>thirty days before Passover.</b> Because <i>kutaḥ</i> is spicy, people use only a bit at a time, so it will likely last until Passover.

### Part 2
It was stated in the mishna that as long as leavened bread may be eaten, <b>it is permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from it. The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No, it is necessary to teach this</b> in a case <b>where one charred</b> the leavened bread with fire <b>before its time,</b> i.e., before it became prohibited, rendering it inedible. <b>And it teaches us</b> that the <i>halakha</i> <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava. As Rava said:</b> If one <b>charred</b> leavened bread <b>before its time, it is permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit from it even after its time,</b> since it no longer has the legal status of leavened bread.

### Part 3
It was stated in the mishna: After <b>its time passes, it is prohibited to benefit from it.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No, it is necessary for</b> the mishna to teach that it remains prohibited to benefit from leavened bread during additional <b>hours</b> that are delineated <b>by rabbinic law. As Rav Giddel said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Yosef said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard <b>to one who</b> takes wheat grains that may have come into contact with water and become leavened and <b>betroths</b> a woman with the leaven <b>from</b> the beginning of <b>the sixth hour,</b> when the leaven is prohibited by rabbinic law, <b>and onward</b> on Passover eve, <b>even</b> if he betrothed her <b>with wheat from the mountains,</b> which is especially hard and unlikely to become leavened, nonetheless, <b>we are not concerned that</b> this <b>betrothal</b> is valid. This is because when performing a betrothal with money one must give the woman an object worth as least the value of a <i>peruta</i>, and leaven from which one is prohibited to benefit is considered worthless.

### Part 4
It was stated in the mishna: <b>And one may not</b> even <b>light an oven or a stove with</b> leavened bread once it becomes prohibited. The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious,</b> as this is also a type of benefit? The Gemara answers: <b>No, it is necessary</b> to teach this due <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who <b>said</b> that <b>the removal of leavened bread is</b> to be performed only <b>through burning.</b> Otherwise, <b>it could enter your mind to say: Since Rabbi Yehuda said that its mitzva is</b> performed through <b>burning, while one is burning it let him benefit from it.</b> Therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> that it is prohibited to benefit from leavened bread even while burning it.

### Part 5
<b>Ḥizkiya said: From where</b> is it derived in the mishna <b>that it is prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit from leavened bread on Passover? As it is stated: “Leavened bread shall not be eaten”</b> (Exodus 13:3). Since the verse uses the passive, it should be understood as follows: <b>There shall be no permitted consumption of it</b> at all, even deriving benefit, as benefit could be exchanged for money, which could be used to buy food. The Gemara reads precisely: <b>The reason</b> deriving benefit is prohibited <b>is that the Merciful One writes</b> in the Torah<b>: “Leavened bread shall not be eaten.” Had</b> the Torah <b>not written: “Shall not be eaten,”</b> and instead used the active form: You shall not eat, <b>I would have said</b> that the <b>prohibition of eating is implied</b> but that <b>the prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit is not implied.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this conclusion <b>disagrees with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Abbahu,</b> as <b>Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>wherever it is stated: “It shall not be eaten,” “You,</b> singular, <b>shall not eat,”</b> or <b>“You,</b> plural, <b>shall not eat,” both a prohibition of eating and a prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit are implied, unless the verse specifies</b> that one may benefit, <b>in the manner that it specified with regard to an</b> unslaughtered <b>animal carcass.</b>

### Part 7
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“You shall not eat of any unslaughtered animal; you may give it to the resident alien who is within your gates, that he may eat it; or you may sell it to a foreigner;</b> for you are a sacred people to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 14:21). <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that it is permitted <b>to a resident alien through giving and to a gentile through selling. From where</b> do I derive that it is permitted <b>to a resident alien through selling? The verse states: “You may give it to the resident alien who is within your gates…or you may sell it,”</b> meaning that one has the option to do either of these. <b>From where is it derived</b> that it is permitted <b>to a gentile through giving</b> and one is not required to sell it to him? <b>The verse states: “You may give it</b>…<b>that he may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner.”</b> Therefore, <b>you may say</b> that he may transfer it to <b>both a resident alien and a gentile, both through giving and through selling.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> These <b>matters are</b> meant to be understood <b>as they are written;</b> he may transfer an unslaughtered animal carcass <b>to a resident alien</b> only <b>through giving and to a gentile</b> only <b>through selling.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason for</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If it could enter your mind</b> to understand the verse <b>in accordance with</b> that which <b>Rabbi Meir said, then let the Merciful One write: You may give it to the resident alien who is within your gates that he may eat it and sell it</b> to a foreigner. <b>Why do I</b> need the word <b>“or”</b> between these two options? <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>the matters are</b> to be understood <b>as they are written.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Meir</b> explain the formulation of the verse? The Gemara answers that Rabbi Meir would explain that the word <b>“or”</b> teaches one <b>to give precedence to giving to a resident alien over selling to a gentile.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> from where does <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? According to Rabbi Yehuda, <b>this</b> matter <b>does not need a verse, since you are commanded to sustain a resident alien,</b> as it is a mitzva for one to sustain a resident alien who has renounced idol worship, <b>and you are not commanded to sustain a gentile. There is no need for a verse</b> to teach this; <b>it is</b> based on a <b>logical inference.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara applies this discussion to the previously mentioned topic. <b>Granted,</b> Rabbi Abbahu’s opinion is reasonable <b>according to Rabbi Meir, who said</b> that one may transfer an animal carcass <b>to both a convert and a gentile, both through selling and through giving. From</b> the fact that <b>a verse was necessary to permit</b> one to derive <b>benefit from an animal carcass,</b> one can learn that with regard to <b>all</b> other <b>prohibitions in the Torah</b> about which it states only that one may not eat an item, <b>it is prohibited both to eat it and to derive benefit from it.</b>

### Part 11
<b>However, according to Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> that the word “or” <b>comes to</b> teach that the <b>matters are</b> to be understood <b>as they are written, from where does he derive</b> with regard to <b>all prohibitions</b> of eating <b>mentioned in the Torah that it is prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> as well? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it</b> from another verse. It is stated with regard to an animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>]: “And you shall be sacred men to Me, therefore you shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; <b>you shall cast it to the dogs”</b> (Exodus 22:30).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC