
### Part 1
<b>you are not allowed to permit</b> these actions in their presence, lest they come to treat other prohibitions lightly, saying: If this previously prohibited activity was permitted, other prohibitions are not particularly stringent either. How did Rav Yosef permit the residents of Ḥozai to eat rice dough? Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>And wasn’t it stated</b> about this <i>halakha</i> concerning stringencies that <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This was stated specifically <b>with regard to Samaritans?</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>What is the reason</b> that this applies to <b>Samaritans?</b> It is due to the fact that <b>they will extend</b> this <b>matter</b> of leniency, and add to it additional, unjustified leniencies. <b>These people</b> of Ḥozai <b>will also extend</b> this <b>matter</b> of leniency, and come to practice additional leniencies in other cases, as they are ignoramuses.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi said: We see, if the majority</b> of people in that place <b>eat rice,</b> do <b>not let a non-priest eat</b> <i>ḥalla</i> <b>in their presence, lest the</b> halakhic <b>category</b> of <b><i>ḥalla</i> be forgotten from them. And if most of them eat grain,</b> let <b>a non-priest eat</b> <i>ḥalla</i> separated from rice dough <b>in their presence, lest they separate</b> <i>ḥalla</i> <b>from</b> grain, from which separating <i>ḥalla</i> <b>is a requirement, on behalf of</b> rice from which separating <i>ḥalla</i> is <b>an exemption,</b> in which case the priest eating the <i>ḥalla</i> would be eating bread from which <i>ḥalla</i> was not separated; <b>or from that which is an exemption on behalf of that which is a requirement,</b> in which case the person eating the grain bread would be eating bread from which <i>ḥalla</i> was not separated.

### Part 3
After mentioning <i>halakhot</i> relating to customs, the Gemara returns to discuss the <b>matter itself.</b> If <b>matters</b> are <b>permitted but others were accustomed to</b> treat <b>them</b> as a <b>prohibition, you are not allowed to permit</b> these actions in their presence. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: We are dealing with Samaritans,</b> not with Jews. The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>And doesn’t</b> this apply <b>to everyone? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> to the contrary? <b>Two brothers may bathe together,</b> and there is no concern that doing so is immodest or will lead to sinful thoughts. <b>However,</b> the custom was that <b>two brothers do not bathe together in</b> the city of <b>Kabul</b> (see I Kings 9:13). <b>And</b> there was <b>an incident involving Yehuda and Hillel, sons of Rabban Gamliel, who bathed together in Kabul, and the entire city denounced them</b> and <b>said: In all our days we have never seen that</b> type of conduct. <b>Hillel stole</b> away <b>and went out to the outer chamber and did not want to tell them: You are permitted</b> to do so. He preferred to obey the city residents rather than rule it permitted for two brothers to bathe together.

### Part 4
Similarly, <b>one</b> may <b>go out with wide shoes</b> that resemble slippers <b>on Shabbat; however, one does not go out with wide shoes</b> in the city of <b>Birei. And</b> there was <b>an incident involving Yehuda and Hillel, sons of Rabban Gamliel, who went out with wide shoes in Birei, and the</b> people of the <b>city denounced them and said: In all our days we have never seen that</b> type of conduct. <b>And</b> Yehuda and Hillel <b>removed</b> their shoes, <b>and gave them to their</b> gentile <b>servants, and did not want to tell</b> the residents of the city: <b>You are permitted</b> to go out with wide shoes on Shabbat.

### Part 5
Similarly, <b>one may sit on gentiles’ stools on Shabbat,</b> even though these stools are typically used for displaying merchandise. <b>But one may not sit on gentiles' stools on Shabbat in the city of Akko. And</b> there was <b>an incident involving Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel who sat on gentiles’ stools on Shabbat in</b> the city of <b>Akko, and the entire city denounced him. They said: In all our days we have never seen that</b> type of conduct. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>moved onto the ground and did not want to tell them: You are permitted</b> to sit on the stools. The Gemara answers: The legal status of <b>people in the cities, since Sages are not found among them, is like</b> that of <b>the Samaritans.</b> Therefore, it is prohibited to tell them that these activities are permitted.

### Part 6
The Gemara proceeds to clarify the reasons for the stringent customs in those communities. <b>Granted,</b> sitting on <b>gentiles’ stools</b> is prohibited <b>because it appears like</b> one is engaged <b>in buying and selling</b> on Shabbat. In the case of <b>wide shoes as well,</b> it is prohibited to wear them due to the concern <b>lest they fall off</b> one’s feet <b>and he come to carry them</b> in his hand <b>four cubits in the public domain,</b> thereby violating a Torah prohibition.

### Part 7
<b>However, what is the reason that</b> two brothers <b>may not bathe</b> together? The Gemara answers: The custom to prohibit doing so is based on that which <b>was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person</b> may <b>bathe with anyone except for his father, and his father-in-law, and his mother’s husband, and his sister’s husband.</b> Due to the nature of their relation, one might come to ponder how they came to be related and have prohibited thoughts about intimacy between men and women. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> one to bathe <b>with his father, due to the honor</b> that he can accord <b>his father</b> by assisting his father while bathing. <b>The same is true for one’s mother’s husband.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And</b> the people of Kabul <b>came and issued a decree</b> to prohibit bathing together <b>for two brothers, due to</b> their concern that it is similar to bathing with <b>one’s sister’s husband. It was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>A student may not bathe with his teacher,</b> since it is disrespectful to see one’s teacher naked. <b>But if his teacher requires his</b> help when bathing, <b>it is permitted.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabba bar bar Ḥana came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he ate</b> the fat found <b>over the straight part</b> of an animal’s stomach. The fat along the stomach consists of two parts: The inner, straight portion, which is shaped like a bowstring, and the outer, rounded portion, which is shaped like a bow. With regard to the fat surrounding the inner, straight portion, the custom in Eretz Yisrael was lenient, whereas in Babylonia it was stringent. <b>Rav Avira the Elder and Rabba, son</b> of <b>Rav Huna, entered to</b> see Rabba bar bar Ḥana. <b>When he saw them</b> coming, <b>he concealed from them</b> what he was eating. <b>They came and told Abaye</b> what had happened, and <b>he said to them:</b> Through his conduct, <b>he rendered you Samaritans,</b> as he could have told you that it is permitted but did not do so.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And is Rabba bar bar Ḥana</b>, who was lenient with regard to a matter that is prohibited, <b>not</b> in agreement with <b>that which we learned</b> in the mishna: When one travels from one place to another, the Sages <b>impose upon him the stringencies of the place from which he left and the stringencies of the place to which he went? Abaye said: That applies</b> when one travels <b>from</b> one place <b>in Babylonia to</b> another place <b>in Babylonia, or from</b> one place <b>in Eretz Yisrael to</b> another place <b>in Eretz Yisrael, or alternatively, from Babylonia to Eretz Yisrael. However,</b> when traveling <b>from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, no,</b> this principle does not apply. <b>Since we,</b> the residents of Babylonia, <b>are subordinate to them</b> in terms of <i>halakha</i>, <b>we act in accordance with their</b> custom, but a resident of Eretz Yisrael is not required to follow the Babylonian custom.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ashi said: Even if you say that</b> when one travels <b>from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia,</b> he is required to act stringently in accordance with the local custom, <b>this applies only when his intent is not to return.</b> One is required to adopt the local customs when permanently settling in a new location. However, as <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana’s intent was to return</b> to Eretz Yisrael, his point of origin, he continued to follow the custom of Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara relates that <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said to his son: My son,</b> you live in Babylonia. Therefore, <b>do not eat</b> this fat, <b>neither</b> when you are <b>in my presence nor</b> when you are <b>not in my presence. I, who saw Rabbi Yoḥanan eat</b> this fat, can say that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan is worthy</b> for one <b>to rely upon him</b> both <b>in his presence and not in his presence. You did not see him.</b> Therefore, <b>do not eat</b> it, neither when you are <b>in my presence nor</b> when you are <b>not in my presence,</b> since you may not rely upon my opinion alone in this matter.

### Part 12
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this statement of <b>his disagrees with</b> another statement of <b>his, as Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Elazar told me: Once I followed Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Yosei ben Lakonya into the garden</b> next to his house,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC