
### Part 1
<b>and</b> they would <b>eat</b> fallen fruit <b>from beneath</b> palm <b>trees that shed fruit</b> that had fallen <b>on Shabbat; and they</b> would <b>designate</b> the produce in the <b>corner</b> for the poor in a field of <b>vegetables,</b> which is exempt from this obligation even by rabbinic law. <b>And the Sages reprimanded</b> the people of Jericho for doing these three things.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Apropos the people of Jericho, who were reprimanded for some of their actions and not reprimanded for others, the Gemara cites a similar <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Sages taught: King Hezekiah performed six actions. With regard to three</b> of them, the Sages of his generation <b>conceded to him; and with regard to three</b> of them, the Sages <b>did not concede to him.</b> Due to King Hezekiah’s father’s wickedness, <b>he dragged the bones of his father</b> Ahaz <b>on a bier of ropes</b> and did not afford him the respect due to a king, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>conceded to him. He ground the copper snake</b> that Moses fashioned in the desert because Israel worshipped it, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>conceded to him. He suppressed the Book of Cures, and they conceded to him.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And with regard to three</b> actions, the Sages <b>did not concede to him. He cut off the doors of the Sanctuary and sent them to the King of Assyria, and they did not concede to him</b> because he thereby demeaned the Temple. <b>He sealed the waters of the upper Gihon</b> stream, diverting its water into the city by means of a tunnel, <b>and they did not concede to him,</b> because he harmed the local populace in the process and should have relied upon God (<i>Me’iri</i>). <b>He intercalated</b> the year, delaying the advent of the month <b>of Nisan during Nisan, and they did not concede to him.</b> The Gemara explains that he declared the first of Nisan to be the thirtieth of Adar and only then intercalated the year (see II Chronicles 30:2).

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna: <b>They</b> would <b>graft palm trees the entire day</b> of the fourteenth of Nisan. The Gemara asks: <b>How did they perform</b> this grafting? <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: They brought fresh myrtle, strong beer</b> made <b>from the</b> fruit of the <b>laurel tree, and barley flour that was cast into a vessel, and forty days has not passed</b> since it was ground. <b>They boiled them</b> together <b>and poured</b> the mixture <b>into the core of the palm tree.</b> And for <b>any</b> tree <b>standing within four cubits of that</b> tree, <b>if they did not perform this</b> treatment with it, <b>it would immediately wither</b> because the tree that received the treatment would grow faster at the expense of the surrounding trees. <b>Rav Aḥa, son</b> of <b>Rava, said: They placed a branch of a male palm tree on the female,</b> and by doing so the female tree would yield fruit.

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna that the residents of Jericho would <b>bundle <i>Shema</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: What does it mean that they bundled <i>Shema</i>? <b>How did they do</b> so? <b>Rabbi Yehuda said</b> that <b>they recited: “Hear Israel: The Lord is our God, the Lord is One</b>” (Deuteronomy 6:4), <b>and they would not pause</b> between words. <b>Rava said: They</b> would <b>pause</b> between words, <b>but</b> instead of reciting this verse in the proper manner: “That which I command you today, shall be on your heart” (Deuteronomy 6:5), pausing after the word today; <b>they would say: Today shall be on your heart,</b> inferring: <b>Today it will be on your heart, and tomorrow it will not be on your heart. The Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>How would they bundle <i>Shema</i>? They recited: “Hear Israel, the Lord is our God the Lord is One,” without pausing;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: They paused, but they would not recite: Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason that we recite</b> that passage: Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever, even though it does not appear in the Torah? The Gemara answers: We recite it <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish interpreted homiletically.</b>

### Part 7
<b>As Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said</b> that it is written: <b>“And Jacob called his sons and said, Gather around and I will tell you</b> what will occur to you in the end of days” (Genesis 49:1). <b>Jacob wanted to reveal to his sons</b> when the complete redemption would arrive at <b>the end of days</b> (see Daniel 12:13), <b>but the Divine Presence abandoned him,</b> rendering him unable to prophesy. <b>He said: Perhaps</b> the Divine Presence has abandoned me because, <b>Heaven forfend, one of my descendants is unfit, as</b> was the case with my grandfather <b>Abraham, from whom Ishmael emerged, and</b> like <b>my father Isaac, from whom Esau emerged. His sons said to him: Hear Israel,</b> our father, <b>the Lord is our God, the Lord is One. They said: Just as there is only one</b> God <b>in your heart, so too, there is only one in our hearts. At that moment Jacob our father said</b> in praise: <b>Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever,</b> as all his children were righteous.

### Part 8
<b>The Rabbis said: What should we do? Shall we recite</b> this verse? But <b>Moses our teacher did not say it</b> in the Torah as part of <i>Shema</i>. <b>Shall we not recite it?</b> But <b>Jacob said it.</b> In order to resolve this dilemma <b>they established that</b> this passage <b>should be recited surreptitiously. Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>the school of Rabbi Ami said:</b> This is <b>analogous to the daughter of a king who smelled</b> the fragrance of the dried <b>spices</b> stuck to the bottom of <b>the pot</b> and craved to eat them. What can she do? <b>If she tells</b> her servants to give it to her, <b>she will be disgraced,</b> as the dried spices are a contemptible food. However, if <b>she does not say</b> she wants to eat them, <b>she will</b> endure <b>suffering. Her servants began to bring</b> them to her <b>surreptitiously.</b> One should conduct himself in that manner in similar cases of uncertainty.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> The Sages <b>instituted that</b> the people <b>should recite it aloud due to the grievance of the heretics.</b> It was instituted to prevent the heretics from claiming that the Jews are surreptitiously reciting inappropriate statements. The Gemara adds: <b>In Neharde’a, where there are no heretics, they recite it surreptitiously even now.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught</b> a related matter in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>The people of Jericho performed six actions, three</b> in keeping <b>with the will of the Sages and three against the will of the Sages. And these</b> are what they did in keeping <b>with the will of the Sages: They</b> would <b>graft palm trees the entire day</b> of the fourteenth of Nisan; <b>and they</b> would <b>bundle <i>Shema</i>; and they</b> would <b>harvest</b> grain <b>before the <i>omer</i></b> offering was brought. <b>And these</b> are what they did <b>against the will of the Sages: They</b> would <b>pile</b> the harvest <b>before the <i>omer</i>; and they</b> would <b>make breaches in</b> the walls of <b>their gardens and their orchards to feed fallen</b> fruit <b>to the poor during drought years,</b> so that the poor could take the fruit that had fallen <b>on Shabbat and Festivals; and they</b> would <b>permit</b> the use of <b>consecrated branches of carob and of sycamore</b> trees. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said to him:</b> It is inaccurate to formulate it in that manner, as <b>if they acted</b> in keeping <b>with the will of the Sages, all people would do so,</b> not only the residents of Jericho. <b>Rather,</b> formulate it in this manner: Both <b>these</b> three acts <b>and those</b> three <b>were performed against the will of the Sages. With regard to three</b> the Sages <b>reprimanded them; and with regard to three</b> the Sages <b>did not reprimand them.</b> Since one could contend that the latter are permitted and the people of Jericho had already performed them, the Sages chose not to reprimand them.

### Part 12
<b>And these</b> are what they did for which the Sages <b>did not reprimand them: They</b> would <b>graft palm trees the entire day; and they</b> would <b>bundle <i>Shema</i>; and they</b> would <b>harvest and pile</b> grain <b>before the <i>omer</i></b> offering was brought. <b>And these</b> are what they did for which the Sages <b>reprimanded them: They</b> would <b>permit</b> the use of <b>consecrated branches of carob and of sycamore</b> trees; <b>they</b> would <b>make breaches in</b> the walls of <b>their gardens and orchards on Shabbat and Festivals, in order to feed the poor fallen fruit during drought years; and they</b> would <b>designate</b> for the poor <b>the</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> in a field of <b>vegetables. And the Sages reprimanded them</b> for those actions.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehuda maintain</b> that this <b>harvest</b> performed by the residents of Jericho <b>was against the will of the Sages? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>The people of Jericho</b> would <b>harvest before the <i>omer</i>,</b> in keeping <b>with the will of the Sages, and they</b> would <b>pile</b> the grain <b>before the <i>omer</i>, against the will of the Sages, but the Sages did not reprimand them?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC