
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>What is</b> the difference <b>between </b>the Paschal lamb offered on <b>the first <i>Pesaḥ</i></b> and the Paschal lamb offered on <b>the second </b><i>Pesaḥ</i>? On <b>the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>, at the time of slaughtering the Paschal lamb, <b>it is prohibited</b> to own leavened bread due to the prohibitions: <b>It shall not be seen, and: It shall not be found. And</b> on <b>the second</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> it is permissible for one to have both <b>leavened bread and <i>matza</i> with him in the house.</b> Another difference is that the Paschal lamb offered on <b>the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>requires</b> the recitation of <b><i>hallel</i> as it is eaten and the second does not require</b> the recitation of <b><i>hallel</i> as it is eaten.</b> However, they are the same in that the Paschal lambs sacrificed on <b>both</b> the first and second <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>require</b> the recitation of <b><i>hallel</i> as they are prepared,</b> i.e., as they are slaughtered, <b>and they are</b> both <b>eaten roasted with <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs, and they override Shabbat</b> in that they may be slaughtered and their blood sprinkled even on Shabbat.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> a halakhic midrash pertaining to the Paschal lamb offered on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>. The verse states with regard to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>: “They shall leave none of it to the morning, nor break a bone in it; <b>according to all the entire statute of the Paschal lamb they shall offer it”</b> (Numbers 9:12). The fact that the verse says “it” indicates that <b>the verse is speaking of a mitzva applicable to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb, meaning that <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to the actual Paschal lamb on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> apply equally to the Paschal lamb on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 3
The midrash continues: With regard to <b>a mitzva related to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb but not actually performed on the body of the offering, <b>from where</b> is it derived that it applies to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> as well? <b>The verse states: “They shall eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11). One <b>might</b> have thought that one must fulfill all mitzvot related to the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>even mitzvot not</b> at all <b>related to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb, such as the requirement to destroy all one’s leaven. <b>Therefore, the Torah states: “And they shall not break a bone in it”</b> (Numbers 9:12), which teaches that <b>just as</b> the prohibition of <b>breaking a bone is notable</b> among the mitzvot related to the Paschal lamb in that it is <b>a mitzva applicable to</b> the Paschal lamb <b>itself, so too, any mitzva applicable to</b> the Paschal lamb <b>itself</b> must be fulfilled on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>. However, other mitzvot pertaining to the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> need not be fulfilled on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 4
<b>Isi ben Yehuda says:</b> It is unnecessary to derive that <i>halakha</i> from the end of the verse quoted, as the phrase in the first half of the verse: <b>“They shall perform it,”</b> indicates that <b>the verse is speaking</b> only <b>of mitzvot applicable to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb <b>itself.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies the details of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that one must fulfill <b>even a mitzva not</b> at all <b>related to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>. The Gemara expresses surprise: <b>But you said</b> that <b>the verse is speaking</b> only <b>of a mitzva applicable to</b> the <b>body</b> of the Paschal lamb, so why would one think that unrelated mitzvot are also included?

### Part 6
The Gemara explains that <b>this is</b> what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: Now that you said</b> the additional <i>halakha</i> that <b>they shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs, apparently</b> the phrase: <b>“They shall perform it,” is not specific</b> and does not limit the <i>halakhot</i> of the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> to those applicable to the Paschal lamb itself, <b>say</b> that this verse <b>is</b> expounded according to the principle of <b>a detail and a generalization,</b> as it first said: “They shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs” and “They shall leave none of it to the morning,” and then it stated a generalization: “According to all the statute of the Paschal lamb they shall perform it.” The principles of halakhic midrash state that in that case, <b>the generalization adds to the detail and even</b> includes <b>everything,</b> such that all the mitzvot of the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> would apply equally to the second, including the removal of leaven. Therefore, the verse “They shall not break a bone in it” <b>teaches us</b> that mitzvot unrelated to the Paschal lamb do not apply to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What does Isi ben Yehuda do with</b> the end of <b>the</b> verse: “And they shall not break a <b>bone</b> in it”? The Gemara answers: <b>He needs it</b> to teach that the prohibition of breaking a bone applies <b>both to a bone that has marrow and to a bone that does not have marrow.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> who expound differently than Isi ben Yehuda, <b>what do they do with this</b> phrase: “They shall perform it”? The Gemara answers: <b>They need it</b> to teach <b>that one does not slaughter the Paschal</b> lamb on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>on</b> behalf of a single <b>individual.</b> Since the verse speaks of people performing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> in the plural, it is derived <b>that as much as it is possible to search</b> for more people to join this individual in his Paschal lamb, <b>we search</b> for them, even if it means causing another individual to become ritually impure to prevent him from performing the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“According to the entire statute of the Paschal lamb they shall offer it”</b> (Numbers 9:12). <b>One might</b> have thought <b>that just as</b> at the time of the sacrifice of the Paschal lamb on <b>the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> it <b>is prohibited</b> to own leaven due to the prohibitions of: <b>It shall not be seen, and: It shall not be found, so too,</b> at the time of the sacrifice of <b>the</b> Paschal lamb on the <b>second</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>it is prohibited</b> to own leaven due to the prohibitions of: <b>It shall not be seen, and: It shall not be found. Therefore, the Torah states: “They shall eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11), which indicates that the other mitzvot pertaining to the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> do not apply on the second.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> from here <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>positive mitzvot</b> related to the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> apply on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>; <b>from where</b> do I derive that the same is true of <b>negative mitzvot? The verse states: “They shall leave none of it to the morning,</b> nor break a bone in it” (Numbers 9:12).

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> from this verse <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>a negative mitzva</b> whose violation <b>can be rectified by</b> the fulfillment of <b>a positive</b> mitzva applies on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, e.g., the prohibition of leaving over meat from the Paschal lamb until morning, which can be rectified by the positive mitzva of burning the leftovers; <b>from where</b> is it derived that the same is true of <b>a full-fledged negative mitzva? The verse states: “They shall not break a bone in it.”</b> It may be concluded from these examples that <b>just as the detail,</b> i.e., the specific mitzvot mentioned in these verses, <b>is explicit</b> and includes <b>a positive mitzva, a prohibition</b> whose violation <b>can be rectified by</b> the fulfillment of <b>a positive mitzva, and a full-fledged negative mitzva; so too, every positive mitzva,</b> every <b>prohibition</b> whose violation <b>can be rectified by</b> the fulfillment of <b>a positive mitzva, and</b> every <b>full-fledged negative mitzva</b> is included.

### Part 12
Now that the generalization has been interpreted as referring to the specific examples mentioned earlier, <b>what is included through the generalization of unleavened bread and bitter herbs?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes to teach that the mitzva of <b>roasting in fire</b> applies to the Paschal lamb on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> as well as to the first. Given that unleavened bread and bitter herbs is also a qualifying detail, <b>what does it exclude through its detail?</b> It teaches that the mitzva of <b>removal of leaven</b> does not apply on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>. The Gemara asks: Perhaps <b>I</b> can <b>reverse it</b> and say that on the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> one is not obligated to roast the offering by fire, but one is obligated to remove all leaven? The Gemara answers: <b>A mitzva relating to</b> the Paschal lamb <b>itself is preferable,</b> as it is more reasonable to assume that the first and second <i>Pesaḥ</i> are comparable with regard to <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to the offering itself.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks further: <b>What is included through the generalization of: They shall leave none of it to the morning?</b> The Gemara answers that it includes the prohibition of: <b>You shall not remove any of its</b> meat from one group to another, <b>which is similar to it, as</b> through <b>this</b> prohibition mentioned in the verse <b>it is disqualified as leftovers, and</b> through <b>this</b> prohibition of removing the meat of the offering <b>it is disqualified as</b> sacrificial meat that <b>has left</b> its permitted boundary.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks further: <b>What does it exclude through its detail?</b> It excludes the prohibitions: <b>It shall not be seen, and: It shall not be found, which are similar to it, as</b> one who violates <b>this</b> prohibition of leaving over the meat of the offering until morning <b>is not flogged because it is a prohibition</b> whose violation <b>can be rectified by</b> fulfilling <b>a positive mitzva</b> by burning the leftovers; <b>and</b> one who violates <b>this</b> prohibition of owning leaven <b>is not flogged because it is a prohibition</b> whose violation <b>can be rectified by</b> fulfilling <b>a positive mitzva</b> of burning the leaven. The Gemara asks: Perhaps <b>I</b> can <b>reverse it</b> and say that the generalization is meant to include removal of leaven and the detail excludes the prohibition of leaving over the meat of the offering? The Gemara answers: In a comparison of the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> and the second, including <b>a mitzva related to</b> the Paschal lamb <b>itself is preferable</b> to including one that does not relate to the Paschal lamb.

### Part 15
The Gemara continues to ask: <b>Through the generalization: They shall not break a bone in it,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC