
### Part 1
<b>this</b> person <b>is a full-fledged righteous person</b> as far as that mitzva is concerned? These ulterior motives, e.g., seeking a reward, do not detract from the value of the mitzva. The Gemara answers: There is still concern <b>lest he look for</b> the needle <b>after he searched</b> for leaven and completed the search. There is danger that since he already completed the mitzva, its merit will not protect him when he is searching for the needle.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The danger referred to by the <i>Tosefta</i> is the <b>danger</b> posed <b>by gentiles.</b> And this ruling <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of the <i>tanna</i> <b>Pelimu. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a hole</b> in a wall located <b>between</b> the residences of <b>a Jew and a gentile, one searches</b> in the hole <b>as far as his hand reaches, and the rest he renders null and void in his heart. Pelimu said:</b> One does <b>not search the entire</b> hole at all, <b>due to the danger</b> involved.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: Due to <b>what danger? If we say</b> it is due to <b>the danger of sorcery,</b> i.e., the gentile will suspect the Jew of casting spells on him and will come to hate him and threaten him, if so, <b>when he made use of</b> the hole in the first place, <b>how did he make use</b> of it without arousing the enmity of his gentile neighbor? If the hole is never used there is no need to search it in any case. The Gemara answers: <b>There, when he made use of</b> the hole, it was during the <b>day and</b> there was <b>light, and</b> the gentile would <b>not raise</b> the suspicion that the Jew was casting spells <b>in his mind. Here,</b> it is during the <b>night and</b> the search <b>is</b> performed with <b>a lamp, and</b> the gentile would <b>raise</b> the suspicion that the Jew was casting spells <b>in his mind.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Elazar say</b> that <b>those on the path to perform a mitzva are not</b> susceptible to <b>harm</b> throughout the process of performing the mitzva? The Gemara responds: In a place <b>where danger is commonplace it is different,</b> as one should not rely on a miracle, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to God’s command to Samuel to anoint David as king in place of Saul: <b>“And Samuel said: How will I go, and Saul will hear and kill me; and God said: Take in your hand a calf</b> and say: I have come to offer a sacrifice to God” (I Samuel 16:2). Even when God Himself issued the command, there is concern with regard to commonplace dangers.

### Part 5
<b>They raised a dilemma before Rav:</b> With regard to <b>those members of the school of Rav who live in the fields [<i>baga</i>]</b> far away from the city, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as to whether they may <b>come early</b> before dawn <b>and</b> in the evening after <b>dark to Rav’s school,</b> or should they be concerned about robbers? <b>He said to them: Let them come,</b> and responsibility for their safety is <b>upon me and my neck.</b> They asked him: <b>What is</b> your opinion about <b>returning</b> home? <b>He said to them: I do not know</b> if it is possible to rely on the protection of the mitzva when returning home.

### Part 6
On a related note, <b>it was stated</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: Those on the path to perform a mitzva are not</b> susceptible to <b>harm; neither when they go nor when they return.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion did he say this?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of this <i>tanna</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Isi ben Yehuda says: With regard to</b> that <b>which the Torah said: “And no man shall covet your land,</b> when you go up to appear before God your Lord three times in the year” (Exodus 34:24), this <b>teaches that your cow shall graze in the meadow and no beast will harm it,</b> and <b>your rooster shall peck in the garbage</b> dump <b>and no marten</b> [<b><i>ḥulda</i></b>] <b>shall harm it.</b> In other words, your property will be protected while everyone ascends to Jerusalem for the Festival, despite the fact that the farm will not be defended.

### Part 8
<b>And are</b> these <b>matters not</b> inferred <b><i>a fortiori</i>? And if those</b> animals <b>that typically are harmed</b> by other animals <b>are not harmed,</b> due to the protection provided by the mitzva, <b>people who typically are not harmed,</b> as they are capable of protecting themselves, <b>all the more so,</b> will not be harmed due to the protection provided by the mitzva of ascending to Jerusalem for the Festival. <b>I have only</b> derived that one is protected <b>when going</b> to Jerusalem; <b>from where</b> is it derived that one is protected even <b>when returning</b> from the Temple? <b>The verse states:</b> “You shall roast and eat the Paschal lamb in the place which God your Lord shall choose; <b>and you shall turn in the morning and go to your tents”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:7). This <b>teaches that you shall go and</b> upon your return <b>find your tent in peace,</b> unharmed.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And once</b> we derived <b>that</b> the merit of a mitzva protects a person <b>even when returning, why do I</b> need a source to teach that he is protected <b>when</b> he <b>goes?</b> This teaching could also be derived by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference. The Gemara answers: Actually, the first verse is interpreted <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ami, as Rabbi Ami said: Any person who has land</b> in his possession is obligated to <b>ascend</b> to the Temple <b>for the</b> three pilgrim <b>Festivals. And</b> one <b>who does not have land</b> in his possession <b>is not</b> obligated to <b>ascend for the Festivals,</b> as the verse states: Your land, in the context of the obligation to ascend to Jerusalem for the three Pilgrim Festivals.

### Part 10
Apropos the ascent to Jerusalem for a Festival and the performance of a mitzva with ulterior motives, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Avin bar Rav Adda said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Due to what</b> reason <b>are there no fruits of Ginnosar,</b> which were of the highest quality, growing <b>in Jerusalem?</b> Why is Jerusalem not graced with this produce? The reason is <b>so that</b> the <b>pilgrims would not say: If we had ascended only to eat the fruit of Ginnosar, it would have been sufficient for us.</b> The <b>ascent</b> to Jerusalem would <b>then be</b> performed <b>not for its own sake.</b>

### Part 11
<b>On a similar</b> note, <b>Rabbi Dostai, son of Rabbi Yannai, said: Due to what</b> reason <b>are the hot springs of Tiberias not</b> located <b>in Jerusalem?</b> It is <b>so that</b> the <b>pilgrims would not say: If we had only ascended to bathe in the hot springs of Tiberias, it would have been sufficient for us.</b> The <b>ascent</b> to Jerusalem would <b>then be</b> performed <b>not for its own sake.</b>

### Part 12
We learned in the mishna: <b>And with regard to what</b> did the Sages of previous generations <b>say</b> that one must search <b>two rows</b> of wine barrels in a cellar, <b>etc.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>A cellar, who mentioned</b> anything about that? What led the <i>tanna</i> to begin a discussion of a wine cellar?

### Part 13
The Gemara answers that <b>this is</b> what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: Any place into which one does not take leaven does not require searching, and wine storages and oil storages also do not require searching. And with regard to what</b> did the Sages <b>say</b> that one must search <b>two rows in a cellar?</b> This statement is referring to <b>a place into which one brings leavened bread, and where one supplies</b> wine from the storage during the meal.

### Part 14
We learned in the mishna that <b>Beit Shammai say</b> that one must search the first <b>two rows</b> across the entire cellar. <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> The <b>two rows that they stated</b> are two full rows in the front, <b>from the ground up to the ceiling. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> These two rows are <b>one row</b> at a right angle, <b>like the shape of</b> the letter <b><i>gamma</i> [gam],</b> i.e., the entire length and height of the front row and the entire top row of the barrels along the length and width of the cellar.

### Part 15
The Gemara comments: One <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yehuda,</b> and one <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> One <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yehuda: Beit Shammai say</b> that one must search <b>two rows across the entire front of the cellar, and the two rows that were stated</b> are <b>from the ground up to the ceiling.</b> One <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> One must search <b>two rows across the entire cellar,</b> i.e., the <b>outer</b> row that <b>faces the door, and</b> the <b>upper row</b> that <b>faces the ceiling.</b> The rows <b>inward</b> from the outermost one <b>and</b> the rows <b>lower than</b> the uppermost one <b>do not require searching.</b>

### Part 16
We further learned in the mishna that <b>Beit Hillel say:</b> It is sufficient to search <b>the two external rows, which are the upper ones.</b> There is an amoraic dispute with regard to this statement. <b>Rav said</b> it is referring to the <b>uppermost</b> row of barrels <b>and</b> the row <b>that is beneath it. And Shmuel said</b> it means <b>the uppermost</b> front row <b>and the</b> next one <b>that is inward</b> into the cellar. <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion of <b>Rav? He infers</b> from the term: <b>Outer</b> rows, that Beit Hillel mean that both rows face outward. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t</b> the mishna also <b>teach: Upper</b> rows, indicating that both rows are adjacent to the ceiling? The Gemara answers: This term comes <b>to exclude the lowest of the lower</b> rows. One must search only the top two rows.

### Part 17
<b>And Shmuel said</b> the mishna is referring to <b>the uppermost</b> front row <b>and the</b> next one <b>that is inward</b> into the cellar. <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion of <b>Shmuel? He infers</b> from the term: <b>Upper</b> rows, that one must search the first two rows on the top level of barrels. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t</b> the mishna also <b>teach: Outer</b> row? The Gemara answers that this word comes <b>to exclude the innermost of the inner</b> rows. One must search only the two outermost rows. The Gemara comments: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav, and all</b> the other <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> who recite the <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> by heart, <b>teach in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC