
### Part 1
<b>we do not perform labor in the settled area due to</b> the need to avoid <b>deviation</b> that causes <b>dispute,</b> as it is the custom in the Diaspora to refrain from performance of labor on those days. However, <b>in the desert</b> outside the Jewish community, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>He said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rav Ami said: In a settled area it is prohibited; in the desert it is permitted.</b>

### Part 2
Tangentially, it is reported that <b>Rav Natan bar Asya</b> relied upon his knowledge of the calendar and <b>traveled from Rav’s</b> study <b>hall to Pumbedita on the second day of</b> the festival of <b>Assembly,</b> i.e., <i>Shavuot</i>, and thereby desecrated the second day of the Festival by traveling beyond the town limits. <b>Rav Yosef excommunicated him</b> as punishment for this act. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>Let the Master flog</b> Rav Natan bar Asya for this grave sin. Rav Yosef <b>said to him: I</b> punished <b>him more severely, as in Eretz Yisrael they vote to flog a Torah scholar, but do not vote to</b> punish him with <b>excommunication,</b> in deference to the Torah. Apparently, excommunication is a more severe punishment than lashes.

### Part 3
<b>Some say: Rav Yosef</b> ordered the court officer to <b>flog him. Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>Let the Master excommunicate him, as</b> it is <b>Rav and Shmuel who both say</b> that <b>one excommunicates for</b> desecration of <b>the second day of the Festival in the Diaspora.</b> Rav Yosef <b>said to him: That applies to an ordinary person. Here, he is a Torah scholar. I did what was best for him, as in Eretz Yisrael they vote to flog a Torah scholar but do not vote to</b> punish him with <b>excommunication.</b> Rav Yosef did not wish to sentence him to so severe a punishment.

### Part 4
We learned in the mishna: <b>Similarly,</b> one <b>who transports Sabbatical</b> Year <b>produce</b> from a place where a crop has ceased in the fields to a place where it has not yet ceased, or from a place where it has not yet ceased to a place where it has already ceased, is obligated to remove the produce from his possession, in accordance with the stringencies of both locations. Rabbi Yehuda says that one need not remove the produce, as he can say to a local resident: You too go out and bring this produce from a place where it remains in the field. Therefore, he may partake of the produce that he brought with him. The Gemara asks: <b>And is Rabbi Yehuda not</b> in agreement with <b>that which we learned</b> in the mishna: The Sages <b>impose upon him the stringencies of</b> both <b>the place from which he left and the stringencies of the place to which he went?</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Sheisha, son</b> of <b>Rav Idi, said: Rabbi Yehuda is stating a different matter, and this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: Or</b> if one went <b>from a place where</b> a crop <b>has not ceased</b> in the fields <b>to a place where it has</b> also <b>not ceased</b> in the fields, <b>and he heard that it</b> now <b>ceased</b> in the fields <b>in his</b> original <b>location, he is</b> then <b>required to remove</b> the fruits from his possession. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> He need not remove it and can say to the people of his location of origin: <b>You, too, go out and bring</b> these fruits <b>from a place where they remain in the field, as they have not ceased</b> in the fields here, and I may continue eating this produce.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda is stating</b> his opinion <b>as a leniency</b> in his dispute with the Rabbis? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Elazar say: Rabbi Yehuda stated</b> his opinion <b>as a stringency? Rather, reverse</b> the statements in the mishna: If one travels from a place where a crop has not ceased in the fields to another place where it has not ceased in the fields, and hears that it has ceased in the fields in his original location, <b>he is not required to remove</b> that produce from his house. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: You, too, go out and bring</b> these fruits <b>from</b> the place <b>where I brought them, and</b> the crop has <b>ceased</b> in the fields there, and therefore he is required to remove the produce from his house.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said: Actually,</b> maintain the dispute in the mishna <b>as it is taught, and this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: Or,</b> if he brought it <b>from place where it has not ceased</b> in the fields <b>to a place where it has ceased</b> in the fields, <b>and he returned</b> the fruits <b>to their</b> original <b>place</b> where they <b>have still not ceased</b> from the fields, <b>he is not required to remove</b> the produce. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: You, too, go out and bring</b> these fruits <b>from</b> the place <b>where I brought them, and hasn’t</b> the crop <b>ceased</b> from the fields there? When he brought the produce back, he took it from a location where the fruit had ceased to be available, and he is required to remove it.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ashi strongly objects to this: Is that to say</b> that, according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda, did the back of the donkey absorb</b> these fruits? In other words, should this fruit be prohibited just because he transported the fruits on a donkey’s back through a place where it no longer exists in the field, even though it was neither grown there nor is he eating it there? <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said:</b> The dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda is parallel <b>to the dispute of these <i>tanna’im</i>, as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>one who preserves three</b> types of vegetable <b>preserves in one barrel</b> during the Sabbatical Year, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: One may eat</b> all three vegetables based <b>on</b> the status of <b>the first.</b> One may eat all three only until the date that the first of those vegetables ceases in the field. Thereafter, he is required to remove all the vegetables because they form a mixture of the prohibited and the permitted.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> One may <b>even</b> continue eating all of them based <b>on</b> the status of <b>the final</b> type of those vegetables, until it is no longer present in the field. <b>Rabban Gamliel says: Any</b> of the vegetables <b>whose type has ceased from the field, he</b> will <b>remove its type from the barrel</b> and it may not be eaten; <b>and the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with his statement.</b> The parallels between the dispute in this mishna and the dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda are: The unattributed opinion in the mishna is parallel to the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua opinion: As long as there is an element of leniency, it is all permitted. Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion is parallel to the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer: As long as there is an element of stringency, it is all prohibited (Rabbeinu Ḥananel).

### Part 10
<b>Ravina said:</b> The dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda is parallel <b>to the dispute of these <i>tanna’im</i>, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One may eat dates</b> in all of Judea <b>until the last</b> palm tree, which produces the latest dates, <b>in Tzoar,</b> has <b>ceased</b> producing dates. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC