
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>According to Ḥizkiya,</b> who says that: You shall not eat, indicates only that eating is prohibited but that benefit is permitted, <b>for what <i>halakha</i> is blood juxtaposed to water?</b> According to his opinion, there is no need for the verse to teach that one may benefit from blood. The Gemara answers that he needs this verse <b>to derive</b> that which was taught by <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the blood of sacrifices does not render</b> food <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity? <b>As it is stated: “You shall not eat it; you shall pour it out upon the earth like water”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:24). <b>Blood that is poured out like water,</b> such as that of a slaughtered, non-sacrificial animal, <b>renders</b> food <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. However, sacrificial blood, <b>which is not poured out like water</b> and is instead sprinkled on the altar, <b>does not render</b> food <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity.

### Part 2
The Gemara further challenges Rabbi Abbahu’s opinion: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition against eating <b>a limb</b> cut <b>from a living</b> animal, <b>as it is written:</b> “Only be steadfast in not eating the blood; for the blood is the life; <b>and you shall not eat the life with the flesh”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:23). <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a person</b> may <b>not offer a cup of wine to a nazirite,</b> who is prohibited from drinking wine, and that he may not offer <b>a limb</b> cut <b>from a living animal to a descendant of Noah,</b> who is prohibited by Noahide law from eating a limb from a living animal? <b>The verse states: “You shall not put a stumbling block before the blind”</b> (Leviticus 19:14). Causing another person to sin is like placing a stumbling block before a blind person; one who does so violates this prohibition. The prohibition of giving a limb from a living animal to a gentile is apparently due only to the prohibition of placing a stumbling block. <b>However, it is permitted</b> for one to throw it <b>to dogs.</b> Therefore, despite the fact that the verse says: “You shall not eat it,” apparently there is no prohibition against benefiting from this prohibited item. This challenges Rabbi Abbahu’s principle.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>A limb from a living animal is different, as it is juxtaposed</b> in the Torah <b>to blood. As it is written: “Only be steadfast in not eating the blood; for the blood is the life;</b> and you shall not eat the life with the flesh” (Deuteronomy 12:23). Just as it is permitted to benefit from blood, it is likewise permitted to benefit from a limb torn from a living animal.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Ḥizkiya,</b> in order to teach <b>what <i>halakha</i> is</b> the prohibition against eating <b>a limb from a living animal juxtaposed to</b> the prohibition against eating <b>blood?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that the juxtaposition comes to teach the opposite. <b>It is blood that is juxtaposed to a limb from a living animal</b> to teach the following: <b>Just as a limb from a living animal is prohibited, so too, blood of a living being is prohibited. And</b> to <b>which</b> blood is <b>this</b> referring? <b>This</b> is referring to <b>blood</b> spilled in the process <b>of bloodletting, through which the soul departs.</b> That is considered to be blood from a living being, and even the descendants of Noah are prohibited from eating it (Rabbeinu Ḥananel).

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition against eating the meat from <b>an ox that is stoned, as the Merciful One says:</b> “And if an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox shall be surely stoned, <b>and of its flesh shall not be eaten;</b> but the owner of the ox shall be clear” (Exodus 21:28). <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>By inference from that which is stated: “The ox shall surely be stoned,”</b> in which case it is not to be slaughtered properly, <b>don’t I know that it is an animal carcass, and it is prohibited to eat an animal carcass? What</b> does it mean when <b>the verse states: “Its</b> flesh <b>shall not be eaten”? The verse is telling you that</b> even <b>if one slaughtered</b> the ox <b>after its verdict had been reached</b> but before it had been carried out, <b>it is</b> still <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that one is prohibited <b>from eating</b> this ox; <b>from where</b> do I derive that one is prohibited <b>from</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from it as well? <b>The verse states: “But the owner of the ox shall be clear [<i>naki</i>].”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where may it be inferred</b> that one may not benefit from this ox? <b>Shimon ben Zoma says:</b> This is <b>like a person who says to his fellow: So-and-so was left clear [<i>naki</i>] of his property, and he has no benefit from it at all.</b> Similarly, “But the owner of the ox shall be clear” means that he has no benefit from the ox.

### Part 7
The Gemara infers from the verse that <b>the reason</b> that it is prohibited to derive benefit from the ox <b>is that</b> the Torah specifically <b>wrote: “But the owner of the ox shall be clear.” As, if</b> this prohibition were derived <b>from: “It shall not be eaten,”</b> apparently the <b>prohibition of eating would be implied,</b> but <b>the prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit would not be implied.</b> This presents a challenge even for Ḥizkiya, who agrees that the passive formulation: “It shall not be eaten,” indicates that in addition one may not benefit from the item.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the phrase: <b>“It shall not be eaten” indicates</b> both <b>a prohibition of eating and a prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit.</b> And the phrase: <b>“But the owner of the ox shall be clear,” comes to</b> prohibit deriving <b>benefit from the hide</b> of the ox that has been stoned. <b>And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to mention this explicitly, as <b>it could enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>it is written: “Its flesh shall not be eaten,”</b> with regard to <b>its flesh, yes,</b> it is prohibited, but with regard to <b>its hide, no,</b> it is not. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that it is prohibited to benefit from its hide as well.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to those <i>tanna’im</i> who expound this verse:</b> “But the owner of the ox shall be clear,” <b>for another interpretation,</b> namely, to teach that the owner of an innocuous ox, i.e., one that is not known to cause damage with the intent to injure, is exempt from the payment of <b>half</b> of the <b>indemnity</b> if that ox killed a person, or that he is exempt from <b>payment for offspring</b> if his ox gores a pregnant woman and causes her to miscarry; <b>from where do they derive</b> this prohibition against <b>benefiting from</b> the ox’s <b>hide?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> from the wording: <b>“Of</b> [<b><i>et</i></b>] <b>its flesh.”</b> The verse could have been formulated: And its flesh shall not be eaten. The addition of the word <i>et</i> comes to include <b>that which is secondary to the flesh,</b> i.e., the hide.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, who derives the prohibition against benefiting from the hide from the verse: “But the owner of the ox shall be clear,” what does he learn from the additional word <i>et</i>? The Gemara answers: This Sage <b>does not interpret</b> the word <b><i>et</i></b> as a means to derive new <i>halakhot</i>. He considers the word <i>et</i> to be an ordinary part of the sentence structure and not a source for exegetical exposition.

### Part 11
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Shimon HaAmmassoni, and some say</b> that <b>it</b> was <b>Neḥemya HaAmmassoni, would interpret all</b> occurrences of the word <b><i>et</i> in the Torah,</b> deriving additional <i>halakhot</i> with regard to the particular subject matter. <b>Once he reached</b> the verse: <b>“You shall be in awe of [<i>et</i>] the Lord your God;</b> you shall serve Him; and to Him you shall cleave, and by His name you shall swear” (Deuteronomy 10:20), <b>he withdrew</b> from this method of exposition, as how could one add to God Himself? <b>His students said to him: Rabbi, what will be with all the <i>etim</i> that you interpreted</b> until now? <b>He said to them: Just as I received reward for the interpretation, so I shall receive reward for</b> my <b>withdrawal</b> from using this method of exposition. The word <i>et</i> in this verse was not explained <b>until Rabbi Akiva came and expounded: “You shall be in awe of [<i>et</i>] the Lord your God”:</b> The word <i>et</i> comes <b>to include Torah scholars,</b> and one is commanded to fear them just as one fears God. In any case, Shimon HaAmmassoni no longer derived additional <i>halakhot</i> from the word <i>et</i>.

### Part 12
The Gemara further challenges: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition of <b>fruit that grows on a tree during the first three years after it was planted [<i>orla</i>], as the Merciful One says:</b> “And when you come into the land, and you shall plant all types of trees for food, then you shall count the fruit thereof as prohibited; three years shall it be <b>prohibited [<i>arelim</i>]</b> to you; <b>it shall not be eaten”</b> (Leviticus 19:23). <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: “Shall it be <b>prohibited</b> to you; <b>it shall not be eaten”: I have only derived a prohibition to eat</b> it. <b>From where do I derive that one may not</b> even <b>benefit from it,</b> e.g., that <b>he may not paint with</b> the dye that can be extracted from the fruit, <b>nor may he light a lamp with</b> its oil? <b>The verse states: “You shall count the fruit thereof [<i>orlato</i>] as prohibited [<i>araltem</i>];</b> three years shall it be <b>prohibited [<i>arelim</i>] to you; it shall not be eaten.”</b> This repetition of the term <i>arel</i> comes <b>to include all forms</b> of benefit.

### Part 13
The Gemara reads precisely: <b>The reason</b> that all forms of benefit are prohibited <b>is that the Merciful One writes: “You shall count</b> the fruit thereof <b>as prohibited [<i>araltem</i>];</b> three years <b>shall it be prohibited [<i>arelim</i>].”</b> The double use of the word <i>arel</i> indicates a two-fold prohibition. <b>However, were that not</b> the case, <b>I would have said: The prohibition of eating is indicated</b> here; however, <b>the prohibition to</b> derive <b>benefit is not indicated.</b> This is a challenge even to Ḥizkiya’s opinion, as the verse says: “It shall not be eaten,” indicating that it is prohibited to derive benefit as well.

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this. <b>Actually,</b> in general, <b>“it shall not be eaten” indicates both a prohibition of eating and a prohibition to</b> derive <b>benefit. However, it is different there,</b> with regard to <i>orla</i>, <b>as it is written:</b> “Three years shall it be prohibited [<i>arelim</i>] <b>to you.” And,</b> therefore, <b>it was necessary</b> for the verse to repeat the prohibition using several terms, as <b>it could enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since it wrote “to you”</b> it means that <b>it shall be yours,</b> namely that one is permitted to benefit from it. Therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> that it is prohibited to derive benefit.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>However, now that these</b> words in the <b>verses are written,</b> indicating the prohibition to derive benefit from <i>orla</i>, <b>why do I</b> need the words <b>“to you,”</b> i.e., what does this phrase teach us here? The Gemara answers: <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: That which is stated: <b>“To you,”</b> comes <b>to include that which is planted</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC