
### Part 1
<b>One</b> may continue <b>eating</b> dates based <b>on</b> those that have fallen off the tree and are stuck <b>between the palm branches. But one</b> may <b>not</b> continue <b>eating on</b> the basis of the dates that have fallen <b>between the thorn branches,</b> as animals are unable to reach them there. According to the first <i>tanna</i> in the mishna cited, one may continue eating fruit as long as an animal has access to its type, parallel to the opinion of the Rabbis with regard to removal. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel’s opinion is parallel to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda: If the fruit from a certain place is not available to all, one is required to remove it.

### Part 2
Since the Gemara discussed the point when Sabbatical Year produce must be removed in different places, it cites a mishna from tractate <i>Shevi’it</i> that deals with a similar topic. <b>We learned there</b> in a mishna: Eretz Yisrael is divided into <b>three</b> separate <b>lands</b> with regard <b>to removal, Judea, Transjordan, and the Galilee. And</b> there are <b>three lands in each and every one</b> of them: The valley, the mountains, and the plains, in which the <i>halakhot</i> of removal differ. <b>And why did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that there are <b>three lands</b> with regard <b>to removal</b> if those lands themselves are further divided? It is so <b>that</b> people <b>will eat in each and every one until</b> a certain crop <b>ceases</b> from the field <b>in the last</b> of the regions that comprise <b>it.</b> Therefore, even if a certain fruit is no longer available in a particular region within the land, it may still be eaten there as long as it is available in one of the other regions.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived, that it is permitted to continue eating a type of fruit that has ceased from the fields in a region, as long as it has not ceased elsewhere in the land, but that once it has ceased from the fields in the entire land it is prohibited, despite the fact that it has not ceased from the fields in the other lands? <b>Rav Ḥama bar Ukva said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: The verse says</b> with regard to land during the Sabbatical Year: <b>“And for the cattle and the beasts that are in your land,</b> all its produce may be eaten” (Leviticus 25:7), from which it is derived: <b>As long as the undomesticated animals eat</b> a type of produce <b>from the field, one may feed</b> that type <b>to the domesticated animal in</b> his <b>house,</b> as it still remains in the field. Deriving benefit from that type of produce is permitted. However, if that type of produce <b>has ceased for the undomesticated animals in the field, cease</b> providing it <b>to your domesticated animal in the house.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And we learned</b> as a tradition <b>that an undomesticated animal in Judea does not develop on the produce of the Galilee, and an undomesticated animal in the Galilee does not develop on the fruits of Judea.</b> In each region there are conditions uniquely suited to the species that live there (<i>Sefat Emet</i>). Animals wander from region to region within Judea or within the Galilee in search of food, but they do not stray beyond the borders of the land of their habitat.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught:</b> Sabbatical Year <b>fruits that left Eretz Yisrael</b> and went <b>to the Diaspora must be removed</b> in <b>any place that they are</b> located. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> That is not so. Rather, the fruits <b>should return to their place</b> of origin in Eretz Yisrael <b>and be removed</b> there. According to his opinion, removal may not be performed outside Eretz Yisrael <b>because it is stated: “In your land,”</b> indicating that this activity may be performed only in Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you derive</b> from this verse that each of the three lands in Eretz Yisrael has a different halakhic status?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>Read</b> the phrase as both <b>in the land</b> and <b>in your land.</b> It is possible to derive two <i>halakhot</i> from this verse; one <i>halakha</i> is with regard to Eretz Yisrael in general, i.e., one may not perform removal outside of Eretz Yisrael, the land, and one is with regard to the different lands within Eretz Yisrael, your land. <b>Alternatively,</b> the second <i>halakha</i> can be derived <b>from</b> the extraneous words in the expression: <b>“That are in your land,”</b> as the Torah could have sufficed with the phrase: “In your land.”

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Safra left Eretz Yisrael</b> and went <b>to the Diaspora, and he had with him a jug of</b> Sabbatical Year <b>wine. Rav Huna, son</b> of <b>Rav Ika, and Rav Kahana accompanied him. He said to them: Is there</b> anyone <b>who heard</b> from <b>Rabbi Abbahu</b> whether <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar or not?</b> According to his opinion, Rav Safra would be required to return the wine to Eretz Yisrael. <b>Rav Kahana said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Abbahu said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar,</b> and one is required to return and perform removal of the Sabbatical Year produce in Eretz Yisrael. <b>Rav Huna, son</b> of <b>Rav Ika, said</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Abbahu said: The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar,</b> and one may perform removal wherever he may be.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Safra said: Take that principle of Rav Huna in your hand,</b> i.e., rely on it, <b>as he is scrupulous and he learned the <i>halakha</i> well from the mouth of its originator, as</b> the Sage <b>Raḥava</b> from the city of <b>Pumbedita</b> would do. Raḥava was famous for the precision with which he would transmit material that he learned from his teacher. The Gemara cites an example: <b>Raḥava said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said: The Temple Mount was a double colonnade [<i>stav</i>],</b> as there was <b>a colonnade within a colonnade</b> there. Here Raḥava used his teacher’s language in describing the structure of the Temple and the rows of columns. He did not employ the common term used for a colonnade, <i>itztaba</i>, but rather <i>stav</i>, using the language he heard from his teacher. With regard to the case where Rav Safra relied on Rav Huna’s opinion and was lenient, <b>Rav Yosef</b> mockingly <b>read the verse: “My nation ask counsel of their stock, and its staff [<i>maklo</i>] tells to them”</b> (Hosea 4:12) and interpreted it homiletically <b>with regard to</b> Rav Safra: <b>Anyone who is lenient [<i>mekel</i>] tells him</b> the <i>halakha</i>. He listens to the opinion of only the Sage who rules leniently.

### Part 9
The Gemara continues to discuss the <i>halakhot</i> of the Sabbatical Year: <b>Rabbi Elai chopped</b> down a palm tree containing <b>unripe dates of the Sabbatical Year.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How did he do this? The Merciful One says:</b> “And the Sabbatical produce of the land shall be for you to eat” (Leviticus 25:6), from which it is inferred: <b>To eat and not to destroy.</b> It is prohibited to destroy Sabbatical Year produce, and it is permitted only to eat it. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>this</b> restriction <b>applies</b> only in a case <b>where it has reached</b> the status <b>of fruit, but</b> in a case <b>where it has not</b> yet <b>reached</b> the status of <b>fruit, no,</b> it does not apply; <b>didn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said: Those <i>orla</i> date coverings are prohibited</b> like other <i>orla</i> fruit, as their legal status is that of food <b>because they became protection for the fruit?</b> They are not considered part of the tree that may be eaten in the <i>orla</i> years.

### Part 10
The Gemara analyzes this: <b>And when do</b> these coverings serve as <b>protection for the fruit? When the fruit is still young and one</b> nevertheless <b>calls them fruit.</b> Dates are considered fruit even when they are undeveloped. Just as it is prohibited to eat these dates during the <i>orla</i> period, it is similarly prohibited to destroy them during the Sabbatical Year. The Gemara answers: It is <b>Rav Naḥman who stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the individual opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> contrary to the majority opinion. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The <b>grape bud,</b> i.e., a cluster of grapes in its earliest stage, immediately after the flowers drop from the vine, <b>is prohibited</b> due to <i>orla</i> <b>because it is</b> already considered <b>a fruit.</b> However, <b>the Rabbis disagree with him,</b> explaining that fruit at that stage is not considered fruit.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Shimi of Neharde’a strongly objects to this: Do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Yosei with regard to</b> the fruits <b>of all other trees</b> besides grapes, that even in the very first stage of ripening, they are considered fruit? <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>From when may one no</b> longer <b>chop down trees during the Sabbatical</b> Year, as he thereby damages the fruit? <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> In the case of <b>all the trees, from when</b> the blossoms fall and <b>fruit</b> begins to <b>emerge</b> in its earliest stage. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> There is a distinction between different types of trees. <b>The carob trees</b> may not be chopped down <b>from when they</b> form <b>chains</b> of carobs; <b>and the vines,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC