
### Part 1
<b>for the public;</b> all the details of the prohibition of <i>orla</i> apply to a tree planted for public purposes. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> This verse comes <b>to exclude a tree planted for the public,</b> i.e., it is exempt from the laws of <i>orla</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the first <i>tanna</i>? As it is written: “And you shall plant.”</b> That the mitzva applies <b>to an individual is indicated,</b> since planting a tree is ordinarily an individual activity; however, that the mitzva of <i>orla</i> applies to a tree planted <b>for the public is not indicated</b> by the verse. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes “for you”</b> in the plural, <b>to include</b> within this prohibition <b>that which is planted for the public. And Rabbi Yehuda</b> concedes that the phrase <b>“and you shall plant” indicates</b> that <i>orla</i> applies <b>both to</b> a tree planted <b>for the public and for an individual;</b> and the phrase <b>“for you”</b> also <b>indicates</b> that <i>orla</i> applies <b>both to</b> a tree planted for <b>an individual and for the public.</b> If so, then this <b>is one amplificatory expression after another,</b> and there is a principle that <b>one amplificatory expression after another is restrictive.</b> Therefore, the term: “For you” comes to exclude from this prohibition a tree planted for the public.

### Part 3
The Gemara further challenges Rabbi Abbahu’s opinion: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition that a non-priest shall not eat <b><i>teruma</i>, as the Merciful One says: “No stranger shall eat of the sacred food;</b> a tenant of a priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the sacred food” (Leviticus 22:10). <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One</b> may <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i>,</b> such as a joining of Shabbat boundaries, <b>on behalf of a nazirite with wine,</b> even though he may not drink it. <b>And</b> one may establish an <i>eiruv</i> <b>on behalf of an Israelite with <i>teruma</i>,</b> although it is prohibited for him to eat it. Apparently, it is permitted for an Israelite to derive benefit from the <i>teruma</i> even though the verse says: “He shall not eat.” This appears to be a challenge to the opinion of Rabbi Abbahu.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Pappa said: It is different there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, <b>as the verse said:</b> “And <b>your <i>teruma</i></b> shall be reckoned unto you, as though it were the grain of the threshing floor, and as the fullness of the winepress” (Numbers 18:27). The Sages derived from the inclusion of the possessive pronoun “your” that the <i>teruma</i> <b>shall be yours;</b> therefore, it is permitted for an Israelite to benefit from <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>the other</b> Sage, Ḥizkiya, derive from this phrase, as he holds that: “He shall not eat” already indicates that it is permitted to benefit from <i>teruma</i>? The Gemara answers: According to his opinion the phrase: <b>“Your <i>teruma</i>”</b> is referring to all of the <i>teruma</i> <b>of the entire Jewish people.</b> This is common biblical vernacular, and nothing may be derived from it.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues to challenge Rabbi Abbahu’s opinion: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition against <b>the nazirite</b> eating grape products, <b>as the Merciful One says:</b> “All the days of his naziriteship <b>he shall eat nothing</b> that is made of the grapevine, <b>from the seeds to the grape skin”</b> (Numbers 6:4). <b>And we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>One</b> may <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i></b> on behalf of <b>a nazirite with wine</b> even though he may not drink it. Apparently, a nazirite may derive benefit from wine despite the fact that the verse says that he may not drink it. <b>Mar Zutra said: It is different there, as the verse said: “His naziriteship.”</b> He derives from this verse that <b>it shall be his;</b> in other words, the nazirite may continue to own wine and to benefit from it.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi said:</b> This <i>halakha</i> is derived from another source. As the verse says: <b>“He shall be sacred, he shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long”</b> (Numbers 6:5). Rav Ashi reads the verse precisely to indicate that <b>the growth</b> of the nazirite’s hair <b>is sacred</b> and must be burned, <b>but no other element</b> of his naziriteship <b>is sacred.</b> In other words, he may derive benefit from the other elements prohibited to him during his naziriteship, i.e., from grape products. The Gemara challenges: <b>And is it written: No other element</b> of his naziriteship? There is no indication that this statement means that the prohibition against deriving benefit is limited to this one element. <b>Rather, it is clear</b> that the derivation of this <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Mar Zutra.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara continues to challenge Rabbi Abbahu’s opinion: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition of <b>new</b> grain, which was harvested before the bringing of the <i>omer</i> offering, <b>as the Merciful One says: “And you shall eat neither bread, nor parched grain, nor fresh stalks until this day itself,</b> until you have brought the offering of your God; it is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings” (Leviticus 23:14). <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One</b> may <b>harvest</b> grain before the <i>omer</i> <b>as fodder and feed it to his animal.</b> Apparently, one may derive benefit from this grain even though the verse says: “You shall not eat.”

### Part 8
<b>Rav Shemaya said: It is different there, as the verse said: “Your harvest”</b> (Leviticus 23:10), indicating that <b>your harvest will be yours.</b> In other words, one may benefit from it, as it is still considered to be his. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>the other</b> Sage, Ḥizkiya, derive from this phrase? The Gemara answers that according to his opinion, <b>“your harvest”</b> is referring to the harvest <b>of the entire Jewish people.</b> This is common biblical vernacular, and nothing may be derived from it.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges both opinions. <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition against eating <b>creeping animals, as the Merciful One says:</b> “And every creeping thing that swarms upon the earth <b>is a detestable thing; it shall not be eaten”</b> (Leviticus 11:41). <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>If hunters of undomesticated animals, birds, and fish happen to catch non-kosher species</b> that they did not intend to trap, <b>it is permitted for them to sell</b> them <b>to gentiles.</b> Apparently, one may derive benefit from non-kosher species even though the verse says: “It shall not be eaten.” The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there, as the verse said: “For you”</b> (Leviticus 11:10), indicating that <b>they will be yours,</b> that one may derive benefit from them.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that it is permitted to derive benefit from these creeping animals, then <b>even</b> if one intends to catch them it should <b>also</b> be permitted to sell them to gentiles <i>ab initio</i>. However, the mishna indicates that this is prohibited. The Gemara answers: <b>It is different here,</b> in the case of creeping animals, <b>as the verse said: “They shall be”</b> (Leviticus 11:11). It is derived from this that <b>they shall be as they are.</b> In other words, they should remain in their detestable state, and one should stay away from them.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Ḥizkiya, why do I</b> need the verse <b>to write: “It shall not be eaten,”</b> to teach that one may not derive benefit from them, <b>and</b> afterward <b>to say: “For you,” to permit</b> deriving benefit from <b>them? Let the Merciful One not write: “It shall not be eaten,” and it will not need</b> to say: <b>“For you.” Ḥizkiya</b> could have <b>said to you: My reason is also</b> derived <b>from here,</b> as this verse is a central source for my opinion. Since the verse needed to say explicitly: “For you,” it is evident that when the Torah writes only: “It shall not be eaten,” it is indicating that it is prohibited to benefit from the item as well.

### Part 12
The Gemara further challenges the opinions of Ḥizkiya and Rabbi Abbahu: <b>And</b> yet there is the prohibition of <b>leavened bread,</b> as <b>the Merciful One says: “Leavened bread shall not be eaten,”</b> and <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: Be astounded with yourself; how is it prohibited</b> to derive <b>benefit</b> from <b>leavened bread</b> for <b>all seven</b> days? Apparently, he holds that it is permitted for one to derive benefit from leavened bread for all seven days of Passover and certainly afterward. The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there, as the verse said:</b> “<i>Matzot</i> shall be eaten throughout the seven days; and no leavened bread shall be seen with you, <b>neither shall there be leaven seen with you,</b> in all your borders” (Exodus 13:7). The phrase “with you” indicates that <b>it is yours,</b> i.e., it is still considered to be in one’s possession, and it is permitted for him to derive benefit from it.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what do <b>the Rabbis,</b> who say that it is prohibited to derive benefit from leavened bread, learn from the phrase “with you”? The Gemara answers: They derive that <b>you</b> may <b>not see your own</b> leavened bread; <b>however, you</b> may <b>see</b> that <b>of others and</b> that which is consecrated <b>to God</b> but remained in one’s possession. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, say about this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: There are <b>two</b> occurrences of the phrase <b>“with you” written.</b> One indicates that it is permitted to see leavened bread that belongs to a gentile, and the other indicates that one may derive benefit from leavened bread.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>the other</b> Sages, the Rabbis, why is the phrase “with you” written twice? They explain: <b>One</b> is written <b>with regard to a gentile whom he has conquered,</b> i.e., who is under his control. <b>And the other</b> is written <b>with regard to a gentile whom he has not conquered.</b> In either case, one is permitted to keep the gentile’s leavened bread in his possession on Passover. <b>And</b> from where does <b>the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, derive this <i>halakha</i> that one may see even the leavened bread of a gentile who is under his control? He points out that there are <b>three</b> occurrences of the phrase <b>“with you” written. And</b> what do <b>the other</b> Sages, the Rabbis, learn from the extra instance of the phrase “with you”? They learn that it is used <b>once</b> to teach about <b>leaven, and once</b> to teach about <b>leavened bread. And they are</b> both <b>necessary</b> and must be mentioned explicitly, as one cannot derive this principle with regard to leavened bread from leaven or vice versa.

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> this dispute between Ḥizkiya and Rabbi Abbahu with regard to the implication of the phrase: It shall not be eaten, <b>is parallel to a</b> dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> The verse states: “And the fat of the animal carcass, and the fat of that which is torn of beasts, <b>may be used for any other service;</b> but you shall surely not eat of it” (Leviticus 7:24). <b>What</b> does it mean when <b>the verse states: “For any other service”?</b> I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> with regard <b>to the Temple service it should be permitted</b> to use this fat for the following reason: Because fats may generally be offered on the altar, it is as though it is permitted to consume them; therefore, they may be used for other sacred purposes as well. <b>However,</b> I might have thought that with regard <b>to common use it should be prohibited</b> to use them, as the verse states: “You shall surely not eat of it.” Therefore, <b>the verse states: “For any other service,”</b> meaning that its use is permitted in all contexts. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> Although its use is clearly permitted, I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> despite the fact that an animal carcass is impure, with regard <b>to common use</b> its fat <b>should be</b> ritually <b>pure;</b> however, with regard <b>to the Temple service it should be</b> ritually <b>impure.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “For any other service,”</b> meaning that it is considered pure in all contexts.

### Part 17
The Gemara explains their dispute: <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili</b> holds that <b>with regard to purity and impurity no verse is necessary,</b> as there is no reason to assume that the fat of an animal carcass is impure. <b>The verse is necessary to</b> establish the <b>prohibited or permitted</b> status of this fat. <b>And Rabbi Akiva</b> holds that to teach whether this fat is <b>prohibited or permitted no</b> separate <b>verse is necessary; it is necessary</b> to establish its status with regard <b>to ritual purity or impurity.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC