
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer: <b>Or</b> perhaps we can <b>reverse</b> the order of your argument and say the opposite: <b>If,</b> as we know by accepted tradition, <b>sprinkling</b> the purifying water on Shabbat, <b>which is</b> prohibited only <b>due to rabbinic decree, does not override Shabbat,</b> then with regard to <b>slaughter, which is</b> prohibited <b>as a</b> biblically prohibited <b>labor, is it not right that it should not override Shabbat?</b> Therefore, it should be prohibited to slaughter the Paschal lamb when the eve of Passover occurs on Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Eliezer said to him: Akiva,</b> how can you say this? <b>You have</b> thus <b>uprooted what is written in the Torah:</b> “Let the children of Israel offer the Paschal lamb <b>in its appointed time”</b> (Numbers 9:2); the phrase “at its appointed time” indicates that the offering must be brought on that day, <b>whether it is a weekday or Shabbat.</b>

### Part 2
Rabbi Akiva <b>said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer: <b>My teacher, bring me an appointed time</b> stated in the Torah <b>for these</b> tasks, namely, carrying the animal or bringing it from outside the Shabbat limits, <b>like the appointed time</b> stated <b>with respect to slaughter.</b> The Paschal lamb must be slaughtered on the fourteenth of Nisan, but there is no fixed time when the animal must be brought to the Temple, and it is therefore possible to transport it before Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Akiva stated a principle: Any prohibited labor</b> required for the offering of the sacrifice <b>that can be performed on the eve of Shabbat does not override Shabbat; slaughter, which cannot be performed on the eve of Shabbat, overrides Shabbat.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the basic <i>halakha</i> governing the eve of Passover that <b>occurs</b> on Shabbat: <b>This law was forgotten by the sons of Beteira,</b> who were the leaders of their generation. <b>The fourteenth</b> of Nisan <b>once occurred on Shabbat,</b> and <b>they forgot and did not know whether the Paschal lamb overrides Shabbat or not. They said: Is there any person who knows whether the Paschal lamb overrides Shabbat or not? They said to them: There is a certain man</b> in Jerusalem <b>who came up from Babylonia, and Hillel the Babylonian is his name.</b> At one point, <b>he served the two</b> most <b>eminent</b> scholars <b>of the generation, Shemaya and Avtalyon, and</b> he certainly <b>knows whether the Paschal lamb overrides Shabbat or not.</b> The sons of Beteira <b>sent</b> messengers <b>and called for him. They said to him: Do you know whether the Paschal lamb overrides Shabbat or not? He said to them: Have we</b> but <b>one Paschal lamb during the year that overrides Shabbat? Do we not have many more than two hundred Paschal lambs,</b> i.e., sacrifices, <b>during the year that override Shabbat?</b>

### Part 4
<b>They said to him: From where do you</b> know this? <b>He said to them: “Its appointed time” is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb and “its appointed time” is</b> also <b>stated with regard to the daily offering,</b> for the verse says: “Command the children of Israel and say to them, My offering, the provision of My sacrifice made with fire, for a sweet savor to Me, shall you observe to offer Me at its appointed time” (Numbers 28:2). From here we learn that the daily offering is brought even on Shabbat. Thus, the daily morning and afternoon offerings are brought on more than fifty <i>Shabbatot</i> over the course of the year, and two sheep are offered every Shabbat as additional offerings, for a total of more than two hundred sacrifices a year that override Shabbat. <b>Just as</b> the expression <b>“its appointed time,” which is stated with regard to the daily offering,</b> indicates that it <b>overrides Shabbat, so too “its appointed time,” which is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb,</b> indicates that it <b>overrides Shabbat.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And furthermore, it is an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If the daily offering,</b> the neglect of which <b>is not punishable by <i>karet</i>, overrides Shabbat, is it not right that the Paschal lamb,</b> the neglect of which <b>is punishable by <i>karet</i>, should override Shabbat?</b>

### Part 6
After Hillel brought these proofs, <b>they immediately seated him at the head and appointed him <i>Nasi</i> over them, and he expounded the laws of Passover that entire day.</b> In the course of his teaching, <b>he began rebuking them [<i>mekanteran</i>] them with words. He said to them: What caused</b> this to happen <b>to you, that I should come up from Babylonia and become <i>Nasi</i> over you?</b> It was <b>the laziness in you</b> that <b>you did not serve the two</b> most <b>eminent</b> scholars <b>of the generation</b> living in Eretz Yisrael, <b>Shemaya and Avtalyon.</b>

### Part 7
<b>They said to</b> Hillel: <b>Our teacher,</b> if one <b>forgot and did not bring a knife on the eve of Shabbat</b> and cannot slaughter his Paschal lamb, <b>what is</b> the law? Since he could have brought the knife before Shabbat, he cannot bring it on Shabbat; but what should he do in this situation? <b>He said to them: I</b> once <b>heard this <i>halakha</i></b> from my teachers <b>but I have forgotten</b> it. <b>But leave</b> it <b>to the Jewish people; if they are not prophets</b> to whom God has revealed His secrets, <b>they are the sons of prophets,</b> and will certainly do the right thing on their own.

### Part 8
<b>The next day,</b> on Shabbat that was the eve of Passover, <b>one whose Paschal offering was a lamb</b> took the knife and <b>stuck it in its wool;</b> and <b>one whose Paschal offering was a goat,</b> which does not have wool, <b>stuck it between its horns.</b> Hillel <b>saw the incident and remembered the <i>halakha</i></b> that he had once learned <b>and said: This</b> is the tradition <b>I received from the mouths of Shemaya and Avtalyon,</b> meaning that this is in fact the proper course of action. This concludes the text of the <i>baraita</i> and the Gemara will begin to elucidate it.

### Part 9
<b>The Master said</b> above: <b>“Its appointed time” is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb and “its appointed time” is stated with regard to the daily offering. Just as “its appointed time,” which is stated with regard to the daily offering,</b> indicates that it <b>overrides Shabbat, so too “its appointed time,” which is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb,</b> indicates that it <b>overrides Shabbat. And from where do we</b> derive <b>that the daily offering itself overrides Shabbat? If we say because “in its appointed time” is written in its regard, “in its appointed time” is also written with regard to the Paschal lamb.</b> Were it possible to derive from this expression that the sacrifice is offered even on Shabbat, it would not be necessary to derive the law governing the Paschal lamb from a verbal analogy between the daily offering and the Paschal lamb.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> you must conclude that the expression <b>“its appointed time,”</b> which is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb, <b>does not indicate to</b> Hillel that the Torah was so particular about the timing of the Paschal lamb that its slaughter overrides Shabbat. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to the daily offering, you must say that <b>“its appointed time” does not indicate to him</b> that it is brought on Shabbat, and so this expression is not the source of this law. <b>Rather,</b> the law is derived from <b>the verse</b> that <b>states: “The burnt-offering of Shabbat on its Shabbat, beside the continual burnt-offering</b> and its libation” (Numbers 28:10), from which <b>it may be inferred that the daily burnt-offering is brought</b> even <b>on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara raises another question: <b>The Master said</b> in that same <i>baraita</i>: <b>And furthermore, it is an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: If the daily offering,</b> the neglect of which <b>is not punishable by <i>karet</i>, overrides Shabbat, is it not right that the Paschal lamb,</b> the neglect of which <b>is punishable by <i>karet</i>, should override Shabbat?</b> The Gemara points out that <b>there is room to refute</b> the logic of this argument: <b>What</b> is unique about <b>the daily offering</b> that enables it to override Shabbat? <b>That it is frequent,</b> and something that is frequent always takes precedence; <b>and</b> also that it is totally <b>consumed</b> on the altar, unlike the Paschal lamb, most of which is eaten by human beings. The Gemara explains that this is what happened: Hillel <b>first told them the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, but they refuted it</b> and proved that it was not reliable, as explained above; <b>and then he told them the verbal analogy,</b> and a verbal analogy is based on an oral tradition originating from Moses at Sinai and must be accepted.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But since</b> Hillel <b>learned</b> this <b>verbal analogy</b> from his teachers, <b>why do I</b> need <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference? Why did he add a logical argument of his own if he had an explicit verbal tradition that this was the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, he said it for them,</b> to show that they had not sufficiently exerted themselves in clarifying this <i>halakha</i>: <b>Granted, you did not learn the verbal analogy</b> on your own, because you acted according to the principle that <b>one may not expound a verbal analogy on one’s own.</b> Since there is no limit to the laws that one can extract using this method of derivation, such a derivation is only legitimate if it has been transmitted as part of the oral tradition, and apparently they did not learn this verbal analogy from their teachers. <b>But an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, <b>which one can derive on one’s own, you should have derived</b> and you would then have known how to resolve this question. <b>They said to him: It is a faulty <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as we have shown that it can be easily refuted.

### Part 13
<b>The Master said</b> further in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The next day, one whose Paschal offering was a lamb stuck</b> the knife <b>in its wool,</b> and one whose Paschal offering was a <b>goat stuck it between its horns</b> so as to avoid carrying the knife on Shabbat.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC