
### Part 1
One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> a substitute Paschal lamb that was found <b>before</b> the slaughter of the replacement <b>Paschal lamb</b> should have the <b>same</b> status, and it should be permitted to sacrifice such a lamb as a peace-offering. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “It,”</b> to emphasize that <b>it,</b> a valid Paschal lamb, <b>is sacrificed, and the substitute of a Paschal lamb is not sacrificed.</b>

### Part 2
<b>What are the circumstances</b> of the case under discussion? <b>If we say</b> it is a case in which the lamb <b>is found before the slaughter and one performed the substitution before the slaughter</b> of the replacement, it is <b>obvious; why do I</b> need <b>a</b> specific <b>verse</b> to teach this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rather, is it not</b> addressing a case in which the original lamb <b>was found before the slaughter and one performed the substitution after the slaughter</b> of the replacement, and the <i>baraita</i> ruled that the substitute lamb may not be sacrificed as a peace-offering, in opposition to the ruling of Rava? The Gemara concludes that <b>the refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rava is</b> indeed <b>a conclusive refutation,</b> and his opinion is rejected according to this version.

### Part 3
<b>Shmuel stated</b> a principle pertaining to the <i>halakhot</i> of offerings: With regard to <b>any</b> animal that was consecrated as an offering and becomes unfit such <b>that a sin-offering</b> in its condition would be placed in isolation for it to <b>die,</b> meaning that it would be caused to die, if it is <b>a Paschal lamb</b> in that condition <b>it is sacrificed as a peace-offering. And</b> with regard to <b>any</b> animal that becomes unfit such <b>that a sin-offering</b> in its condition <b>is left to graze</b> until it develops a blemish, if it is <b>a Paschal lamb it is also left to graze. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A Paschal lamb is sacrificed as a peace-offering only when</b> the lost lamb <b>was found after the slaughter</b> of the replacement Paschal lamb, <b>but</b> if it was found <b>before the slaughter,</b> there is <b>no</b> instance in which it is brought as a peace-offering.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef strongly objects to</b> Shmuel’s statement: <b>Is that an</b> established <b>principle</b> in every possible circumstance? <b>Isn’t</b> there the case of <b>a sin-offering whose</b> first <b>year has passed</b> and is therefore no longer fit to be offered as a sin-offering, <b>which goes to graze</b> until it develops a blemish? <b>As Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: A sin-offering whose</b> first <b>year has passed, it is viewed as though it were standing in a cemetery</b> where a priest may not enter in order to retrieve it; therefore, <b>it grazes</b> until it develops a blemish. The animal is then sold and its sanctity transferred to the proceeds of the sale, which are used to purchase an animal for a peace-offering.

### Part 5
<b>However, a Paschal lamb in a case like this is sacrificed as a peace-offering, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The word <b>“lamb”</b> comes <b>to include the Paschal lamb</b> in the requirement that <b>the fat tail</b> be sacrificed on the altar. <b>When it says: “If</b> he brings <b>a lamb,”</b> it comes <b>to include</b> a lamb consecrated as <b>a Paschal lamb whose</b> first <b>year has passed and peace-offerings that come due to a Paschal lamb.</b> These are considered peace-offerings rather than Paschal lambs, and they are included <b>in all the laws of peace-offerings</b> in <b>that they require leaning and libations and the waving of the breast and thigh. When it says</b> later: <b>“And if</b> his offering is a <b>she-goat”</b> (Leviticus 3:12), <b>it interrupted the</b> previous <b>matter</b> of the <i>halakhot</i> of sheep brought as peace-offerings and began a new discussion <b>in order to teach that the</b> offering of a <b>she-goat does not require</b> the <b>fat tail</b> to be offered on the altar. This <i>baraita</i> teaches that an animal consecrated as a Paschal lamb whose first year has passed is offered as a peace-offering and is not left to graze until it develops a blemish.

### Part 6
<b>He said to him: When Shmuel stated</b> his principle, it was specifically <b>with regard to</b> Paschal lambs <b>that were lost; he did not state</b> his principle <b>with regard to</b> Paschal lambs <b>that were deferred</b> because they had become unfit for use.

### Part 7
The Gemara continues its line of questioning: With regard to <b>lost</b> sacrifices <b>do you find</b> Shmuel’s principle to be correct? <b>But</b> what about the case of a sin-offering <b>that was</b> already <b>lost at the time of the separation</b> of a replacement to take its place, and the original animal was found before the second was sacrificed? <b>According to the Rabbis,</b> this animal <b>goes for grazing, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>If one separated his sin-offering and it was lost, and he separated another in its place and the first was found, and therefore both are available,</b> then <b>one of them,</b> whichever he chooses, <b>is sacrificed,</b> as he may bring only one offering, <b>and the second shall</b> be caused to <b>die;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: A sin-offering is</b> caused to <b>die only when it is found after the owners gained atonement</b> through another offering. <b>Therefore,</b> according to the Rabbis, if the animal was found <b>before the owners gained atonement, it grazes.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And yet with regard to the Paschal lamb,</b> in a situation <b>where it is found after midday before the slaughter, it is sacrificed as a peace-offering.</b> Consequently, Shmuel’s principle is not correct even with regard to offerings that were lost. The Gemara answers: <b>Shmuel holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said</b> that <b>a lost</b> sin-offering is put into isolation and <b>goes to</b> its <b>death.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But every lost</b> sin-offering is placed in isolation and left to <b>die</b> according <b>to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>whereas with regard to the Paschal lamb, when it was lost before midday and</b> then <b>found before midday</b> but after a replacement animal had been separated, <b>it grazes.</b> The Gemara responds: A Paschal lamb lost <b>before midday is not</b> considered <b>lost, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava, as Rava said:</b> A sin-offering <b>lost at night</b> and found by the morning <b>is not called lost,</b> and the <i>halakhot</i> of lost sin-offerings do not apply because a sin-offering cannot be sacrificed at night in any case. Similarly, if a Paschal lamb is lost before midday on the eve of Passover, since it could not be sacrificed at that time, it does not attain the status of a lost sacrifice even if one separates a replacement. In such a case, even Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi would concede that the original animal would be left to graze rather than being left to die.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, under <b>what circumstances</b> can the case of a sin-offering that is left to <b>graze be found?</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that every lost sin-offering is left to die and none is left to graze; therefore, there is no significance to Shmuel’s ruling with regard to any sin-offering that is left to graze.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC