
### Part 1
<b>this <i>halakha</i> in the name of Rav Yosef with the following formulation: Everyone agrees that one</b> may <b>not redeem consecrated items in order to feed them to dogs. And here, they disagree</b> with regard to the question of whether <b>an item that can cause a financial</b> loss <b>is considered to be of monetary</b> value. The Sages disagree about the status of an object that does not have any present value but if lost or destroyed will cause the owner financial loss. In other words, they disagree as to whether such an item is considered to have inherent value. This dispute can be applied to our discussion of the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, who states that one is permitted to eat leavened bread after Passover even if it was owned by a Jew.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains: <b>The one who said</b> that <b>he misused</b> consecrated property by using consecrated leavened bread during Passover <b>holds that an item that can cause a financial</b> loss <b>is considered to be of monetary</b> value. Although the leavened bread is currently worthless, it can be eaten after Passover and will have some value at that time. It is therefore considered to have monetary value now, such that one who uses it is guilty of misuse of consecrated items. <b>And the one who said</b> that <b>he did not misuse</b> consecrated property <b>holds</b> that <b>an item that can cause a financial</b> loss <b>is not considered to be of monetary</b> value. Therefore, since the leavened bread is currently worthless, one who uses it would not be guilty of misuse of consecrated property.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov</b> explains the issue as follows: <b>Everyone agrees that an item that can cause a financial</b> loss <b>is considered to be of monetary</b> value, <b>and here they disagree with regard to</b> the same point of <b>dispute as Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon.</b> The opinion of <b>the one who said</b> that <b>he did not misuse</b> consecrated items is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who maintains that one may not derive benefit from leavened bread that was owned by a Jew during Passover. Thus, the consecrated leavened bread is worthless, since it will remain prohibited after Passover as well. <b>And the one who said</b> that <b>he misused</b> consecrated items is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that one may derive benefit from leavened bread after the conclusion of Passover even if it was owned by a Jew during Passover. Therefore, the consecrated leavened bread is considered to be of monetary value, and one who uses it is guilty of misuse of consecrated items.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a challenge: <b>But isn’t it Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov who said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda derives</b> the details of the prohibition against <b>eating leaven from</b> the details of the prohibition against <b>seeing leaven?</b> Just as it is permitted to see the leavened bread of a gentile or of God, so too, it is permitted to eat this type of leavened bread after Passover. Therefore, consecrated leavened bread would be permitted after Passover even according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>Rather,</b> it should be understood that <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov retracted that</b> explanation of Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion, and agrees with Rava, who explains that Rabbi Yehuda maintains that any leavened bread in existence during Passover is forbidden afterward.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi said that everyone</b> agrees <b>that one does not redeem</b> consecrated property in order to feed it to dogs, <b>and</b> similarly, everyone agrees that <b>an item that can cause a financial</b> loss <b>is not considered to be of monetary</b> value. <b>And here,</b> in this <i>baraita</i>, <b>they disagree with regard to</b> the same point of <b>dispute as</b> do <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili and the Rabbis.</b> The opinion of <b>the one who said</b> that <b>he misused</b> consecrated items by eating the consecrated leavened bread is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> who maintains that one may derive benefit from leavened bread that belongs to a Jew even during the seven days of Passover. Therefore, since the leavened bread has some value, one is guilty of misuse of consecrated items by using it. <b>And</b> the opinion of <b>the one who said</b> that <b>he did not misuse</b> consecrated items is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that one may not derive benefit from leavened bread during Passover, thus rendering the consecrated leavened bread worthless. Although it may have some value after Passover, an item that can cause a financial loss is not considered to be of monetary value, and therefore it is presently considered to be worthless.

### Part 6
<b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>leavened bread</b> that becomes mixed with permitted food, the following distinction applies. <b>During its time</b> of prohibition, i.e., during the seven days of Passover, <b>leavened bread is forbidden whether</b> it is mixed <b>with its own type,</b> for example, when leavened flour is mixed with <i>matza</i> flour or when unleavened <i>matza</i> is mixed with leavened <i>matza</i>, <b>or</b> it is mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance. <b>Not during its time</b> of prohibition, but rather after Passover, if it is mixed <b>with its own type</b> of substance, then <b>it is prohibited.</b> However, if it is mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, then <b>it is permitted.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>With what are we dealing? If you say that</b> there is enough leavened bread such that it <b>gives flavor</b> to the mixture, i.e., at least one part in sixty, then if it is <b>not during its time</b> and mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, why <b>is it permitted? Doesn’t it give flavor</b> to the mixture, and, as one who eats this mixture will distinguish the forbidden flavor, the entire mixture is forbidden?

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> this case is dealing <b>with any amount,</b> a minimal quantity of leavened bread that has been mixed with a large quantity of matza. The <i>halakha</i> in this case is that <b>leavened bread during its time</b> of prohibition <b>is forbidden, whether</b> it is mixed <b>with its own type</b> of substance <b>or with another type</b> of substance. This statement of <b>Rav</b> conforms <b>to his</b> line <b>of reasoning</b> as follows: <b>As</b> it is <b>Rav and Shmuel who both say:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> foods <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that become mixed with permitted foods, if the permitted food is of <b>its own type,</b> such that it is impossible to distinguish one from another, then even <b>any amount</b> of the prohibited substance renders the entire mixture prohibited. However, if the forbidden food was mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, then the mixture becomes prohibited only when there is enough of the forbidden item to <b>give flavor</b> to the mixture.

### Part 9
<b>Rav rendered an</b> additional <b>decree</b> prohibiting <b>leavened bread during its time</b> of prohibition, when that leavened bread is mixed with <b>another type</b> of food even when only a small bit of it is mixed in, <b>due to</b> the prohibition against consuming a comparable mixture <b>with its own type</b> of substance. Owing to the severity of the prohibition against consuming leavened bread during Passover, Rav thought it necessary to render this additional decree. Rav’s statement that leavened bread <b>is forbidden not during its time,</b> when it is mixed <b>with its own type</b> of substance, <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who says that according to the Torah, leavened bread is forbidden even after Passover, and thus even a mixture of it is prohibited.

### Part 10
<b>But</b> if it is mixed with <b>another type</b> of substance <b>it is permitted, because</b> there is <b>no</b> need to go <b>so far</b> as <b>to render a decree with regard to</b> a mixture with <b>another type</b> of substance <b>not during its time, due to</b> the prohibition of a mixture with <b>the same type</b> of substance. Rav maintains that when any prohibited item falls into a mixture of a different type of substance, it is nullified, unless it gives flavor to the new mixture. Therefore, the same principle should apply to leavened bread after Passover, and a small amount should be nullified once the more serious prohibition no longer applies to it.

### Part 11
In contrast, <b>Shmuel said</b> that if <b>leavened bread</b> becomes mixed with permitted food <b>during its time</b> of prohibition, then the following distinction applies: If it becomes mixed <b>with its own type</b> of food <b>it is forbidden,</b> but if it becomes mixed <b>with another type</b> of food <b>it is permitted. If it</b> becomes mixed together <b>not during its time</b> of prohibition, but after Passover, then regardless <b>of whether</b> it becomes mixed <b>with its own type or with another type</b> of substance, <b>it is permitted.</b> With regard to the statement that <b>leavened bread</b> mixed <b>with the same type</b> of substance <b>during its time</b> of prohibition <b>is forbidden, Shmuel</b> conforms <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> below: <b>As</b> it is <b>Rav and Shmuel who both say:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> foods <b>prohibited by the Torah</b> that become mixed with permitted foods, if the permitted food is of <b>its own type,</b> such that it is impossible to distinguish one from another, then even <b>any amount</b> of the prohibited substance renders the entire mixture prohibited. However, if the prohibited food is mixed <b>with another type</b> of substance, then the mixture becomes prohibited only when there is enough of the forbidden item to <b>give flavor</b> to the mixture.

### Part 12
And Shmuel <b>did not render a decree</b> prohibiting a mixture <b>with another type</b> of substance, <b>due to</b> the prohibition against consuming a mixture with <b>its same type.</b> However, <b>not during its time,</b> but rather after Passover, the mixture <b>is permitted,</b> regardless of <b>whether</b> it was mixed <b>with its own type or with another type.</b> And this statement is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who states that after Passover one may derive benefit from leavened bread that was owned by a Jew during Passover.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>leavened bread</b> that falls into a mixture <b>during its time</b> of prohibition, <b>whether</b> it is mixed <b>with its own type</b> of substance <b>or another type</b> of substance, <b>it becomes prohibited only when</b> there is enough of the forbidden item to <b>give flavor</b> to the mixture. However, <b>not during its time</b> of prohibition, but rather after Passover, <b>it is</b> always <b>permitted,</b> regardless <b>of whether</b> it falls into a mixture <b>of its own type</b> of substance <b>or</b> whether it falls into a mixture of <b>another type</b> of substance.

### Part 14
The Gemara explains this position: With regard to the statement that <b>leavened bread</b> that falls into a mixture <b>during its time</b> of prohibition, <b>whether with its own type</b> of food <b>or with another type</b> of food, then it is prohibited only <b>when it gives flavor</b> to the mixture, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> conforms <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> below. <b>As</b> it is <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish who both say:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> foods <b>forbidden by the Torah</b> that fall into a mixture, <b>whether of its own type</b> of food <b>or another type</b> of food, the mixture <b>is prohibited when</b> there is enough of the forbidden item <b>to give flavor</b> to the mixture. If less than this amount falls into the mixture, it is nullified by the large majority of permitted food. Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement that <b>not during its time</b> of prohibition, but rather after Passover, <b>it is permitted,</b> regardless of <b>whether</b> it falls into a mixture <b>of its own type</b> of food <b>or</b> into a mixture of <b>another type</b> of food, is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that leavened bread owned by a Jew during Passover is not prohibited afterward.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC