
### Part 1
<b>According to Rav Yehuda’s</b> opinion it is also <b>not difficult,</b> because in his opinion <b>the Torah</b> itself <b>deferred</b> the obligation of <b>one who is ritually impure</b> through contact with a dead <b>creeping animal</b> to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>as it is written: “If any man of you or of your generations shall be ritually impure due to a dead body”</b> (Numbers 9:10). <b>Are we not dealing</b> even with a situation in which <b>his seventh</b> day of purification <b>occurs on Passover eve,</b> such that he can be ritually pure by nightfall and therefore he has the same status on that seventh day as one who became impure due to contact with a dead creeping animal? <b>And nonetheless the Torah stated</b> that <b>his</b> obligation <b>shall be deferred.</b> This teaches that anyone who is ritually impure at the time of the slaughtering has his obligation deferred to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, even if he would be able to immerse and become pure in time to eat the offering on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> with the rest of the Jewish people.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>one was standing outside the</b> city <b>of Modi’im and was able to enter</b> Jerusalem <b>on horses or mules</b> but not by walking, I <b>might</b> have thought <b>he would be liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i> for failing to come to Jerusalem and offer the Paschal lamb; <b>therefore, the verse states: “And is not on a journey”</b> (Numbers 9:13). <b>This</b> person <b>was on a</b> distant <b>journey</b> and is therefore exempt.

### Part 3
On the other hand, if <b>one was standing closer</b> to Jerusalem <b>than Modi’im</b> but <b>was not able to enter due to the camels and carriages that are</b> carrying his family and <b>delaying him,</b> I <b>might</b> have thought <b>he would not be liable</b> for failing to offer the Paschal lamb because he is trying to enter; <b>therefore, the verse states: “And was not on a journey,” and</b> this person <b>was not on a</b> distant <b>journey</b> and is therefore liable. This person could have dismounted and come to Jerusalem on foot, but he wanted to bring his family with him in a carriage and was consequently delayed. One’s liability is determined based on his distance from Jerusalem.

### Part 4
The discussion above pertaining to the distance that an average person can walk in a day is based on the assumption that he walks five <i>mil</i> between dawn and sunrise. The Gemara brings support for this assumption. <b>Rava said: The</b> size of the <b>world is six thousand parasangs, and the thickness of the firmament is one thousand parasangs. One</b> of these measurements with regard to the size of the world <b>is a tradition, and one</b> of the measurements <b>is</b> based upon Rava’s own <b>reasoning.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: Rava <b>holds like that</b> statement <b>which Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: How far can an average person walk in a day?</b> One can walk <b>ten parasangs,</b> which are forty <i>mil</i>. This is explained: <b>From dawn until sunrise</b> one can walk a distance of <b>five <i>mil</i>; from sunset until the emergence of the stars</b> one can walk another <b>five <i>mil</i>.</b> Therefore, <b>it is found</b> that <b>the thickness of the firmament is one-sixth</b> of the distance that the sun travels during <b>the day.</b> Between sunrise and sunset, the sun travels a distance of six thousand parasangs during the amount of time an average person can walk thirty <i>mil</i>. During the dawn and twilight periods in the morning and evening, when the sun passes through the thickness of the firmament, an average person can walk five <i>mil</i>, which is one-sixth of the distance he can walk between sunrise and sunset. Consequently, during dawn and twilight the sun must also travel one-sixth of the distance it travels between sunrise and sunset, i.e., one thousand parasangs, which is the thickness of the firmament.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The thickness of the firmament is</b> only <b>one-tenth</b> of the distance that the sun travels during <b>the day. Know</b> that this is true because <b>how far can an average person walk in a day</b> between dawn and the emergence of the stars? One can walk <b>ten parasangs,</b> which are forty <i>mil</i>, <b>and from dawn until sunrise</b> one can walk only <b>four <i>mil</i>,</b> which are one parasang. Therefore, <b>it is found that the thickness of the firmament is</b> only <b>one-tenth</b> of the distance that the sun travels during <b>the day.</b> This is <b>a refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rava.</b> Similarly, it is <b>a refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Ulla,</b> who holds that an average person can walk fifteen <i>mil</i> in half a day, whereas Rabbi Yehuda holds that the average person can walk sixteen <i>mil</i> in half a day. The Gemara concludes: <b>It is</b> indeed <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this <b>will be a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of Rabba bar bar Ḥana, citing <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> with regard to how far an average person can walk in a day. The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yoḥanan could have <b>said to you: I am speaking</b> about the total distance that an average person can walk <b>in an</b> entire <b>day,</b> but I never specified the distance one can walk during different parts of the day. <b>And it was the Sages</b> Ulla and Rava who <b>erred</b> in interpreting my opinion by saying that one can walk five <i>mil</i> and not four during each intermediate period, <b>because</b> when <b>they calculated</b> five <i>mil</i> before sunrise and after sunset they included the distance walked by people who set out <b>earlier</b> in the morning, before dawn, and by those who continued walking after nightfall.

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say it is a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> who proved from biblical verses that the distance from Sodom to Zoar is five <i>mil</i>. The angels and Lot walked that distance between dawn and sunrise, which implies that it is only four <i>mil</i>. The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> that verse states: “The angels hastened Lot,” which indicates that they traveled very quickly. Therefore, <b>hastened is different;</b> because they hurried, they traveled five <i>mil</i> in the time one would normally walk four <i>mil</i>.

### Part 9
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a challenge from a <i>baraita</i> to the previous opinion with regard to the size of the world: The size of <b>Egypt was four hundred parasangs by four hundred parasangs, and Egypt is one-sixtieth</b> of the size <b>of Cush, and Cush is one-sixtieth of the world, and the world is one-sixtieth</b> the size <b>of the Garden</b> of Eden, <b>and the Garden</b> of Eden <b>is one-sixtieth of Eden, and Eden is one sixtieth</b> of the size <b>of Gehenna.</b> Therefore, <b>it is found that the entire world is like a pot cover,</b> which is a small part of the total size of the pot, compared <b>to Gehenna.</b> In any event, based upon the sizes of Egypt and Cush, it is apparent that the entire world is larger than six thousand parasangs. This is indeed a <b>conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another challenge: One of the Sages of <b>the school of Eliyahu taught</b> that <b>Rabbi Natan says: The entire settlement,</b> the area of the world that is inhabited, <b>sits under one star. Know</b> that this is correct because when <b>a person focuses his eye on one star,</b> he can <b>travel east</b> as far as he wishes within the settled part of the world and the star <b>remains opposite him</b> in the same place, and he can travel <b>in the four directions of the world</b> and the star <b>remains</b> in place <b>opposite him. By inference, the entire settlement</b> of the world <b>rests under one star;</b> and since so many stars are visible and each one covers an area of the world comparable in size to the entire settled portion of the world, it must be that the world is larger than six thousand parasangs. The Gemara comments that this is indeed <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Rava’s opinion.

### Part 11
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another challenge from another <i>baraita</i>, which teaches that the constellation <b>Ursa Major is in the north and</b> the constellation <b>Scorpio is in the south, and the entire settlement sits between Ursa Major and Scorpio,</b> as the relative positions of these two constellations appear to be the same from any location in the settled areas of the world. The ratio of <b>the entire settlement</b> to the world as a whole is comparable to <b>only one hour in a day, as the sun enters</b> the sky above <b>the settlement</b> for <b>only one hour a day</b> while the rest of the day it is outside the settlement.

### Part 12
<b>Know</b> that this is correct because <b>at five</b> hours into the day <b>the sun is</b> still <b>in the east, and at seven</b> hours <b>the sun is in the west.</b> During the second <b>half of</b> the <b>sixth</b> hour <b>and</b> the first <b>half of</b> the <b>seventh</b> hour <b>the sun is positioned on top of everyone,</b> as it is in the middle of the sky in every inhabited area during this time. Apparently, the sun travels over the inhabited parts of the world in a single hour while the rest of the day it travels over the uninhabited parts. Therefore, the entire settled portion of the world is equal to one-twelfth of the world. It was established that the settled part of the world itself is several parasangs, so the entire world must be larger than six thousand parasangs. This also serves as <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Rava’s opinion.

### Part 13
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another challenge, <b>as Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said: What response did the Divine Voice answer to that wicked man,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, <b>when he said: “I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the Most High”</b> (Isaiah 14:14)? <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said to him: Wicked man, son of a wicked man,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC