
### Part 1
<b>the garment of Adam, the first</b> man, was created at this time, as it is stated: “And God made for Adam and his wife garments of skins and clothed them” (Genesis 3:21).

### Part 2
Apropos the list of items created during twilight, the Gemara cites that <b>the Sages taught: Seven matters are concealed from people,</b> and <b>they are:</b> The <b>day of death; and the day of consolation</b> from one’s concerns; <b>the profundity of justice,</b> ascertaining the truth in certain disputes; <b>and a person</b> also <b>does not know what is in the heart of another; and a person does not know in what</b> way he <b>will earn a profit;</b> and one does not know <b>when the monarchy of the house of David will be restored</b> to Israel; <b>and when the wicked</b> Roman <b>monarchy will cease</b> to exist.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> on a similar note: The thoughts of <b>three matters arose in</b> God’s <b>mind to be created, and if they did not arise</b> in His thoughts, <b>by right</b> they should have <b>arisen</b> in His thoughts, as they are fundamental to the existence of the world. God created a world in which <b>a corpse rots,</b> so that it requires burial and the family does not continually suffer by seeing the corpse; <b>that the deceased are forgotten from the heart,</b> and the sense of pain and loss diminishes with time; <b>and that grain will rot</b> so that it cannot be hoarded forever, and therefore one must sell his produce. <b>And some say:</b> He instituted <b>that currency will circulate</b> so that people will accept money as a method of payment.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna continues the previous discussion of customs. In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to perform labor on the Ninth of Av, one performs</b> labor. In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to perform labor,</b> one does <b>not perform</b> labor. <b>And in all places Torah scholars are idle</b> and do not perform labor on the Ninth of Av, due to the mourning over the Temple’s destruction. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> With regard to the Ninth of Av, <b>a person should always conduct himself</b> as <b>a Torah scholar</b> and refrain from performing labor.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Shmuel said: The only communal fast in Babylonia</b> during which all the stringencies of a communal fast are observed <b>is the Ninth of Av.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say,</b> based on the parallel he drew between them, <b>that Shmuel holds</b> that <b>the Ninth of Av</b> is as stringent as communal fast days, in that <b>during twilight</b> on the Ninth of Av all activities prohibited on the Ninth of Av are <b>prohibited? But didn’t Shmuel say:</b> During <b>twilight of the Ninth of Av</b> all activities prohibited on the Ninth of Av are <b>permitted,</b> and the Sages did not decree any prohibitions during this time? <b>And if you say that Shmuel holds:</b> With regard to <b>every communal fast, during twilight</b> those activities considered to be afflictions are <b>permitted, didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna with regard to a public fast day: <b>One may eat and drink while it is still day?</b> The Gemara analyzes this statement: <b>What</b> does the expression: While it is still day, come <b>to exclude? What, isn’t it to exclude twilight</b> of a communal fast day, when these activities are prohibited? The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is <b>to exclude</b> the time <b>after dark,</b> when these afflictions are certainly in effect.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> Shmuel’s opinion: <b>The only</b> difference <b>between the Ninth of Av and Yom Kippur is that</b> with regard to <b>this,</b> Yom Kippur, <b>its uncertainty is prohibited,</b> as eating and drinking on Yom Kippur is prohibited by Torah law, <b>whereas</b> with regard to that, the Ninth of Av, <b>its uncertainty</b> is <b>permitted,</b> as the afflictions of the Ninth of Av are rabbinic decrees.

### Part 7
The Gemara explains the support for Shmuel’s opinion: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the expression: With regard to that, the Ninth of Av, <b>its uncertainty</b> is <b>permitted?</b> Is it <b>not</b> referring to <b>twilight,</b> with regard to which there is uncertainty whether it is day or night? Apparently, it is permitted to eat during twilight on the Ninth of Av. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is <b>as Rav Sheisha, son</b> of <b>Rav Idi, said</b> in a different context: It is referring to uncertainty with regard to the <b>determination of the</b> first day of the new <b>month,</b> which would require observance of the Festival for two days. <b>Here, too,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to uncertainty with regard to <b>determination of</b> the first day of the new <b>month.</b> Since the Ninth of Av is a fast of rabbinic origin, there is no requirement to observe two days.

### Part 8
<b>Rava taught: Pregnant women and nursing women fast and complete</b> the fast <b>on</b> the Ninth of Av <b>in the manner that they fast and complete</b> the fast <b>on Yom Kippur, and</b> during <b>twilight on</b> the Ninth of Av <b>it is prohibited</b> to eat or drink. <b>And they likewise said</b> so <b>in the name</b> of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> actually <b>say that?</b> Didn’t <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan say: The Ninth of Av is not like a communal fast</b> decreed to pray for rain? <b>What, isn’t it</b> referring to the matter of <b>twilight?</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that it is permitted to eat and drink during twilight on the Ninth of Av. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is referring to performing <b>labor,</b> which is prohibited on the Ninth of Av, in contrast to other fasts.

### Part 9
The Gemara expresses surprise: It is referring to performing <b>labor? We</b> already <b>learned</b> explicitly in the mishna: In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to perform labor on the Ninth of Av, one performs</b> labor; <b>in a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to perform</b> labor, <b>one does not perform</b> labor. Apparently, the prohibition against performing labor on the Ninth of Av depends on local custom and is not an outright prohibition. <b>And even Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel only said</b> that one may conduct himself as a Torah scholar and refrain from performing labor <b>because when one sits and does not perform</b> labor, <b>it does not appear as presumptuousness</b> on his part. It does not create the impression that he actually considers himself a Torah scholar because others may simply think that he has no work to do. <b>However,</b> in terms of <b>prohibiting</b> the performance of labor, <b>he does not prohibit</b> performing labor on the Ninth of Av.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning of the expression: The Ninth of Av <b>is not like a communal fast?</b> It was stated with regard to <b>the closing prayer.</b> On a communal fast day there are four prayers, and on Yom Kippur there are five prayers, but on the Ninth of Av there are only three prayers, like an ordinary weekday. <b>But didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say: If only a person would continue to pray throughout the entire day?</b> This indicates that according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, a person may recite additional prayers if he so chooses.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> on a communal fast day, it is <b>a requirement</b> to recite four prayers; <b>here,</b> on the Ninth of Av, reciting additional prayers is <b>optional</b> according to Rabbi Yoḥanan. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the expression: The Ninth of Av <b>is not like a communal fast?</b> It is with regard to the <b>twenty-four</b> blessings that are recited on a communal fast, as six blessings were added to the eighteen blessings of the daily <i>Amida</i> prayer. On the Ninth of Av one recites only the standard eighteen blessings.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Pappa said: What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: The Ninth of Av <b>is not like a communal fast?</b> It comes to teach a stringency. There are different types of communal fasts for rain. The first three fasts are the least stringent; the next three are more stringent; and the final seven fasts are the most stringent of all. The statement teaches that the Ninth of Av <b>is not</b> like the <b>first</b> fast days, which are more lenient in several respects; for example, they do not begin during twilight. <b>Rather, it is like the final</b> fast days, when eating and performing labor are <b>prohibited</b> during twilight.

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection:</b> Didn’t we already learn that <b>the only</b> difference <b>between the Ninth of Av and Yom Kippur is that</b> with regard to <b>this,</b> Yom Kippur, <b>its uncertainty</b> is <b>prohibited,</b> because eating and drinking on Yom Kippur are prohibited by Torah law, <b>whereas</b> with regard to that, the Ninth of Av, <b>its uncertainty</b> is <b>permitted? What</b> is the meaning of the expression referring to the Ninth of Av: <b>Its uncertainty</b> is <b>permitted?</b> Is it <b>not</b> referring to <b>its twilight,</b> contrary to the statement of Rav Pappa? The Gemara rejects this. <b>Rav Sheisha, son</b> of <b>Rav Idi, said</b> in a different context: <b>No.</b> It is uncertainty with regard to the <b>determination of the</b> first day of the new <b>month.</b> There is no requirement to observe a second day of the Ninth of Av. By inference, with regard <b>to all</b> other <b>matters this and that are equal.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara comments: This statement <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar said:</b> It is <b>prohibited for a person to extend his finger into water on the Ninth of Av, just as it is prohibited</b> for him <b>to extend his finger into water on Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara <b>raises an objection: The only</b> difference <b>between the Ninth of Av and a communal fast is that</b> on <b>this</b> day, a communal fast, <b>performance of labor is prohibited, and on that</b> day, the Ninth of Av, <b>performance of labor is permitted in a place where</b> people <b>are accustomed</b> to perform labor. By inference, with regard to <b>all</b> other <b>matters this and that are equal. However, with regard to a communal fast, it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>bathing is prohibited, they said</b> it <b>only</b> with regard to washing <b>one’s entire body, but</b> with regard to washing <b>one’s face, one’s hands, and one’s feet</b> in increments, the Sages did <b>not</b> say that it was prohibited. Apparently, with respect to washing, the Rabbis were stricter with regard to the Ninth of Av than they were with regard to a communal fast.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC