
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>What, is it not that they disagree about this,</b> the following issue? <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili holds: “You shall not eat” indicates both the prohibition of eating and the prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit;</b> therefore, one may not derive benefit from an animal carcass. <b>And when the verse came</b> and said: “For any other service,” <b>it came to permit</b> one to derive <b>benefit</b> from <b>an animal carcass. And Rabbi Akiva holds: “You shall not eat” indicates</b> that there is only <b>a prohibition of eating; it does not indicate a prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit.</b> Therefore, no verse is necessary to learn that it is permitted to derive benefit from an animal carcass. <b>When the verse came</b> and said: “For any other service,” <b>it came</b> to teach about the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>ritual purity and impurity.</b> Apparently, there is a tannaitic dispute about the meaning of the words: “You shall not eat.”

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this assumption. <b>No,</b> it is possible to say <b>that everyone</b> holds that <b>“You shall not eat” indicates both a prohibition of eating and a prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit. And here, they disagree about this: Rabbi Yosei HaGelili holds that when it was permitted</b> to derive benefit from <b>an animal carcass,</b> the carcass itself <b>was permitted;</b> however, <b>its fat and its sinews were not permitted. And the</b> phrase “for any other service” in the <b>verse is necessary to permit</b> one to derive <b>benefit</b> from this fat. However, <b>Rabbi Akiva holds: When it was permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from an animal carcass, it was also permitted</b> to derive benefit from <b>its fat and sinews.</b> Therefore, the phrase “for any other service” in <b>the verse is necessary for</b> the issue of <b>purity and impurity.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, we find that the Merciful One</b> explicitly <b>permits</b> one to derive <b>benefit from fat; however, let us say</b> that <b>the sinew</b> of the sciatic nerve <b>is prohibited.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>it is indeed so that it is prohibited</b> to derive benefit from the sciatic nerve. And <b>if you wish, say</b> instead that one is permitted to derive benefit from the sciatic nerve, and Rabbi Yosei HaGelili <b>derives that</b> the sciatic nerve is permitted <b>through</b> an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If</b> with regard to forbidden <b>fat, for which one is punished with <i>karet</i></b> if he eats it intentionally, <b>it is permitted</b> to derive <b>benefit,</b> with regard to the sciatic <b>nerve,</b> for which <b>the punishment</b> for one who eats it <b>is not <i>karet</i>, all the more so</b> is it <b>not</b> clear that it is permitted to derive benefit?

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why does <b>Rabbi Shimon, who prohibits</b> deriving benefit from the sciatic nerve, not accept this <i>a fortiori</i> inference? The Gemara answers: This inference <b>can be refuted,</b> as it is possible to say: <b>What</b> is unique <b>to fat?</b> It is <b>that it is released from its general</b> prohibition <b>with regard to non-domesticated animals,</b> as the prohibition only applies to the fats of kosher domesticated animals. <b>Can you say</b> the same <b>with regard to the</b> sciatic <b>nerve, which is not released from its general</b> prohibition <b>with regard to non-domesticated animals</b> and remains prohibited? Apparently, in some ways the prohibition of the sciatic nerve is more stringent than that of fat.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Yosei, who permits one to derive benefit from the sciatic nerve based on this <i>a fortiori</i> inference, respond? The Gemara says: When <b>we state</b> this <i>a fortiori</i> inference, it is <b>with regard to a domesticated animal; in any case, with regard to a domesticated animal</b> its fat <b>is not permitted.</b> Since with regard to a domesticated animal the prohibition of fat is more stringent than that of the sciatic nerve, the <i>a fortiori</i> inference is valid.

### Part 6
After discussing numerous cases that involve prohibitions of eating and deriving benefit, the Gemara asks: <b>Since we raised objections from all of these verses and answered them,</b> and in every case it is apparent that despite the fact that the verse said: “You shall not eat” there was no dispute as to whether or not one may derive benefit from these items, then <b>with regard to what</b> issue <b>do Ḥizkiya and Rabbi Abbahu disagree?</b> The Gemara answers: They disagree <b>with</b> regard to <b>leavened bread on Passover, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who prohibit one to derive benefit from it; and they disagree <b>with</b> regard to <b>an ox that is stoned, in accordance with everyone.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Ḥizkiya derived</b> that it is prohibited to derive benefit in this case <b>from</b> the words: <b>“It shall not be eaten,” and Rabbi Abbahu derived</b> that it is prohibited <b>from</b> the fact that the Torah explicitly had to permit one to derive benefit in the case of <b>an animal carcass.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Now, both according to</b> the one <b>Master and according to</b> the other <b>Master, it is prohibited</b> to derive <b>benefit</b> from these items. The fact that they disagree about the source of this <i>halakha</i> notwithstanding, <b>what is</b> the practical difference <b>between them?</b> The Gemara answers: The practical difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to <b>non-sacrificial animals that were slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard. Ḥizkiya holds: “It shall not be eaten”</b> comes <b>to exclude these</b> cases of leavened bread and the ox that is stoned. Although in most cases a prohibition against eating does not extend to a prohibition against deriving benefit, the language of the verse in these cases indicates that there is a prohibition against deriving benefit as well. Furthermore, <b>“It</b> shall be thrown to the dog” comes <b>to exclude non-sacrificial animals slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard,</b> indicating that it is prohibited to derive benefit from them.

### Part 8
However, <b>Rabbi Abbahu holds</b> that according to Rabbi Yehuda, who maintained that the prohibition against eating an animal carcass cannot be used to derive the prohibition against deriving benefit: <b>“It</b> shall be thrown to the dog” comes <b>to exclude these</b> two cases, leavened bread and an ox that is stoned, where deriving benefit is prohibited. And the prohibition to derive benefit from <b>non-sacrificial animals slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard is not by Torah law,</b> as there is no source from which to derive this prohibition. Therefore, the only practical difference between them is whether the prohibition of deriving benefit from non-sacrificial animals slaughtered in the Temple courtyard is by Torah law or by rabbinic law.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>One of the Sages sat before Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani, and he sat and said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: From where is it derived</b> with regard <b>to all the prohibitions in the Torah that just as it is prohibited to eat them, so too, it is prohibited to benefit from them? And what are</b> the prohibited objects to which this statement refers? They are <b>leavened bread on Passover and an ox that is stoned.</b> The Gemara asks: Why ask <b>from where? Derive</b> the prohibition from the phrase: <b>“It shall not be eaten.”</b> The Gemara answers that <b>he derived a prohibition of eating</b> this item from: <b>“It shall not be eaten”;</b> however, <b>he did not derive a prohibition of</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from this phrase.

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: <b>Derive</b> this general prohibition against deriving benefit <b>from</b> the fact that the Torah had to explicitly permit one to benefit from an <b>animal carcass.</b> The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> with regard to an animal carcass: The <b>matters are as they are written,</b> and the words in the verse do not indicate anything beyond their simple meaning.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges: <b>If he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> then <b>let him derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from where Rabbi Yehuda derives it,</b> i.e., <b>from</b> the verse: “And you shall be sacred men unto Me; therefore you shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; <b>you shall cast it to the dog”</b> (Exodus 22:30). Rabbi Yehuda expounded that one may throw it to a dog, but one may not throw any of the other prohibited items mentioned in the Torah to a dog. From this he infers that it is prohibited to derive benefit from leavened bread on Passover or from other similar items.

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: This Sage <b>holds</b> that the prohibition to derive benefit from <b>non-sacrificial animals that were slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard is by Torah law,</b> and that it is the word “it” in the verse that indicates they are prohibited. And <b>from where</b> is it derived that this prohibition against deriving benefit applies to leavened bread and to an ox that is stoned as well? <b>As it is written: “And no sin-offering, of which any of the blood is brought</b> into the Tent of Meeting to make atonement in the sacred place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire” (Leviticus 6:23).

### Part 13
<b>As</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “It shall be burnt with fire”; And</b> for <b>what</b> purpose then does <b>the verse state: “It shall be burnt with fire”? If it does not</b> apply to the subject <b>matter itself</b> in its context, <b>as it is</b> already <b>written:</b> “And Moshe diligently inquired about the goat of the sin-offering, <b>and, behold, it was burnt”</b> (Leviticus 10:16), <b>apply it to the matter of all the prohibitions in the Torah.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC