
### Part 1
<b>And Rabbi Eliezer</b> rejects this refutation because, in his opinion, permitting <b>a rabbinic decree for</b> the sake of <b>a mitzva is preferable.</b> We cannot derive through an <i>a fortiori</i> inference that since rabbinic decrees were not permitted for optional activities associated with rejoicing on festivals, they must not be permitted for the purpose of a mitzva on Shabbat. This is because it is possible that they permitted rabbinic decrees for mitzva purposes due to the importance of the mitzva.

### Part 2
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer said: What</b> reason do <b>I</b> have? <b>If actions that facilitate</b> the performance of <b>the mitzva</b> and are done <b>after the slaughter,</b> such as cleaning the intestines which is permitted according all opinions, <b>override Shabbat</b> even though <b>the mitzva has</b> already <b>been done,</b> is it possible to say that <b>actions that facilitate</b> the performance of <b>the mitzva</b> and must be done <b>before the slaughter do not</b> also <b>override Shabbat?</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to him: What</b> reason do <b>I</b> have to reject this comparison? <b>If actions that facilitate</b> the performance of <b>the mitzva</b> that are done <b>after the slaughter override Shabbat,</b> that is <b>because slaughter has</b> already <b>overridden Shabbat</b> and therefore an action that violates a rabbinic decree is performed, after Shabbat has already been overridden; <b>can you say that actions that facilitate</b> the performance of <b>the mitzva</b> and are done <b>before the slaughter should override Shabbat</b> even though <b>slaughter has not</b> yet <b>overridden Shabbat? Alternatively,</b> Rabbi Akiva has another reason: <b>Perhaps the offering will be found to be disqualified</b> due to a blemish <b>and</b> the person <b>will be found to have violated Shabbat retroactively</b> when he slaughtered the animal without fulfilling a mitzva.

### Part 4
Rabbi Eliezer rejects this argument: <b>If so,</b> if you are concerned about this possibility, <b>it should also not be slaughtered;</b> for <b>perhaps the offering will be found to be invalid and</b> the person <b>will be found to have violated Shabbat retroactively. Rather,</b> the course of the discussion must have gone as follows: Rabbi Akiva <b>said this</b> last reason <b>to</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>at the beginning and he refuted it</b> as explained above; <b>and then</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him this</b> other reason of: <b>What</b> reason do <b>I</b> have to reject this comparison? <b>If</b> actions that facilitate the performance of the mitzva <b>override,</b> etc.

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Akiva responded and said</b> to Rabbi Eliezer that the law governing the <b>sprinkling</b> of the purifying water of a red heifer <b>proves</b> that actions prohibited by a rabbinic decree, even when they are performed for the sake of a mitzva, do not override Shabbat. He then goes on to argue that we can reverse the order of the argument and conclude by way of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference that even slaughter does not override Shabbat. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer said to him</b> about this: <b>Akiva, you have</b> lightheartedly <b>responded to me</b> with a faulty <i>a fortiori</i> inference with regard to <b>slaughter. His death will be with slaughter;</b> meaning, as punishment for this disrespect you will be slaughtered by other people. Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: My teacher, do not deny my</b> contention <b>at the time</b> we are discussing this <b>inference,</b> for <b>this</b> is the tradition <b>I received from you: Sprinkling is</b> forbidden by <b>rabbinic decree and does not override Shabbat.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Seeing that</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>taught</b> Rabbi Akiva this <i>halakha</i> that sprinkling purifying water does not override Shabbat, <b>what is the reason he retracted</b> his opinion? <b>Ulla said: When Rabbi Eliezer taught him</b> this <i>halakha</i>, <b>he taught</b> it to <b>him</b> with respect to <b>sprinkling</b> that is performed in order to enable a ritually impure priest to partake of <b><i>teruma</i>.</b> This sprinkling does not override Shabbat <b>because</b> even separating <b><i>teruma</i> itself does not override Shabbat.</b> But he never taught Rabbi Akiva this <i>halakha</i> with respect to sprinkling that is performed in order enable someone to eat of the Paschal lamb.

### Part 7
The Gemara notes that <b>Rabbi Akiva as well, when he challenged</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>challenged him</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of <b>sprinkling for <i>teruma</i>,</b> and his objection should be understood as follows: Eating <i>teruma</i> <b>is a mitzva,</b> and sprinkling purifying water on someone who is ritually impure is only prohibited <b>due to a rabbinic decree;</b> nevertheless, sprinkling purifying water on a ritually impure priest, in order to enable him to eat <i>teruma</i>, is prohibited on Shabbat. Thus it follows by <i>a fortiori</i> inference that slaughter, which is a biblically prohibited labor, should certainly be forbidden on Shabbat, even when performed for the sake of a mitzva. <b>And</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>thought</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>was challenging him</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of <b>sprinkling</b> that is performed in order to enable someone to eat of <b>the Paschal lamb;</b> that is why he said that he disagreed about sprinkling as well.

### Part 8
<b>Rabba raised an objection</b> to Ulla’s explanation, based on a different <i>baraita</i> which states: <b>Rabbi Akiva responded and said: The sprinkling</b> of purifying water on <b>someone who is ritually impure due to</b> contact with <b>a corpse proves</b> the matter when <b>his seventh day</b> of impurity <b>occurs on Shabbat and</b> it is also <b>the eve of Passover, for it is</b> done <b>for</b> the sake of <b>a mitzva,</b> in order to allow the person to eat of the Paschal lamb, <b>and it is</b> prohibited only <b>due to a rabbinic decree, and</b> nonetheless <b>it does not override Shabbat.</b> From this <i>baraita</i> it is clear that Rabbi Akiva challenged Rabbi Eliezer with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of sprinkling that is performed in order to enable someone to eat the Paschal lamb.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> we must reject Ulla’s explanation and say instead that Rabbi Eliezer <b>certainly taught</b> Rabbi Akiva about <b>sprinkling</b> that is performed in order to enable someone to eat of the <b>Paschal lamb.</b> And with regard to the question that <b>seeing that</b> Rabbi Eliezer himself <b>taught him</b> this <i>halakha</i>, <b>what is the reason that Rabbi Eliezer refutes it,</b> the Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Eliezer forgot his</b> own <b>teaching and Rabbi Akiva came to remind him of his teaching</b> by drawing an <i>a fortiori</i> inference that would cause Rabbi Eliezer to remember what he himself had taught. The Gemara asks: If so, then <b>let</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>say explicitly</b> that this is what Rabbi Eliezer himself had taught him. The Gemara answers: <b>He thought that it would not be proper</b> to tell his teacher that he had forgotten his teaching, and therefore his initial attempt was to remind him indirectly.

### Part 10
The Gemara questions the reason for the <i>halakha</i> under discussion. <b>What is the reason that</b> the <b>sprinkling</b> of purifying water <b>does not override Shabbat? Since it</b> involves the <b>mere moving</b> of the liquid from the utensil in his hand to the body of the person seeking purification, why should it be forbidden on Shabbat? <b>Let it</b> at least <b>override Shabbat on account</b> of the mitzva <b>of the Paschal lamb. Rabba said:</b> The prohibition against sprinkling is <b>a</b> rabbinic <b>decree</b> that was instituted <b>lest one take</b> the utensil containing the purifying water <b>and carry it</b> a distance of <b>four cubits in the public domain,</b> thus violating an actual Torah prohibition. This is consistent with Rabba’s opinion in several other places in the Talmud that the Sages forbade the fulfillment of certain mitzvot due to a similar concern about carrying in the public domain.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: At least <b>according to Rabbi Eliezer, let us carry</b> the purifying water even in the public domain, <b>for Rabbi Eliezer said</b> as a general rule that actions that <b>facilitate</b> the performance of <b>a mitzva override Shabbat,</b> even if they are not mitzvot themselves and involve transgression of Torah prohibitions. <b>They say</b> that there is room to distinguish between different situations: The rule that actions necessary to facilitate a mitzva override Shabbat only <b>applies when the person himself is fit</b> to fulfill the mitzva <b>and the obligation</b> to fulfill it <b>is incumbent upon him. But here where the person himself is not fit</b> to eat the Paschal lamb, as he is presently ritually impure, <b>the obligation</b> to fulfill the mitzva <b>is not incumbent upon him,</b> and therefore actions that would enable him to fulfill the mitzva do not override Shabbat.

### Part 12
<b>Rabba said: According to the statement of Rabbi Eliezer</b> that when a person is unfit no obligation is incumbent upon him, in the case of <b>a healthy baby, one may heat water for him to strengthen him</b> even further in order <b>to circumcise him on Shabbat, as he is</b> already now <b>fit</b> to be circumcised. But in the case of <b>a sickly baby, one may not heat water for him to strengthen him</b> in order <b>to circumcise him, for</b> owing to his sickliness <b>he is not</b> presently <b>fit</b> for the mitzva, and acts that facilitate a mitzva do not override Shabbat if the person is not currently fit for the mitzva.

### Part 13
<b>Rava said: But if</b> the baby <b>is healthy, why does he</b> need <b>hot water to strengthen him? Rather, Rava said: All</b> babies <b>are</b> considered <b>sickly with respect to circumcision,</b> as they all need to be washed with hot water. Therefore, <b>both</b> in the case of <b>a healthy baby and</b> in the case of <b>a sickly baby, one may not heat water for him to strengthen him</b> in order <b>to circumcise him on Shabbat,</b> even according to Rabbi Eliezer, <b>as he is not</b> presently <b>fit</b> for the mitzva.

### Part 14
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rabba’s distinction between someone who is currently fit for the mitzva and someone who is not, based on what was taught elsewhere in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>An uncircumcised</b> adult <b>who did not circumcise</b> himself before Passover <b>is liable to the punishment of <i>karet</i></b> for having intentionally violated the mitzva to bring the Paschal lamb, as an uncircumcised person may not eat of the offering; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. But here the person himself is not fit,</b> for as long as he is uncircumcised he is not obligated to bring the Paschal lamb, and nonetheless the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching that he is punished with <i>karet</i>. Apparently, the obligation is incumbent upon him</b> even though he is presently unfit to perform the mitzva.

### Part 15
<b>Rabba said</b> in answer to this objection: <b>Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that <b>one may not slaughter</b> the Paschal lamb <b>or sprinkle</b> its blood <b>for someone who is ritually impure due to</b> contact with <b>a creeping animal</b> because he is currently impure, even though he can immerse in a ritual bath and become pure by the night of Passover.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC