
### Part 1
<b>and one clearing a pile</b> of stones that collapsed on top of a person, in which case there is a possibility that the person buried underneath is dead and his corpse will impart ritual impurity to the person clearing the pile; <b>and similarly, one whom</b> the governing body <b>promised to release from prison</b> on the night of Passover; <b>and an ill person and an elderly person who are</b> still <b>capable of eating an olive-bulk</b> of meat, <b>one slaughters</b> the Paschal lamb <b>on their behalf,</b> since they are currently fit to eat the Paschal lamb.

### Part 2
However, <b>with regard to all of them,</b> this is only true when they are included in a group with other people who will definitely be able to partake of the lamb; but <b>we do not slaughter</b> the Paschal lamb <b>on their behalf</b> if they are <b>by themselves,</b> either as individuals or in a group composed entirely of such people, because <b>perhaps they will cause the Paschal lamb to become disqualified,</b> since there is a possibility that by the night of Passover they will be unable to partake of the Paschal lamb.

### Part 3
<b>Therefore,</b> since they were registered for a Paschal lamb and it was slaughtered when they were still fit to partake of it, even <b>if a disqualification occurred to them</b> later, preventing them from partaking of the Paschal lamb, <b>they are</b> nevertheless <b>exempt from observing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.</b> The exemption from the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> is dependent not on whether they partook of a Paschal lamb, but on whether it was validly slaughtered on their behalf. This holds true <b>except for one who was clearing a pile</b> of stones where the person buried underneath was eventually found dead, <b>because</b> in such a case the person searching for him certainly stood over the corpse at some point. He had therefore become <b>ritually impure from the outset,</b> even before the Paschal lamb was slaughtered. Consequently, he would not have been fit even during the slaughter and will have to observe the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the Paschal lamb may be slaughtered on behalf of a prisoner only if he is included in a group with other people. <b>Rabba bar Huna said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They taught</b> this <b>only</b> if he is in <b>a prison belonging to gentiles; but</b> if he is in <b>a prison belonging to Jews, one slaughters</b> on his behalf even if he is <b>by himself</b> and not included in a group with other people. <b>Since they promised him</b> they would release him <b>they will</b> certainly <b>release him, as it is written: “The remnant of Israel will not do iniquity nor speak lies”</b> (Zephaniah 3:13). Therefore, there is no concern that on the night of Passover he will not be able to partake of the Paschal lamb.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> With regard to <b>that which you said,</b> that the mishna’s ruling permitting a the Paschal lamb to be slaughtered on behalf of a prisoner, but only when he is included in a group with others, refers to a prisoner in <b>a prison belonging to gentiles, they said</b> this only with regard to a prison <b>outside the wall of Beit Pagei,</b> i.e., the prison is located outside the area where the Paschal lamb may be consumed. <b>But</b> if the prison is located <b>within the wall of Beit Pagei, one slaughters on his behalf</b> even if he is <b>by himself</b> and not included in a group with other people. <b>What is the reason?</b> Even if he is not released from prison, <b>it is possible for them to bring him</b> a portion of the Paschal lamb while still in prison, <b>and he will eat it</b> there.

### Part 6
We learned in the mishna: <b>Therefore,</b> even <b>if</b> a disqualification <b>occurred</b> to them, they are exempt from observing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>. This holds true except for one who was clearing a pile of stones. The Gemara qualifies this ruling: <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: They taught</b> that one who clears a pile of stones is required to observe the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>only</b> if he was clearing <b>a round pile.</b> While clearing it, he certainly stood over the corpse and became ritually impure. <b>But</b> if it was <b>a long pile</b> of stones, it is possible that the corpse was to one side of the pile and the person clearing the stones had not yet stood over the corpse at the time the Paschal lamb was slaughtered. Therefore, <b>he is exempt from observing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>,</b> because one can <b>say</b> that perhaps <b>he was ritually pure at the time of the slaughter.</b> Since the matter is in doubt, he is exempt from observing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>.

### Part 7
<b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says: One who clears a pile of stones</b> that collapsed on top of a person <b>is sometimes exempt</b> from observing the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> and <b>sometimes obligated. How so?</b> If it is <b>a round pile of stones and ritual impurity was found underneath it, he is obligated</b> to observe the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, as he certainly stood over the corpse before his Paschal lamb was slaughtered. However, if it is <b>a long pile of stones and ritual impurity was found underneath it, he is exempt,</b> because one can <b>say</b> that perhaps <b>he was pure at the time of the slaughter.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>We do not slaughter the Paschal lamb on behalf of an individual,</b> only for a group of people; <b>this is the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And Rabbi Yosei permits</b> it. <b>And even</b> if there is <b>a group of one hundred who</b> together <b>are unable to eat an olive-bulk</b> of it, <b>we do not slaughter on their behalf.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And we do not make a group</b> for a Paschal lamb that consists <b>of women, slaves, and minors.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that we do not slaughter a Paschal lamb on behalf on an individual? The verse states: “You may not sacrifice the Paschal lamb in any one</b> of your gates, which the Lord your God has given you” (Deuteronomy 16:5). The phrase “in any one” is expounded to mean: For any one person, which indicates that the Paschal lamb is not slaughtered on behalf of an individual; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And Rabbi Yosei says:</b> If there is <b>an individual and he is able to eat</b> an olive-bulk of the Paschal lamb, <b>one slaughters it on his behalf;</b> whereas if there are <b>ten</b> people <b>and they are unable to eat</b> together an olive-bulk of the Paschal lamb, <b>we do not slaughter it on their behalf.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara proceeds to analyze the opinions taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And what does Rabbi Yosei do</b> with <b>this</b> phrase, <b>“in any one,”</b> from which Rabbi Yehuda derived the <i>halakha</i> he taught in the mishna? <b>He needs it for that which Rabbi Shimon expounded, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to improvised altars used by individuals for their private offerings, which are permitted for use only when there is no permanent national altar, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: From where do we know that</b> with regard to <b>one who sacrifices his Paschal lamb on an improvised altar, at a time</b> when <b>the prohibition of</b> sacrificing offerings on <b>improvised altars</b> applies, <b>he</b> is in violation of <b>a negative mitzva?</b>

### Part 12
<b>The verse states: “You may not slaughter the Paschal lamb in any one of your gates.”</b> The phrase “any one of your gates” is referring to the use of improvised altars. <b>I might</b> have thought that <b>even at a time</b> when it is <b>permitted</b> to sacrifice offerings on <b>improvised altars</b> this <b>is so;</b> therefore <b>the verse states “in any one of your gates,”</b> which indicates that this prohibition <b>was said only when all of the Jewish people enter into one gate,</b> i.e., when they all come together to sacrifice their offerings on a permanent national altar, such as the Temple. However, where there is no permanent national altar, it is indeed permitted to offer the Paschal lamb on an improvised altar.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who already used the phrase “in any one” to derive the <i>halakha</i> he taught in the mishna, <b>from where does he</b> derive <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> concerning improvised altars? According to Rabbi Yehuda, <b>you learn two things from</b> the same phrase.

### Part 14
<b>And for Rabbi Yosei, from where</b> does he know that the phrase “in any one” should be expounded <b>as Rabbi Shimon said</b> it should be? <b>Perhaps it comes</b> to teach what <b>Rabbi Yehuda said?</b> Rabbi Yosei could have <b>said to you: This cannot enter your mind, because it is written</b> with regard to the Paschal lamb: <b>“According to every man’s eating</b> you shall make your count for the lamb” (Exodus 12:4). Since the verse states “man” in the singular, it indicates that the Paschal lamb can be slaughtered even for an individual.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ukva bar Ḥinana from Perishna raised a contradiction to Rava: Did Rabbi Yehuda</b> actually <b>say: We do not slaughter the Paschal lamb on behalf of an individual?</b> But <b>we may raise a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a woman, on the first</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>one slaughters</b> the Paschal lamb <b>on her behalf,</b> even if she is <b>by herself. And on the second</b> <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>we make her ancillary to others,</b> i.e., she may join others in a group registered for a Paschal lamb but we do not slaughter a lamb on her behalf if she is by herself; <b>this is the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b> The <i>baraita</i> clearly records Rabbi Yehuda as permitting the offering of a Paschal lamb on behalf of an individual. Rava <b>said to him: Do not say</b> Rabbi Yehuda allows slaughtering the Paschal lamb for a woman <b>by herself; rather, say</b> he allows slaughtering only for a group of women <b>by themselves.</b>

### Part 16
Rav Ukva questioned this answer and <b>said to him: Do we make a group that is entirely</b> composed of <b>women?</b> But <b>didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>We do not make a group</b> for a Paschal lamb that consists <b>of women, slaves, and minors. What, is</b> the mishna <b>not</b> referring to forming a group that is composed exclusively of <b>women by themselves and slaves by themselves and minors by themselves?</b> Rava <b>said to him: No,</b> the mishna is referring only to forming a group that is composed of <b>women and slaves and minors</b> together, but a group composed exclusively of women, or slaves, or minors would be permitted. It is prohibited to form a group containing both <b>women and slaves, due to</b> a concern that it may lead to <b>frivolity.</b> It is prohibited to form a group of <b>minors and slaves, due to</b> a concern that it may lead to

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC