
### Part 1
<b>And Rabba said</b> that the correct order is <b><i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>kuf</i>:</b> Wine [<i>yayin</i>], <i>havdala</i>, candle [<i>ner</i>], and <i>kiddush</i>. <b>And Levi said</b> the order is <b><i>kuf</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>:</b> <i>Kiddush</i>, candle [<i>ner</i>], wine [<i>yayin</i>], and <i>havdala</i>. <b>And the Rabbis say</b> the order is <b><i>kuf</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>:</b> <i>kiddush</i>, wine [<i>yayin</i>], candle [<i>ner</i>], and <i>havdala</i>. <b>Mar, son of Rabbana, said</b> the order is <b><i>nun</i>, <i>kuf</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>heh</i>:</b> Candle [<i>ner</i>], <i>kiddush</i>, wine [<i>yayin</i>], and <i>havdala</i>. The Sage named <b>Marta said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua</b> that the proper order is <b><i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>kuf</i>:</b> Candle [<i>ner</i>], wine [<i>yayin</i>], <i>havdala</i>, and <i>kiddush</i>.

### Part 2
With regard to this issue, <b>the father of Shmuel,</b> Abba ben Abba, <b>sent</b> a letter <b>to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>Teach us, our Rabbi. How</b> should one recite <b>the order of <i>havdala</i></b> when a Festival occurs after Shabbat? Rabbi <b>sent him</b> the following response: <b>This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said, who said</b> it <b>in the name of his father, who</b> himself <b>said</b> it <b>in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya:</b> The proper order of the blessings is <b><i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>kuf</i>:</b> Candle [<i>ner</i>], <i>havdala</i>, wine [<i>yayin</i>], and <i>kiddush</i>.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina said</b> that the following <b>parable</b> serves to explain the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya:</b> This is comparable <b>to a king who is exiting</b> a city <b>and a governor is entering.</b> Etiquette dictates that the inhabitants of the city first <b>escort the king</b> out of the city to take leave of him in a dignified fashion, <b>and afterward they go out to greet the governor.</b> Similarly, one should first recite <i>havdala</i>, to take leave of Shabbat, and only then recite <i>kiddush</i> over the Festival, whose sanctity is lesser than that of Shabbat.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> halakhic conclusion <b>was reached about</b> this matter? What is the proper order of the blessings? The <i>amora’im</i> accept Rav’s opinion that one should recite <i>kiddush</i> before <i>havdala</i>; however, they disagree about the blessing of time, which is generally relevant in such cases and which Rav did not address. <b>Abaye said</b> that the proper order is <b><i>yod</i>, <i>kuf</i>, <i>zayin</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>:</b> The blessing over wine [<i>yayin</i>], <i>kiddush</i>, the blessing for time [<i>zeman</i>], the blessing over the candle [<i>ner</i>], and <i>havdala</i>. <b>And Rava said</b> the order is <b><i>yod</i>, <i>kuf</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>zayin</i>:</b> Wine [<i>yayin</i>], <i>kiddush</i>, candle [<i>ner</i>], <i>havdala</i>, and time [<i>zeman</i>]. The Gemara concludes: <b>And</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava.</b>

### Part 5
With regard to this issue of <i>havdala</i>, the Gemara relates that <b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda happened to</b> come to <b>the house of Rava.</b> After Shabbat, <b>they brought before them a light and spices. Rava recited the blessing over the spices first and then</b> the blessing <b>over the light.</b> Rav Huna bar Yehuda <b>said to him: But both Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel,</b> who dispute the order of the blessings at <i>havdala</i>, agree that the blessing over <b>light is first, and</b> only <b>then</b> comes the blessing <b>over the spices.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And what is this;</b> what is the source that this is the dispute between Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel? <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Beit Shammai say</b> that with regard to one who is required to say Grace after Meals and <i>havdala</i>, and he has only one cup of wine, the proper order of the blessings is: The blessing over the <b>candle, and</b> the blessing of Grace After <b>Meals,</b> followed by the blessing over the <b>spices, and</b> finally <b><i>havdala</i>. And Beit Hillel say:</b> The blessing over the <b>candle</b> comes first, <b>and</b> then the blessing over the <b>spices, and</b> afterward the blessing of Grace After <b>Meals, and</b> last is <b><i>havdala</i>.</b> Both Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel agree that the blessing over the candle is recited before <i>havdala</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Rava answered after him and said: This</b> mishna is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. However, Rabbi Yehuda says: Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel did not disagree over</b> Grace After <b>Meals, as</b> everyone concurs that <b>it is</b> recited <b>first, nor</b> did they disagree <b>over <i>the blessing over the spices</i>, as it is</b> recited <b>last.</b>

### Part 8
<b>With regard to what did they disagree?</b> They disagreed over the blessings recited in the middle of <i>havdala</i>, i.e., the blessings <b>over light and over the spices. Beit Shammai say: Light</b> first, <b>and spices thereafter; and Beit Hillel say: Spices</b> first, <b>and light thereafter. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The people were accustomed</b> to conduct themselves <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel, according to</b> the interpretation of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b> Rava acted as dictated by this custom.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates another incident with regard to establishing meals and reciting blessings. <b>Rav Ya’akov bar Abba happened to</b> come to <b>Rava’s house</b> for a Shabbat meal. <b>He saw that</b> Rava <b>recited</b> the blessing: <b>Who creates the fruit of the vine, over the first cup</b> of wine he drank at the meal, <b>and then he recited</b> the same <b>blessing upon the cup of</b> wine he used for the <b>blessing</b> of Grace after Meals <b>and drank</b> it. <b>He said to him: Why do you</b> have to say <b>all this,</b> i.e., why is it necessary to recite a second blessing? <b>The Master has recited a blessing for us once</b> already, at the beginning of the meal, and thereby exempted us from a blessing on all the wine drunk during the meal. Rava <b>said to him: When we were in the house of the Exilarch, this was our practice.</b> It was the custom among the Sages to recite two blessings.

### Part 10
<b>He said to him:</b> It works out <b>well to act this way</b> in <b>the house of the Exilarch, as there is uncertainty</b> as to whether <b>he will bring us</b> another cup of wine to drink, <b>or whether he will not bring us</b> another cup. Since we are dependent upon the host and cannot anticipate in advance whether we will drink more wine, each cup requires its own blessing. <b>Here,</b> however, <b>the cup is resting before us and our attention is on it,</b> i.e., we intend to drink this wine after Grace after Meals. What need is there to recite another blessing? <b>He said to him: I acted in accordance with the</b> opinion of the <b>students of Rav, as Rav Beruna and Rav Ḥananel, the students of Rav, were sitting</b> together <b>at a meal,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC