
### Part 1
“And whoever touches <b>one who is slain with a sword</b> in the open field, or one who dies on his own, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days” (Numbers 19:16). The Sages derived from the phrase: One who is slain with a sword, that the legal status of a metal <b>sword</b> in terms of its degree of impurity <b>is like</b> that of <b>one who is slain.</b> Any metal vessel that becomes impure through contact with a corpse assumes the impurity status of a corpse, the ultimate primary source of ritual impurity. The same is true with regard to a metal vessel that came into contact with a person or vessel that became impure with impurity imparted by a corpse. In that case the metal vessel assumes the impurity status of that person or vessel, <b>and</b> therefore, <b>this</b> metal lamp <b>is a primary source of impurity. And</b> yet Rabbi Akiva <b>maintains</b> that <b>it is permitted to render</b> this oil, which is impure with <b>third-</b>degree impurity, impure with <b>first-</b>degree impurity through contact with the metal lamp.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And what impelled Rav Yehuda to establish</b> the mishna as referring specifically to the case <b>of a metal lamp? Let him establish it</b> as referring specifically to the case <b>of an earthenware lamp.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And</b> if so, <b>what does</b> Rabbi Akiva’s statement <b>add?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Whereas there,</b> in Rabbi Ḥanina’s testimony, he is referring to a case where one piece of <b>ritually impure</b> meat came into contact with another piece of <b>impure</b> meat, <b>here,</b> in Rabbi Akiva’s testimony, he is referring to a case where oil that is <b>disqualified</b> came into contact with a lamp with first-degree impurity status, rendering the oil <b>impure.</b> Oil with second-degree ritual impurity status disqualifies <i>teruma</i>, as <i>teruma</i> with third-degree ritual impurity status does not transmit ritual impurity to other <i>teruma</i>. In that case, the novelty in Rabbi Akiva’s statement is that a disqualified item is burned together with an impure item even though it is thereby rendered impure.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: The mishna was difficult for</b> Rav Yehuda: <b>Why</b> did the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically teach</b> the case of <b>a lamp that became ritually impure</b> with first-degree impurity <b>through</b> contact with one who became <b>ritually impure</b> with impurity imparted by <b>a corpse? Let it teach that</b> the lamp <b>became impure by</b> contact with <b>a creeping animal,</b> which is a much more common primary source of impurity.

### Part 5
<b>Rather, what is the substance</b> with regard to <b>which</b> there is <b>a distinction between its impurity</b> when exposed to <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse</b> and its impurity when exposed to impurity imparted by a <b>creeping animal? You must say</b> that the substance <b>is metal.</b> A metal vessel that comes into contact with a creeping animal assumes first-degree ritual impurity status, whereas if it comes into contact with a person or a vessel that came into contact with a corpse, it becomes a primary source of impurity.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said: Learn from</b> this statement that <b>Rabbi Akiva holds: The ritual impurity of liquids</b> with regard <b>to transmitting impurity to other</b> objects is <b>by Torah law,</b> contrary to those <i>tanna’im</i> who hold that liquids transmit impurity only by rabbinic decree. <b>As, if it enters your mind</b> that this type of impurity is <b>by rabbinic law, now, this lamp, what effect does</b> this lamp <b>have on that oil? If</b> it is to <b>disqualify</b> the oil <b>itself, it is</b> already <b>disqualified from the outset.</b> Rather, Rabbi Akiva evidently maintains that through contact with the lamp this oil becomes impure and transmits impurity to food by Torah law.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>From where</b> do you know that this is Rabbi Akiva’s opinion? <b>Perhaps</b> Rabbi Akiva holds that through contact with the lamp, the oil will be able <b>to transmit ritual impurity to other</b> objects <b>by rabbinic law.</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If</b> the oil confers impurity <b>by rabbinic law, why</b> does Rabbi Akiva refer <b>particularly</b> to a case where the oil became impure <b>by</b> contact with <b>a primary source of impurity?</b> If Rabbi Akiva sought to cite an example of rabbinic impurity, he could have cited <b>even</b> a case where the oil came into contact <b>with</b> an object with <b>first-</b>degree impurity status, <b>or</b> an item with <b>second-</b>degree impurity status. By rabbinic law, in those cases <b>too,</b> the oil <b>is</b> impure with <b>first-</b>degree ritual impurity and transmits impurity to food.

### Part 8
The Gemara cites the source for that <i>halakha</i>. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Any</b> item that <b>disqualifies <i>teruma</i>,</b> e.g., anything with second-degree ritual impurity status, <b>transmits impurity to liquids,</b> conferring upon them <b>first-</b>degree ritual impurity status. These liquids assume a higher degree of impurity than the item that rendered them impure. This rabbinic decree applies to anything with second-degree ritual impurity status <b>except</b> for one <b>who</b> was impure and <b>immersed himself during that day</b> and the sun has not yet set. If such a person touches liquids, he does not confer upon them first-degree impurity status. Instead, that case conforms to the standard process of transmission of ritual impurity, and he confers upon them third-degree ritual impurity status and invalidates them.

### Part 9
The Gemara concludes: <b>Rather, learn from</b> the fact that Rabbi Akiva did not cite the example of oil that became impure through contact with an item with first or second-degree ritual impurity that Rabbi Akiva holds that the <i>halakha</i> that liquids transmit impurity to other items <b>is by Torah law.</b>

### Part 10
It was taught in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Meir said: From their statements we learned</b> that one may burn ritually pure <i>teruma</i> with impure <i>teruma</i> when removing leaven on Passover eve. The Gemara asks: <b>From whose statements</b> was this conclusion inferred? <b>If you say</b> that this conclusion is inferred <b>from the statement of Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy High Priest, is</b> Rabbi Meir’s statement <b>comparable</b> to that case? <b>There,</b> Rabbi Ḥanina said that one may burn one <b>ritually impure</b> item <b>and</b> another <b>ritually impure</b> item together, whereas <b>here,</b> Rabbi Meir is referring to burning <b>pure and impure</b> <i>teruma</i> together.

### Part 11
<b>But rather,</b> Rabbi Meir’s conclusion is inferred <b>from the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Is it comparable</b> to that case? <b>There,</b> Rabbi Akiva said that a <b>disqualified</b> item and an <b>impure</b> item may be burned together, whereas <b>here,</b> Rabbi Meir is referring to burning a <b>pure</b> item and an <b>impure</b> item together.

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir maintains</b> that <b>the mishna</b> is referring <b>to</b> an object that is <b>a primary source of impurity by Torah law and</b> an object that is <b>a secondary source of impurity by rabbinic law, which by Torah law is entirely pure.</b> Since the <i>teruma</i> is pure by Torah law, the novelty of Rabbi Meir’s statement is that although by Torah law one of the foods is pure and the other is impure, due to the rabbinic decree of impurity, one may burn the two items together.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC