
### Part 1
<b>Whom did you hear that said: Reprimanded and did not reprimand?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as Rabbi Meir uses the terminology: In keeping with the will and against the will. <b>And</b> yet, <b>Rabbi Yehuda is teaching</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>they</b> would <b>harvest</b> in keeping with the <b>will of the Sages.</b> The Gemara answers with a question: <b>And according to your reasoning, these</b> three activities listed in the mishna, for which the Sages did not reprimand them, <b>are</b> actually <b>four:</b> Grafting palms, bundling <i>Shema</i>, harvesting, and piling. They are not three activities, as stated. <b>Rather, delete harvest</b> from the mishna <b>here.</b> Harvesting should not be listed with the activities for which the Sages did not reprimand them.

### Part 2
It was taught in the baraita: They would <b>permit</b> the use of <b>consecrated branches of carob and of sycamore</b> trees. The Gemara explains the reason: <b>They said: Our fathers consecrated</b> only <b>the tree trunks, and</b> therefore <b>we can permit the consecrated branches</b> that have grown from the branches <b>of carob and of sycamore</b> trees. The Gemara explains that <b>we are dealing with the growth that came afterward, and they hold in accordance with</b> the <b>one who said: There is no misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>with regard to</b> subsequent <b>growth. And the Rabbis hold: Although there is no misuse</b> of consecrated property, <b>in any case, there is a prohibition.</b>

### Part 3
It was taught in the <i>baraita</i> that the residents of Jericho <b>created breaches</b> so that during years of famine the poor could take fruit that fell on Shabbat and Festivals. <b>Ulla said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> between the residents of Jericho and the Sages is <b>with regard to</b> dates no longer attached to the tree that fell onto <b>the upper palm branches [<i>makhebedot</i>]. The Sages hold: We issue a decree</b> to prohibit taking these dates, <b>lest</b> one <b>climb</b> the tree <b>and pick</b> dates still attached to the tree. <b>And the people of Jericho hold: We do not issue a decree lest one climb</b> the tree <b>and pick</b> dates. <b>However, with regard to</b> dates that fell onto <b>lower palm branches [<i>keifin</i>], everyone agrees</b> that taking fruit from these branches is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rava said to</b> Ulla: <b>But aren’t they are set-aside,</b> as they are not prepared as food before Shabbat, since they fell from the tree on Shabbat itself? Any item prohibited during twilight on Shabbat eve remains prohibited throughout day, even if circumstances change. <b>And if you say:</b> These dates are not set-aside, <b>since they are fit for</b> consumption by domestic <b>ravens,</b> which can fly and gather the dates still attached to the tree, <b>now,</b> an item that is <b>prepared for</b> use for <b>a person is not</b> considered <b>prepared for</b> use for <b>dogs, as we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the animal <b>was</b> alive and <b>not a carcass on Shabbat eve, it may not</b> be fed to dogs on Shabbat <b>because it was not</b> expressly <b>prepared</b> for that purpose. Is food <b>prepared for ravens</b> considered <b>prepared for a person?</b> While it was alive, the animal was prepared for human consumption during twilight; nevertheless, it is prohibited to feed its carcass to the dogs.

### Part 5
Ulla <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>Yes,</b> an item that is <b>prepared for</b> consumption for <b>a person is not prepared for dogs, as any item that is fit for a person, one does not remove it from his thoughts;</b> it remains exclusively for the use of a person. However, an item that is <b>prepared for ravens is</b> also <b>prepared for</b> the use of <b>a person. Any item that is fit for</b> the use of <b>a person, his thoughts are upon it.</b> Although initially it is available only to ravens, a person is prepared to eat any food that becomes available to him. That is Ulla’s version of the statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish.

### Part 6
<b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said a different version of that which <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is <b>with regard to</b> dates that fell onto <b>the lower palm branches, as the Sages hold:</b> An item that <b>is prepared for ravens is not prepared for a person. And the people of Jericho hold:</b> An item that <b>is prepared for ravens is prepared for a person. However,</b> with regard to the dates <b>on upper branches, everyone agrees</b> that they are <b>prohibited,</b> as <b>we issue a decree lest one climb</b> the tree <b>and pick</b> dates.

### Part 7
We learned in the mishna: <b>And</b> the residents of Jericho would <b>designate</b> for the poor <b>the</b> produce in the <b>corner [<i>pe’a</i>]</b> in a field of <b>vegetables.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And aren’t the people of Jericho</b> of the opinion of <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>A principle was stated with regard to the</b> produce of the <b>corner</b> of the field: <b>Anything that is food, and is protected, and grows from the ground, and is gathered as one, and</b> one <b>brings it in</b> to store <b>for preservation is obligated in</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of the produce in the <b>corner</b> of the field?

### Part 8
The Gemara elaborates on each criterion in the mishna. <b>Anything that is food;</b> this comes <b>to exclude the after-growths of woad and safflower.</b> These plants are used as dyes and not for food. Therefore, one need not designate <b>the</b> produce in the <b>corners</b> from them. <b>And is protected;</b> this comes <b>to exclude ownerless</b> crops. <b>And grows from the ground;</b> this comes <b>to exclude truffles and mushrooms,</b> which, unlike other plants, do not draw sustenance from the ground. <b>And is gathered as one;</b> this comes <b>to exclude</b> the <b>fig</b> tree, whose fruit is gathered throughout an extended period, as the figs do not ripen together. <b>And one brings it in</b> to storage <b>for preservation;</b> this comes <b>to exclude vegetables,</b> which cannot be stored for lengthy periods.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: Here we are dealing with turnip heads,</b> which can be stored for an extended period of time, and <b>they disagree with regard to bringing it in</b> to storage <b>for preservation by means of another substance.</b> Turnips are not stored alone. In order to store them, one preserves them in vinegar or a similar substance (Rabbeinu Ḥananel). <b>One Sage,</b> the residents of Jericho, <b>holds: Storage by means of another substance</b> such as vinegar <b>is considered storage. And one Sage,</b> i.e., the Sages, <b>holds: It is not considered storage,</b> and therefore one need not designate produce from the <b>corner</b> of the field from turnips.

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught: Initially, they would designate the</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> of the field <b>from turnips and cabbages. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> They would do so <b>even from leeks [<i>kaflot</i>]. And it was taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>They would designate the</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> of the field <b>from turnips and leeks. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> They would do so <b>even from cabbages.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC