
### Part 1
<b>occurred on Shabbat,</b> when moving the rods is prohibited (Rambam), <b>he would rest his hand on another’s shoulder and the other’s hand on his</b> own <b>shoulder and suspend</b> the offering <b>and flay</b> it. <b>He would tear</b> open the flesh of the offering <b>and remove its sacrificial parts,</b> i.e., the fats and other parts offered on the altar. <b>He would place</b> the sacrificial parts <b>in a large basin [<i>mageis</i>] and burn them on the altar.</b>

### Part 2
If this took place on Shabbat, when carrying is prohibited, <b>the first group would exit and remain on the Temple Mount; the second</b> group would remain within <b>the rampart,</b> which was an area outside the women’s courtyard; <b>and the third</b> group <b>would stand in its place</b> in the Temple. They would wait there until nightfall, and as soon as <b>it became dark, they would</b> all <b>go out and roast their Paschal lambs,</b> everyone in his own place.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The Paschal lamb is slaughtered only in three groups of</b> at least <b>thirty people</b> each. <b>What is the reason</b> for this rule? The verse says: <b>Assembly, congregation, and Israel,</b> and each of these terms refers to a group of no fewer than ten people. <b>We are uncertain</b> as to whether this means that we need three groups of ten people <b>at the same time</b> or <b>one after another.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Therefore,</b> in order to satisfy both possible interpretations, <b>we require three groups of thirty people</b> each. <b>As, if</b> you say we need all thirty <b>at the same time,</b> we <b>have</b> that, <b>and if</b> we need them <b>one after another,</b> we <b>have</b> that as well. <b>Therefore,</b> in pressing circumstances when there are not enough people present, <b>even fifty</b> people <b>suffice.</b> How so? <b>Thirty enter and perform</b> the necessary rite, <b>ten</b> others <b>enter and ten</b> of the original group <b>leave</b> so that those present are considered a new group, <b>and</b> then <b>ten</b> others <b>enter and ten</b> more <b>leave</b> so that those present now comprise a third group. In this way the Paschal lamb is slaughtered in three groups of thirty people each, although the total number of people involved is only fifty.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches that <b>the first group entered,</b> after which they closed the doors to the Temple courtyard. <b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disagreed about the precise wording of the mishna. <b>Abaye said: We learned</b> in the mishna that the doors of the Temple courtyard miraculously <b>closed by themselves. Rava said: We learned</b> in the mishna <b>that</b> people <b>would close</b> the doors of the Temple courtyard at the appropriate time.

### Part 6
<b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between them? The</b> practical difference <b>between them is</b> with regard to <b>whether we rely on a miracle. Abaye said: We learned</b> in the mishna <b>that the doors closed by themselves; as many</b> people <b>as entered, entered, and we rely on a miracle</b> to close the doors so that an excessive number of people not enter and thus create a danger (Rabbeinu Ḥananel). <b>Rava said: We learned</b> in the mishna <b>that</b> people would <b>close</b> the doors, <b>and we do not rely on a miracle</b> to ensure that the courtyard not become overly crowded.

### Part 7
<b>And that which we learned</b> elsewhere in a mishna with regard to the ban placed upon Akavya ben Mahalalel for having spoken harshly about Shemaya and Avtalyon, that <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: Heaven forbid that Akavya ben Mahalalel was banned;</b> it must have been someone else, as even when the entire Jewish people would come to Jerusalem for the Festival, <b>the Temple courtyard would not close on any man from Israel</b> as full of <b>wisdom and fear of sin as Akavya ben Mahalalel; Abaye</b> can <b>explain</b> this statement <b>according to his opinion, and Rava</b> can also <b>explain</b> it <b>according to his opinion. Abaye</b> can <b>explain</b> it <b>according to his opinion</b> as follows: <b>No man from Israel was in the Temple courtyard when it closed by itself</b> who was as full of <b>wisdom and fear of sin as Akavya ben Mahalalel. Rava,</b> too, can <b>explain</b> it <b>according to his opinion</b> as follows: <b>No</b> man <b>from Israel was in the Temple courtyard when they closed it</b> who was as full of <b>wisdom and fear of sin as Akavya ben Mahalalel.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught: No one was ever crushed</b> by the great throngs of people <b>in the Temple courtyard, except for one Passover in the days of Hillel when an old man was crushed, and they called</b> that Passover <b>the Passover of the crushed.</b>

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught: Once, King Agrippa wished to set his eyes on the multitudes [<i>ukhlosin</i>] of Israel</b> to know how many they were. He <b>said to the High Priest: Set your eyes on the Paschal lambs;</b> count how many animals are brought in order to approximate the number of people. The High Priest <b>took a kidney from each one,</b> as the kidneys are burned on the altar, <b>and six hundred thousand pairs of kidneys were found there, double</b> the number of <b>those who left Egypt.</b> This did not reflect the sum total of the Jewish people, as it <b>excluded those who were ritually impure or at a great distance,</b> who did not come to offer the sacrifice. Furthermore, this was a count of the Paschal lambs and not of the people, <b>and there was not a single Paschal lamb that did not have more than ten people registered for it. They called that</b> Passover <b>the Passover of the crowded,</b> due to the large number of people.

### Part 10
The Gemara questions one of the details of this story: How could the High Priest <b>take a kidney?</b> Didn’t <b>he have to burn it</b> on the altar? The Gemara answers: <b>He</b> first took the kidneys for the count, and <b>subsequently he burned them.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t it written: “And</b> the priest <b>shall burn it</b> on the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire to the Lord” (Leviticus 3:11)? The singular “it” apparently indicates that <b>he must not mix</b> the <b>fats of this</b> sacrifice <b>with</b> those of <b>another;</b> rather, he must burn each set separately.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>He subsequently burned them one by one</b> and not all together. The Gemara asks further: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the plural “them” in the verse: “And the priest <b>shall burn them</b> upon the altar; it is the food of the offering made by fire for a satisfying aroma; all the fat is the Lord’s” (Leviticus 3:16) indicates <b>that all</b> the sacrificial parts of a sacrifice must be offered <b>at the same time? Rather,</b> it must be that when the High Priest took a kidney for counting, it was <b>merely</b> momentary <b>seizure;</b> that is, <b>he took it from them until they brought him something else</b> with which to keep track of the numbers, and it was this other item that was counted afterward.

### Part 12
It was stated in the mishna that <b>the priests stood in rows</b> and that there were rows of priests holding silver bowls and rows of priests holding gold bowls, but that in no rows were there both gold and silver bowls. <b>What is the reason</b> that there was no intermingling of gold and silver bowls? <b>If you say</b> that it was due to concern that <b>perhaps</b> a priest <b>would take a gold</b> bowl to keep for himself <b>and</b> then <b>return a silver</b> one in its place, the solution described in the mishna does not alleviate this concern. <b>Here, too,</b> in a row where everyone is holding gold bowls, there is concern that <b>perhaps</b> a priest <b>would take a two-hundred-</b>dinar bowl, keep it for himself, <b>and</b> then <b>return a</b> one-hundred-dinar bowl in its place (Rid). <b>Rather,</b> the reason is <b>that this</b> arrangement, where all the bowls in each row are of the same color, <b>is</b> aesthetically <b>more attractive.</b>

### Part 13
It was further stated in the mishna that <b>the bowls did not have</b> flat <b>bases.</b> The Gemara adds that <b>the Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> that states: <b>None of the bowls in the Temple had</b> flat <b>bases</b> for the same reason, so that they should not be put down, which would allow the blood to congeal. This was <b>with the exception of the bowls of frankincense</b> that would be placed on <b>the showbread,</b> which did have flat bases. They could not have sharp bottoms out of concern that <b>perhaps</b> the priests <b>would rest them on the bread and the bread would break.</b> The showbread had an intricate and delicate shape, and a bowl with a sharp bottom could pierce or break the bread.

### Part 14
It was taught in the mishna: <b>An Israelite would slaughter</b> the offering <b>and a priest would receive</b> the blood and pass it to other priests. The Gemara asks: <b>Is it not sufficient</b> if someone who is <b>not an Israelite</b> slaughters the offering? Must the ritual slaughter be performed specifically by an Israelite, and not by a priest or a Levite? The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>teaches us this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>itself, that</b> even if the <b>slaughter</b> is performed <b>by a non-priest</b> it <b>is valid.</b> And that which was stated in the mishna that <b>the priest receives</b> the blood <b>comes to teach us that from receiving and onward</b> the rite is <b>a commandment</b> cast <b>upon the priesthood,</b> and a non-priest may not perform it.

### Part 15
It was also taught in the mishna that the priest would <b>pass</b> the bowl of blood <b>to another</b> priest. The Gemara suggests: <b>Learn from this that carrying without walking,</b> i.e., transporting the blood to the altar by passing it from hand to hand without actually walking with it to the altar, <b>is</b> considered a valid act of <b>carrying</b> the blood of a sacrifice to the altar, one of the four rites involved in the offering of a sacrifice. This would resolve the same unanswered question in tractate <i>Zevaḥim</i>. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the priest <b>would move a little</b> with his feet as he passed the bowl to the next priest, in order to fulfill the requirement to walk with the blood to the altar. <b>Rather, what does this</b> account of how they transported the blood to the altar <b>teach us?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It teaches us</b> that the priests were arranged in rows in order to increase the number of people involved in the rite and fulfill the principle that <b>“in the multitude of people is the king’s glory”</b> (Proverbs 14:28).

### Part 16
It was further stated in the mishna that each priest would <b>receive a full</b> bowl of blood <b>and return an empty</b> one. The Gemara infers: <b>But the opposite</b> was <b>not</b> done; the priest would not first return an empty bowl and then receive a full one. This <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, as Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: One must not postpone</b> the performance of <b>mitzvot.</b> When one is presented with the opportunity to fulfill a mitzva, he must do so immediately and not delay for any reason. In this case, since bringing the blood to the altar is a mitzva, the priest should first fulfill the mitzva at hand and receive the full bowl of blood, and only then should he return the empty bowl.

### Part 17
It was also stated in the mishna that <b>the priest who was closest to the altar</b> would sprinkle the blood upon the altar. <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who holds that the blood of <b>the Paschal lamb</b> requires <b>sprinkling</b> from afar upon the altar, and that pouring the blood directly from the bowl onto the altar does not suffice? <b>Rav Ḥisda said: It is Rabbi Yosei HaGelili.</b>

### Part 18
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says:</b> The verse states: “But the firstborn of an ox, or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat, you shall not redeem, they are sacred; <b>you shall sprinkle their blood upon the altar and you shall burn their fat</b> for an offering made by fire, for a satisfying aroma to the Lord” (Numbers 18:17). <b>It is not stated: Its blood, but</b> rather <b>“their blood.”</b> Similarly, <b>it is not stated: Its fat, but</b> rather <b>“their fat.”</b> This <b>teaches with regard to the firstborn</b> animal, which is mentioned explicitly in the verse, as well as <b>the tithed animal and the Paschal lamb,</b> which have a level of sanctity similar to a firstborn animal, <b>that they</b> all <b>require placement of their blood and sacrificial parts on the altar,</b> although the Torah does not give explicit instructions with regard to this aspect of the rite for a tithed animal or Paschal lamb.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that their blood <b>requires</b> sprinkling upon the altar on a side that has a <b>base? Rabbi Elazar said: This is derived</b> by way of a verbal analogy between the word <b>sprinkling</b> used here and the word <b>sprinkling</b> used <b>with regard to a burnt-offering. Here, it is written: “You shall sprinkle their blood upon the altar;” there, it is written</b> with regard to a burnt-offering: “And he shall slaughter it on the side of the altar northward before the Lord; <b>and the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall sprinkle its blood round about upon the altar”</b> (Leviticus 1:11). <b>Just as</b> the blood of a <b>burnt-offering must</b> be sprinkled on the altar in a place where there is <b>a base, so too,</b> the blood of a <b>Paschal lamb must</b> be sprinkled in a place where there is <b>a base.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC