
### Part 1
Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> with regard to creeping animals: “And every earthenware vessel into which any of them falls, <b>whatever is in it shall be impure,</b> and you shall break it” (Leviticus 11:33). <b>And juxtaposed to it</b> is the verse: <b>“From all food</b> in it which may be eaten, upon which water comes, shall be impure” (Leviticus 11:34). This indicates that <b>food is rendered impure by the airspace of an earthenware vessel, but not all vessels are rendered impure by the airspace of an earthenware vessel.</b> This <i>baraita</i> proves that the earthenware vessel itself is not considered to be filled with carcasses of creeping animals, and therefore it does not render everything inside it impure with first-degree impurity. Were the earthenware vessel indeed considered as if it were filled with impurity, vessels inside it would also assume first-degree ritual impurity.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Ḥisda raised a contradiction</b> between one statement with regard to <b>Passover and</b> another statement with regard to <b>Passover, and he resolved</b> this contradiction himself. The Gemara elaborates: <b>Did Rabbi Yehoshua</b> actually <b>say</b> that <b>both of them</b> may be burned <b>as one,</b> <i>teruma</i> whose purity is uncertain, and definitely impure <i>teruma</i>, on Passover eve?

### Part 3
<b>And</b> he <b>raised a contradiction</b> from the <i>Tosefta</i>, as <b>Rabbi Yosei said: The</b> inferred <b>conclusion</b> of burning pure and impure leaven together <b>is not similar to the</b> case from which you cited <b>proof. When</b> Rabbi Meir said that <b>the Sages,</b> Rabbi Ḥanina the deputy High Priest and Rabbi Akiva, <b>testified, about what did they testify? If</b> you assert that Rabbi Meir said with regard <b>to meat that became ritually impure through</b> contact with <b>a secondary source of impurity, that one</b> may <b>burn it</b> together <b>with meat that became impure through</b> contact with <b>a primary source of impurity,</b> that is a case where both <b>this</b> meat <b>is impure and that</b> meat <b>is impure,</b> albeit not at the same level of impurity.

### Part 4
Rabbi Yosei continues: <b>If</b> you say that Rabbi Meir is referring <b>to</b> the statement of Rabbi Akiva, with regard <b>to oil that was disqualified by one who immersed himself during that day, that one</b> may <b>kindle it in a lamp that became ritually impure</b> with first-degree impurity <b>through</b> contact with one who became <b>ritually impure</b> with impurity imparted by <b>a corpse,</b> that is a case where <b>this</b> substance <b>is disqualified and that</b> object <b>is impure. We also concede with regard to <i>teruma</i> that became impure from a secondary source of impurity, that one</b> may <b>burn it with <i>teruma</i> that became ritually impure from a primary source of impurity,</b> even though the first <i>teruma</i> will assume a greater degree of impurity. <b>However, how will we burn</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> whose impure status is uncertain, together <b>with ritually impure</b> <i>teruma</i>? <b>Perhaps Elijah</b> the Prophet <b>will come</b> and establish prophetically that the <i>teruma</i> is not ritually impure, <b>and render it ritually pure.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> Rav Ḥisda himself <b>resolved</b> the contradiction: <b>This</b> statement that was taught in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua, that one burns <i>teruma</i> in abeyance together with ritually impure <i>teruma</i>, is the ruling of <b>Rabbi Shimon and in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> whereas <b>that</b> statement, that one may not burn them together, is the ruling of <b>Rabbi Yosei and in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara cites the source of this tannaitic dispute with regard to Rabbi Yehoshua’s opinion. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If the <b>fourteenth</b> of Nisan <b>occurs on Shabbat,</b> one may not remove the leaven on Passover eve in the usual manner, and therefore <b>one removes everything before Shabbat, and he burns</b> all <b><i>teruma</i></b> together, <b>impure</b> <i>teruma</i>, <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance, and pure</b> <i>teruma</i>. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> One burns <b>pure</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>by itself,</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance by itself, and impure</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>by itself.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Shimon said: Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua did not disagree about ritually pure</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>and about impure</b> <i>teruma</i>. They agree <b>that one</b> may <b>not burn</b> them together. And neither did they disagree <b>about</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance and about pure</b> <i>teruma</i>. They agree <b>that one</b> may <b>burn</b> them together. Since the <i>teruma</i> is not definitely impure, he does not appear to be directly impurifying the <i>teruma</i>. <b>With regard to what did they disagree?</b> They disagree <b>with regard to</b> burning <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance and impure</b> <i>teruma</i> together, <b>as Rabbi Eliezer says: This</b> <i>teruma</i> should <b>be burned by itself and that</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>by itself.</b> Since this case involves <i>teruma</i> that is definitely impure, if the <i>teruma</i> in abeyance is actually pure, by burning them together he will have rendered it impure. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> One may burn <b>both of them as one.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Isn’t the mishna</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei?</b> How can Rabbi Yosei’s statement be attributed to Rabbi Shimon? The Gemara answers: <b>This is</b> what <b>Rabbi Yosei is saying to Rabbi Meir: Even</b> according to <b>Rabbi Shimon in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua, who is lenient, where he</b> rules <b>leniently</b> it is only <b>with regard to</b> burning <i>teruma</i> <b>in abeyance and impure</b> <i>teruma</i> together. <b>However, with regard to ritually pure</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>and impure</b> <i>teruma</i> together, <b>no,</b> even he does not permit burning them together.

### Part 9
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, raised a contradiction</b> between the previous statement with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> and a <i>halakha</i> <b>of Passover, and he resolved it</b> himself. The Gemara clarifies: <b>Did Rabbi Yehoshua</b> actually <b>say</b> that <b>both</b> <i>teruma</i> in abeyance and impure <i>teruma</i> may be burned <b>together?</b>

### Part 10
<b>And</b> he <b>raised a contradiction</b> from a mishna: In the case of <b>a barrel of <i>teruma</i></b> produce <b>with regard to which uncertainty developed</b> about its <b>impurity, Rabbi Eliezer says: If</b> the barrel <b>was resting in a vulnerable place,</b> where it may come into contact with impurity, <b>one</b> should <b>place it in a concealed place, and if it was exposed he</b> should <b>cover it. Rabbi Yehoshua says: If it was placed in a concealed place</b> he may <b>place it in a vulnerable place. And if it was covered he</b> may <b>expose it.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara infers from this mishna: In any case, passive <b>causation</b> of <i>teruma</i> whose impurity is uncertain to become definitely impure, <b>yes,</b> it is permitted. However, to actively render <i>teruma</i> impure <b>with</b> one’s <b>hands, no,</b> it is prohibited. This ruling contradicts the previous <i>halakha</i> that one may burn <i>teruma</i> in abeyance and impure <i>teruma</i> together. <b>And</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, <b>resolved</b> this apparent contradiction himself: <b>This</b> statement, that one is permitted to burn <i>teruma</i> in abeyance together with ritually impure <i>teruma</i>, is the ruling of <b>Rabbi Shimon in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> whereas <b>that</b> statement, that one may cause this impurity only passively, is the ruling of <b>Rabbi Yosei in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua.</b>

### Part 12
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Elazar raised a contradiction</b> between one <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> and another <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i>, and resolved</b> the contradiction himself. The Gemara explains: <b>Did Rabbi Yehoshua</b> actually <b>say</b> that passive <b>causation</b> of <i>teruma</i> whose impurity is uncertain to become definitely impure, <b>yes,</b> it is permitted; however, to actively render <i>teruma</i> impure <b>with</b> his <b>hands, no,</b> it is prohibited?

### Part 13
<b>And</b> he <b>raised a contradiction</b> against this from a mishna: With regard to <b>a barrel of <i>teruma</i></b> wine <b>that broke in the upper</b> area <b>in a winepress,</b> where grapes are pressed, <b>and</b> there is <b>impure, non-sacred</b> wine in the <b>lower</b> area of the press, where the wine flows from the upper area, if the <i>teruma</i> wine would flow into the non-sacred wine, the <i>teruma</i> wine would be rendered ritually impure. The result would be significant financial loss, as the legal status of all the wine in the lower press would be that of impure <i>teruma</i>, which is prohibited even for priests to drink.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Eliezer concedes to Rabbi Yehoshua that if one is able to rescue</b> even <b>a quarter-</b><i>log</i> <b>from</b> the barrel that broke and keep the wine <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity,</b> by receiving the <i>teruma</i> wine in a vessel before it becomes impure, <b>he</b> should <b>rescue</b> it. <b>And</b> if <b>one cannot</b> receive the wine in a pure vessel, as only impure vessels are available, so that if he uses them to receive the wine or to seal the upper press he will render the <i>teruma</i> impure, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The <i>teruma</i> wine should be allowed to <b>descend and become impure</b> on its own, <b>but one</b> should <b>not</b> actively <b>render it impure with</b> his <b>hand.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: One</b> may even actively <b>render it impure with</b> his <b>hand,</b> by stopping the pipe connecting between the upper and lower presses with an impure vessel or by receiving the wine in impure vessels. Evidently, Rabbi Yehoshua allows one even to actively impurify pure <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>resolved</b> this contradiction himself: <b>There,</b> with regard to the broken barrel, <b>it is different, as,</b> in that case, <b>there is</b> the potential <b>loss of non-sacred</b> produce, when the <i>teruma</i> wine descends to the lower press. The non-sacred wine will become prohibited due to the mixture with impure <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 17
<b>Rava strongly objects to this</b> claim: In <b>the mishna too there is</b> a <b>loss of wood,</b> as one requires additional wood to kindle a second fire and burn the impure <i>teruma</i> separately. <b>Abaye said to him:</b> With regard to this and similar issues, the Sages <b>were concerned about a great loss.</b> However, <b>they were not concerned about</b> the <b>minimal loss</b> of several pieces of wood.

### Part 18
<b>And from where do you say</b> that the Sages <b>were concerned about a great loss and they were not concerned about a minimal loss? As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a barrel of <i>teruma</i> oil that broke in the upper</b> area of the olive <b>press, and in the lower</b> area of the press there is <b>impure, non-sacred</b> produce, <b>Rabbi Eliezer concedes to Rabbi Yehoshua that if one can rescue</b> even <b>a quarter-</b><i>log</i> of the oil <b>in</b> a state of <b>purity from</b> the barrel, <b>he</b> should <b>rescue</b> it. <b>And</b> if <b>one cannot</b> receive the oil in a pure vessel, the <i>teruma</i> oil should be allowed to <b>descend and become impure</b> on its own, <b>but one</b> should <b>not</b> actively <b>render it impure with</b> his <b>hand.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara answers: <b>What is different</b> about <b>oil</b> that, as opposed to wine, everyone agrees may not be actively rendered impure? If you say the reason is <b>that</b> even if the <i>teruma</i> falls into the lower press and is intermingled with impure <i>teruma</i>, <b>it is</b> still <b>suitable for lighting</b> and not entirely lost, if so, <b>wine is also fit for sprinkling</b> in one’s house to provide a pleasant fragrance. Impure <i>teruma</i> wine could be used for that purpose.

### Part 20
<b>And lest you say</b> that <b>sprinkling</b> wine <b>is not</b> a significant <b>matter,</b> and would be tantamount to destroying the <i>teruma</i>, <b>didn’t Shmuel say in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya: One drinks from</b> wine valued at <b>a <i>log</i> for a <i>sela</i>, and one sprinkles from</b> wine valued at <b>a <i>log</i> for two</b> <i>sela</i>. Apparently, sprinkling is a more significant use than drinking. The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to new</b> wine still in the press, which does not have a strong fragrance and cannot be used for sprinkling.

### Part 21
The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But isn’t</b> the wine <b>fit to be aged,</b> at which point it could be used for sprinkling, and would not be entirely lost. The Gemara answers: One may <b>thereby come to encounter a stumbling block,</b> as he might, with the passage of time, forget that it is ritually impure and come to drink it. The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to <b>oil too, one</b> may <b>thereby come to encounter a stumbling block,</b> in the same way.

### Part 22
The Gemara answers: The Gemara answers: Ritually impure <i>teruma</i> oil is permitted <b>because he places it in a repulsive vessel,</b> so that people will be disinclined to consume it and will use it only for lighting. The Gemara suggests: With regard to <b>wine, too,</b> he can <b>place it in a repulsive vessel.</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion: That is not possible. Is it reasonable that <b>one</b> who <b>wants</b> the wine <b>for sprinkling will place it in a repulsive vessel?</b> One sprinkles wine to add a pleasant odor, which would not be the case if the wine has been left in a disgusting vessel.

### Part 23
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> concern for <b>a stumbling block</b> by keeping prohibited items <b>is itself</b> subject to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a barrel of <i>teruma</i> wine that became ritually impure, Beit Shammai say: It</b> should <b>be poured out all at once, and Beit Hillel say:</b> One should wait until it ages, at which stage <b>it</b> may <b>be used for spraying.</b>

### Part 24
<b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said: I will decide</b> this dispute. If the barrel was <b>in a field, it</b> should <b>be poured out all at once,</b> lest the ritual impurity of the barrel be forgotten by the time it is brought inside the house. However, if the barrel was <b>in the house,</b> where it could be used immediately, <b>it</b> may <b>be used for sprinkling. Some say</b> that Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, decided: <b>In</b> the case of <b>new</b> wine, <b>it</b> should <b>be poured out all at once;</b> but <b>in</b> the case of <b>old</b> wine, <b>it should be used for spraying. They said to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC