
### Part 1
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav</b> was <b>the son of Rabbi Ḥiyya’s</b> half <b>brother and the son of</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya’s half <b>sister,</b> as Ayevu, Rav’s father, married his own stepsister, Imma. <b>When</b> Rav <b>ascended there,</b> to Eretz Yisrael, Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to</b> Rav: <b>Is</b> your father, <b>Ayevu, alive? He said to him,</b> replying with a question: <b>Is</b> your sister, <b>Imma, alive? He said to him:</b> Indeed, <b>is Imma alive? He said to him: Is Ayevu alive?</b> Upon hearing this, Rabbi Ḥiyya understood that both Ayevu and Imma had passed away, and Rav did not wish to say so explicitly.

### Part 2
Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to his attendant: Remove my shoes and carry my garments after me to the bathhouse.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Learn from</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya’s instructions <b>three</b> <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>wearing shoes</b> is <b>prohibited</b> for <b>a mourner,</b> which is why he instructed his servant to remove his shoes. <b>And learn from it</b> that for <b>distant tidings</b> mourning <b>is practiced only one day.</b> One who receives tidings of the death of a relative more than thirty days after he died, does not mourn for seven days. The <i>halakhot</i> of mourning apply for only a single day. <b>And learn from it</b> that with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of mourning, the legal status of <b>part of the day is like</b> that <b>of an entire</b> day. The Gemara derives this <i>halakha</i> from the fact that Rabbi Ḥiyya removed his shoes and immediately thereafter went to the bathhouse, an act that is prohibited for a mourner. He was permitted to do so because the restrictions of the mourning period were no longer in effect after briefly going without shoes.

### Part 3
With regard to the precision required in language, the Gemara relates: <b>A certain</b> man <b>would</b> regularly <b>say</b> whenever involved in conflict: <b>Adjudicate my case [<i>dunu dini</i>].</b> The Sages <b>said: Learn from it</b> that <b>he descends from</b> the tribe of <b>Dan, as it is written: “Dan will judge [<i>yadin</i>] his people like one of the tribes of Israel”</b> (Genesis 49:16). He expressed himself that way due to his lineage.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates a similar incident: <b>A certain</b> man <b>would</b> regularly <b>walk and say: The bushes on the seashore are cypresses</b> (<i>ge’onim</i>), i.e., items located by the sea are more beautiful than those found in other places. <b>They examined</b> his lineage <b>and found that he descends from</b> the tribe of <b>Zebulun, as it is written: “Zebulun shall dwell by the seashore”</b> (Genesis 49:13). That explains his love of all things close to the sea.

### Part 5
The Gemara returns to the issue of the search for leaven. <b>And now that we maintain that everyone agrees</b> the word <b><i>or</i></b> in the mishna <b>is evening,</b> consider the following: <b>After all, both according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda and according to</b> that of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who disagree with regard to the deadline decreed by the Sages to remove all leaven, <b>it is prohibited</b> to derive benefit from <b>leavened bread</b> by Torah law <b>only from the sixth hour</b> of the day <b>and onward. And</b> if so, <b>let us search</b> for leaven at <b>six</b> hours of the day, and eliminate the leaven at that point.

### Part 6
<b>And lest you say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the principle that <b>the vigilant are early</b> in the performance <b>of mitzvot, let us search in the morning.</b> The principle: The vigilant are early in the performance of mitzvot, is derived, <b>as it is written: “And on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised”</b> (Leviticus 12:3). <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The entire day is suitable for</b> performance of the mitzva of <b>circumcision; however, the vigilant are early</b> in the performance <b>of mitzvot,</b> and circumcise in the morning. <b>As it is stated</b> with regard to the binding of Isaac: <b>“And Abraham arose early in the morning”</b> (Genesis 22:3) after hearing God’s command. This indicates that Abraham arose early in his eagerness to perform God’s commandment.

### Part 7
The Gemara cites an answer to its initial question of why the search for leaven is not conducted in the morning. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> One searches for leaven <b>in</b> the evening as it is <b>a time when people are found in their homes,</b> and they have the opportunity to perform the search. <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>the light of the lamp is favorable for</b> conducting a <b>search</b> specifically at night. As the search is conducted with a lamp, it is preferable to search at night.

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said: Therefore,</b> in light of the above <i>halakha</i>, <b>a Torah scholar should not begin his</b> regularly scheduled <b>period</b> of Torah study <b>in the evening</b> at the conclusion <b>of the thirteenth</b> of Nisan <b>that</b> is <b>the evening of the fourteenth,</b> as <b>perhaps he will become engrossed in the <i>halakha</i></b> he is studying <b>and will come to be prevented from</b> performing the <b>mitzva</b> of searching for leaven.

### Part 9
<b>They raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak:</b> With regard to <b>one who lets a house to another on the fourteenth</b> of Nisan, <b>upon whom</b> is it incumbent <b>to search</b> for leaven? Is it incumbent <b>upon the lessor to search</b> for leaven, <b>as the leavened bread is his; or</b> is it <b>perhaps</b> incumbent <b>upon the lessee to search, as the</b> source of the <b>prohibition is in his domain</b> since he will be living in the house during Passover? He answered: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an answer from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who lets a house to another,</b> the obligation is <b>upon the lessee to affix a <i>mezuza</i> for it.</b> Apparently, the person renting the house is obligated to perform the mitzvot connected to the house.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>There,</b> in the case of <i>mezuza</i>, <b>didn’t Rav Mesharshiya say:</b> Affixing <b>a <i>mezuza</i> is the obligation of the resident?</b> The fact is that the owner of an uninhabited house is not obligated to affix a <i>mezuza</i> to its doors. If so, the question remains, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>here? Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to them</b> that <b>we</b> already <b>learned</b> the resolution to this dilemma in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who rents a house to another, if before he delivered the keys to</b> the renter <b>the fourteenth</b> of Nisan <b>began,</b> the obligation is <b>upon the lessor to search</b> for leaven. <b>And if</b> it was <b>after he delivered the keys to him</b> that <b>the fourteenth began,</b> the obligation is <b>upon the lessee to search</b> for leaven.

### Part 11
<b>They raised</b> another <b>dilemma before Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak:</b> With regard to <b>one who lets a house to another on the fourteenth</b> of Nisan, is <b>its presumptive status</b> that it has been <b>searched or</b> is <b>it not its presumptive status that it has been searched?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the practical difference</b> between these possibilities? <b>Let him ask</b> the owner of the house. The Gemara responds: The situation here is one <b>where</b> the owner is <b>not</b> here <b>to ask him.</b> The dilemma is whether or not <b>to impose upon</b> the renter to search for the leaven. <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 12
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to them</b> that <b>we</b> already <b>learned</b> the resolution to this dilemma based on a related <i>baraita</i>: <b>Everyone is believed</b> to provide testimony <b>about the elimination of leavened bread; even women, even slaves,</b> and <b>even minors.</b> Although these people are typically not relied upon to deliver testimony, they are believed when they provide testimony that they have eliminated leaven. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>they are believed?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC