
### Part 1
<b>due to his children,</b> as <b>it is standard practice</b> for children to ride.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises another difficulty. <b>But isn’t it written</b> with regard to Abigail: “And it was so, <b>as she rode on her donkey</b> and came down by the covert of the mountain” (I Samuel 25:20). This verse employs the language of riding in reference to a woman on a donkey. The Gemara answers: <b>There, due to the fear of the night, it is standard practice</b> for a woman to ride and not merely sit on the donkey. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>There is no</b> consideration <b>due to the fear of the night</b> that would explain why she was permitted to ride in the regular manner; rather, <b>there is</b> a consideration <b>due to fear of David. And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>There is no</b> consideration <b>due to fear of David either;</b> however, <b>there is</b> a consideration <b>due to the fear of</b> the incline when riding down <b>the mountain.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t</b> the word <b>impure written in the Torah?</b> Apparently, the Torah does not consistently employ euphemisms, and indeed the word impure appears regularly. <b>Rather, anywhere that</b> two phrases <b>are equal</b> in length, the verse <b>speaks</b> employing <b>a euphemism. Anywhere that the words</b> of the euphemism <b>are</b> more <b>numerous,</b> requiring a lengthier description, the Torah <b>speaks</b> employing <b>concise language, in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said, and some say it</b> was <b>Rav Huna</b> who <b>said</b> that <b>Rav said in the name of Rabbi Meir: A person should always teach his student in a concise manner.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And anywhere that</b> the phrases <b>are equal in</b> length, does the verse always <b>speak</b> employing <b>dignified language? Aren’t</b> the Hebrew words for <b>rides [<i>rokhevet</i>],</b> spelled: <i>Reish</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>kaf</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>tav</i>; <b>and sits [<i>yoshevet</i>],</b> spelled: <i>Yod</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>tav</i>, <b>of equal</b> length, and yet the verse <b>states: Rides</b> (I Samuel 25:20). The Gemara answers: The Hebrew word for <b>rides is written</b> without a <i>vav</i> in the defective form, rendering it shorter than the term for sits. Brevity takes precedence over dignified language.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates an incident involving the use of appropriate language: There were <b>these two students who were sitting before Rav</b> and were weary from studying a complex issue. <b>One</b> of them <b>said: This <i>halakha</i></b> we are studying <b>is rendering us</b> as tired <b>as a tired [<i>mesankan</i>] something else,</b> a euphemism for a pig. <b>And</b> the other <b>one said: This <i>halakha</i> is rendering us</b> as tired <b>as a tired kid. Rav</b> would <b>not speak with that</b> student who made reference to a pig, as one who speaks inappropriately is undoubtedly flawed in character.

### Part 6
The Gemara additionally relates that there were <b>these two students who were sitting before Hillel, and one of them</b> was <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai. And some say</b> they were sitting <b>before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and one of them was</b> the <i>amora</i> <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan. One</b> of them <b>said: Due to what</b> reason need <b>one</b> be careful to <b>harvest grapes in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity,</b> by insisting on the use of pure vessels, <b>and one need not harvest olives in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity? And</b> the other <b>one said</b> the same point, only he worded it differently: <b>Due to what</b> reason need <b>one harvest grapes in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity, but one</b> may <b>harvest olives in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity?</b> Their teacher <b>said: I am certain that this</b> first student, who spoke in a clean manner, will <b>issue</b> halakhic <b>rulings in Israel.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> it was <b>not</b> even <b>a few days later that he issued</b> halakhic <b>rulings in Israel.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara relates an incident involving the use of appropriate language. There were <b>these three priests</b> in the Temple, each of whom received a portion of the showbread divided among the priests. Since there were many priests, each one received only a small amount. <b>One said to them: I received a bean-sized</b> portion. <b>And one said: I received an olive-bulk. And one said: I received</b> a portion the size <b>of a lizard’s tail. They investigated the background</b> of the latter priest, who used the imagery of an impure creeping animal, <b>and they found a trace [<i>shemetz</i>] of disqualification in his</b> background. The Gemara assumes that they found a problem in his lineage that disqualified him from the priesthood. 

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>one does not investigate</b> a priest’s lineage <b>beyond the altar?</b> When the court investigated the lineage of a priest, they would investigate his ancestry only until they discovered a priest who sacrificed offerings on the altar. At that point, they would halt the investigation. A priest of questionable lineage would certainly not have been permitted to serve on the altar. However, in this incident the lineage of a priest who had brought offerings was indeed called into question.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>Do not say</b> that they found <b>a trace [<i>shemetz</i>] of disqualification,</b> referring to his lineage. <b>Rather, say</b> that they found <b>arrogance [<i>shaḥatz</i>] of disqualification,</b> and for that reason he was disqualified from the priesthood. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>There it is different, as he cast aspersions upon himself.</b> Although it is generally assumed that any priest who participates in the Temple service is qualified to do so, this priest discredited his own lineage through his conduct.

### Part 10
With regard to the investigation of the priestly lineage, the Gemara relates: <b>A certain gentile would ascend</b> on the pilgrimage to Jerusalem, claiming he was Jewish, <b>and eat Paschal</b> lambs <b>in Jerusalem.</b> He would then return home and boast about how he had tricked the Jews. <b>He said: It is written:</b> “This is the statute of the Paschal lamb; <b>no foreigner may eat of it”</b> (Exodus 12:43), and another verse says: <b>“Any uncircumcised man shall not eat of it”</b> (Exodus 12:48). <b>And</b> yet, <b>I ate from the finest of the fine</b> portions of the Paschal lamb.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira said to him,</b> in an attempt to thwart any repetition of this action: <b>Did they feed you from the fat tail</b> of the lamb? Do you really think they gave you the finest portion? The gentile was ignorant of the fact that the fat tail is sacrificed on the altar, not eaten. The gentile <b>said to him: No.</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira replied: If so, <b>when you ascend there</b> next time, <b>say to them: Feed me the fat tail.</b> The next year <b>when he ascended, he said to</b> the other members of the group he joined: <b>Feed me from the fat tail. They said to him: The fat tail is</b> offered <b>up to God.</b>

### Part 12
<b>They said to him: Who said that to you,</b> to ask for that portion? <b>He said to them</b> testily: It was <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira. They said: What is this</b> incident that has come <b>before us?</b> Could Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira have told him to eat the fat tail? This matter must be investigated further. <b>They investigated his background and found that he was a gentile, and</b> they <b>killed him. They sent</b> a message <b>to Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira: Peace unto you, Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, as you</b> are <b>in Netzivin and your net is spread in Jerusalem.</b> Despite your distance from Jerusalem, you enabled us to apprehend a person who deceived us.

### Part 13
The Gemara relates another incident in praise of one who is careful to refrain from improper or negative language. <b>Rav Kahana fell ill, and the Sages sent Rabbi Yehoshua, son of Rav Idi,</b> as their emissary to him. <b>They said to him: Go</b> and <b>assess what is</b> Rav Kahana’s <b>condition</b> at present. Rabbi Yehoshua, son <b>of</b> Rav Idi, <b>went and found that</b> Rav Kahana <b>had passed away. He rent his garment and turned</b> his garment around so <b>the tear</b> would be <b>behind him</b> and would not be immediately apparent, <b>and he was crying</b> as he <b>was coming. They said to him: Did</b> Rav Kahana <b>pass away? He said to them: I did not say</b> that, as the verse states: <b>“And he who utters slander is a fool”</b> (Proverbs 10:18). This verse indicates that it is undesirable to be a bearer of bad tidings, and if one must inform others of the unfortunate news, he should do so in an indirect manner.

### Part 14
The Gemara continues to cite examples of clean language: <b>Yoḥanan from Ḥakuk went to the villages. When he came, they said to him:</b> Did the <b>wheat</b> crop <b>develop nicely?</b> Reluctant to say that the wheat crop did not develop nicely, <b>he said to them:</b> The <b>barley</b> crop <b>developed nicely,</b> leaving them to draw their own conclusion. <b>They said to him,</b> mockingly: <b>Go out and inform the horses and donkeys</b> about the barley, <b>as it is written: “Barley and hay for the horses and swift steeds”</b> (I Kings 5:8). The Gemara asks: <b>What could he have said</b> to better express the bad news euphemistically? The Gemara answers: He could have said: <b>Last year’s wheat</b> crop <b>developed nicely. Alternatively,</b> he could have said that this year’s crop of <b>lentils,</b> which is also food for people, <b>has developed nicely.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC