### Part 1
<b>The decision</b> of the <b>third</b> opinion of Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, is <b>not</b> considered <b>a decision</b> in this case, as the other two Sages do not raise the issue of a stumbling block at all.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua with regard to a barrel of <i>teruma</i> that broke in an upper press and was flowing down into the lower press applies only to a case <b>where</b> one <i>se’a</i> of <i>teruma</i> <b>fell into less than one hundred <i>se’a</i> of impure, non-sacred</b> wine in the lower press.

### Part 3
<b>However,</b> if the <i>teruma</i> wine <b>fell into one hundred</b> <i>se’a</i> of <b>ritually impure, non-sacred</b> produce, <b>everyone agrees</b> that the wine should be allowed to <b>descend and become ritually impure</b> by itself, <b>and one</b> should <b>not</b> actively <b>render it impure with</b> his <b>hand.</b> The reason is that if <i>teruma</i> falls into non-sacred produce one hundred times greater in quantity than itself, the <i>teruma</i> is nullified by the non-sacred produce, and therefore, it would be permitted for a non-priest to eat it. Although it becomes ritually impure, the legal status of the nullified <i>teruma</i> is that of non-sacred produce.

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: <b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a barrel of <i>teruma</i></b> wine <b>that broke in the upper winepress, and in the lower</b> press there is <b>one hundred</b> times that amount of <b>ritually impure, non-sacred</b> wine, <b>Rabbi Eliezer concedes to Rabbi Yehoshua that if one is able to rescue</b> even <b>a quarter-</b><i>log</i> <b>from</b> the barrel that broke and keep the wine <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity, he</b> should <b>rescue</b> it. <b>And</b> if <b>not,</b> one should let the <i>teruma</i> wine <b>descend and become impure</b> on its own, <b>but he</b> should <b>not</b> actively <b>render it impure with</b> his <b>hand.</b>

### Part 5
After citing proof for the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, from this source, the Gemara questions the formulation of the <i>baraita</i> itself. <b>This</b> expression: <b>Rabbi Eliezer concedes to Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> is puzzling, as Rabbi Eliezer ruled that one may never directly render the barrel impure. The <i>baraita</i> <b>should</b> say the opposite: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua concedes to Rabbi Eliezer,</b> as it is Rabbi Yehoshua who concedes that one may not render impure the barrel of <i>teruma</i> in the upper vat. <b>Rava said: Reverse</b> the names, so that it is Rabbi Yehoshua who concedes to Rabbi Eliezer.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: Actually, do not reverse</b> the names. Rather, <b>with what are we dealing here?</b> We are referring to a case where it is possible to collect the wine only <b>in a vessel whose interior is ritually pure and whose exterior is impure</b> by rabbinic law, having become impure through contact with impure liquids. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>we</b> should <b>issue a decree</b> that one may not rescue even a quarter-<i>log</i>, <b>lest the</b> vessel’s <b>exterior touch the <i>teruma</i></b> and render it impure, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Eliezer concedes to Rabbi Yehoshua that despite that concern, it is permitted to rescue a quarter-<i>log</i> of pure <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 7
end of chapter

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For the <b>entire time that it is permitted to eat</b> leavened bread, <b>one</b> may also <b>feed</b> it <b>to</b> his <b>domesticated animals, to non-domesticated animals, and to birds; and one</b> may <b>sell</b> it <b>to a gentile; and it is permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit from it.</b> After <b>its time passes, it is prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit from it, and one may not</b> even <b>light an oven or a stove with</b> leavened bread. With regard to the manner of removal of leavened bread, <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The removal of leavened bread is</b> to be accomplished <b>only</b> through <b>burning. And the Rabbis say:</b> Burning is not required, as <b>one</b> may <b>even crumble</b> it <b>and throw</b> it <b>into the wind or cast</b> it <b>into the sea.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara reads the mishna precisely: For the <b>entire time that it is permitted to eat</b> leavened bread, <b>one</b> may <b>feed</b> it to his animals. <b>However,</b> apparently, for the <b>entire time that it is not permitted to eat</b> leavened bread, <b>one</b> may <b>not feed</b> his animals. <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, isn’t there</b> the <b>fifth</b> hour, when <b>one</b> may <b>not eat</b> leavened bread <b>but one</b> may <b>feed</b> it to his animals? <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabbi Meir says: One</b> may <b>eat</b> leavened bread on the morning of the fourteenth day of Nisan for <b>the entire fifth</b> hour, <b>and he burns</b> it <b>at the beginning of the sixth</b> hour. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One</b> may <b>eat</b> it for <b>the entire fourth</b> hour, <b>he suspends</b> his consumption of it for <b>the entire fifth</b> hour, <b>and he burns it at the beginning of the sixth</b> hour. Apparently, there is an hour in which it is prohibited to eat leavened bread, but it is permitted to feed it to one’s animals.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what</b> can be said? This mishna follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> If so, <b>this</b> statement: For the <b>entire time that it is permitted to eat</b> leavened bread <b>one</b> may <b>feed,</b> is imprecise. <b>It should have</b> said: For the <b>entire time that one eats</b> leavened bread <b>he</b> may <b>feed.</b> As it stands, there is no parallel between the phrase: It is permitted to eat, and the phrase: One may feed. Therefore, it appears that the mishna is referring to two different people or cases.

### Part 11
<b>Rabba bar Ulla said: The mishna is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel. As we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>Rabban Gamliel says: Non-sacred</b> leavened bread may <b>be eaten</b> on the fourteenth of Nisan during <b>the entire fourth</b> hour, leavened bread that is <b><i>teruma</i></b> may be eaten during <b>the entire fifth</b> hour, <b>and one burns</b> the leavened bread <b>at the beginning of the sixth</b> hour. <b>And this is</b> what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> For the <b>entire time that it is permitted</b> for <b>a priest to partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> although an Israelite may not eat leavened bread at that time, <b>an Israelite</b> may <b>feed non-sacred</b> food <b>to</b> his <b>domesticated animals, to non-domesticated animals, and to birds.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara continues to read the mishna precisely. The mishna states that one may feed his leavened bread to his domesticated animals, to non-domesticated animals, and to birds. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the mishna <b>to teach</b> about the case of <b>domesticated animals, and why do I</b> need it <b>to teach</b> about <b>non-domesticated animals</b> as well? The <i>halakha</i> should be the same for both cases. The Gemara answers: It is <b>necessary</b> to teach us both cases, <b>as had it taught</b> only about <b>domesticated animals,</b> one would have said that it is permitted feed them <b>because if</b> the animal <b>leaves over</b> some leavened bread <b>one will see</b> what is left over and dispose of it. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>a non-domesticated animal, if it leaves over</b> any of the leavened bread, <b>it hides it</b> to save for later. Therefore, one could <b>say</b> that it is <b>not</b> permitted to feed it so close to the time when leavened bread is prohibited.

### Part 13
<b>And had it taught</b> only the case of <b>a non-domesticated animal,</b> one might say that it is permitted to feed leavened bread to such an animal <b>because if it leaves over</b> any food <b>in any case it will hide</b> it, and the owner will not violate the prohibition: It shall not be seen. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>a domesticated animal, sometimes it leaves over</b> food, <b>and it does not enter his mind</b> that the animal will do so. <b>And</b> in that case both prohibitions: <b>It shall not be seen and it shall not be found,</b> would <b>apply to him.</b> Consequently, one could <b>say</b> that it would <b>not</b> be permitted for him to feed a domesticated animal. Therefore, <b>it was necessary</b> to teach both cases.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the mishna to mention <b>birds</b> as well? The Gemara answers: There is no inherent need to mention birds; however, <b>since</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> the cases of <b>domesticated animals and non-domesticated animals, it also taught</b> the case of <b>birds,</b> as these are normally grouped together.

### Part 15
It was stated in the mishna that whenever it is permitted to eat leavened bread, one may also <b>sell it to a gentile.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious,</b> as the mishna already taught that one may benefit from it? The Gemara answers: This is stated <b>to exclude</b> the opinion <b>of this <i>tanna</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Beit Shammai say: A person</b> may <b>not sell his leavened bread to a gentile unless he knows that</b> the leavened bread <b>will be consumed before Passover.</b> According to Beit Shammai, a person retains some responsibility for his leavened bread even when it is no longer in his possession. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> For the <b>entire time that it is permitted</b> for a Jew <b>to eat</b> leavened bread, <b>it is</b> also <b>permitted for him to sell it</b> to a gentile. The Jew ceases to be responsible for leavened bread sold to a gentile from the moment it is sold.