
### Part 1
<b>Rather,</b> it refers <b>to leavened bread,</b> which is prohibited all seven days of Passover in the generations following the Exodus. The Gemara asks: Does this prove <b>by inference that</b> during <b>the Passover of Egypt,</b> leaven was prohibited for only <b>one night and not more? But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: From where</b> is it derived with regard to <b>the Passover of Egypt that its</b> prohibition of <b>leavened bread applied for only one day? The verse states: “No leavened bread shall be eaten”</b> (Exodus 13:3), <b>and juxtaposed to it</b> the verse states: <b>“This day you go forth”</b> (Exodus 13:4), to teach that the prohibition of leaven applied in Egypt for only one day. In any event, the prohibition applied for an entire night and day, and not just one night.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> this question must be answered by saying that <b>this is</b> what <b>it said</b> in the mishna: The Paschal lamb was eaten in Egypt on <b>one night, and the same is true of the Paschal lamb of</b> later <b>generations; and its</b> prohibition against <b>leavened bread</b> applied <b>the entire day, and</b> on <b>Passover</b> in later <b>generations it applies to all seven</b> days of the Festival.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yehoshua said: I heard</b> two rulings from my teachers: One ruling was <b>that the substitute of a Paschal lamb is sacrificed</b> as a peace-offering after Passover, and another ruling was that <b>the substitute of a Paschal lamb is not sacrificed</b> as a peace-offering after Passover; <b>and I cannot explain</b> these two rulings, as I do not remember the circumstances to which each ruling applies.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Akiva said: I will explain:</b> With regard to a lamb that is separated as a <b>Paschal lamb</b> and is then lost, leading the owner to separate another animal as its replacement, <b>and is</b> later <b>found before the slaughter of the</b> replacement <b>Paschal lamb,</b> it is left to <b>graze until it becomes unfit [<i>yista’ev</i>]</b> and disqualified for use as a sacrifice. It is then <b>sold</b> and becomes unconsecrated, <b>and</b> the owner must <b>bring a peace-offering with its proceeds. And so too,</b> the same is true with regard to <b>its substitute:</b> If one separates another lamb as a substitute for this replacement, the sanctity of the original lamb extends to the substitute as well. In the case outlined above, the substitute would graze, just like the replacement, until it developed a blemish and would then be sold. This is the circumstance in which the substitute of a Paschal lamb is not sacrificed.

### Part 5
On the other hand, if the lost lamb is found <b>after</b> the <b>slaughter of the</b> replacement <b>Paschal lamb, it</b> itself <b>is sacrificed as a peace-offering, and so too, its substitute</b> is sacrificed, which explains the ruling that the substitute of a Paschal lamb is sacrificed as a peace-offering.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara questions the explanation of Rabbi Akiva: If so, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>say</b> these <i>halakhot</i> more simply, as follows: <b>The Paschal lamb</b> itself <b>is sacrificed and the Paschal lamb is not sacrificed.</b> According to Rabbi Akiva’s explanation, the same rule applies to both the lamb and its substitute. What additional point is Rabbi Yehoshua making by speaking about the substitute? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> comes to <b>teach us</b> through this formulation <b>that there is a</b> case of a <b>substitute Paschal lamb that is not sacrificed.</b> One might have thought that a substitute Paschal lamb is always treated as a peace-offering, even when it was substituted before the time of the slaughter; therefore, the mishna states that there is an instance in which it cannot be sacrificed because it is a substitute for a Paschal lamb that itself cannot be sacrificed.

### Part 7
<b>It was stated</b> that there was a dispute between <i>amora’im</i> about the proper text of the mishna. <b>Rabba said: We learned</b> the opinion of Rabbi Akiva in the mishna as referring to the distinction of whether the lamb is found <b>before</b> the <b>slaughter</b> of the replacement lamb <b>or after</b> the <b>slaughter</b> of the replacement lamb. <b>Rabbi Zeira said: We learned</b> that it depends upon whether it is found <b>before midday or after midday.</b> Midday is the time that determines the status of an animal as a Paschal lamb; therefore, if the lamb is found after midday, even if it is found before the slaughter of the replacement Paschal lamb, its identity as a Paschal lamb is not firmly established and it may be sacrificed as a peace-offering.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Zeira, isn’t</b> the mishna <b>teaching</b> explicitly that it depends upon whether the lamb is found <b>before the slaughter of the</b> replacement <b>Paschal lamb?</b> How can he disagree with the mishna? The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that according to Rabbi Zeira, the mishna must be interpreted as referring not to the act of the slaughter itself but to a lamb that is found <b>before the</b> earliest <b>time</b> for the <b>slaughter of the Paschal lamb,</b> which is midday.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes that this dispute among the <i>amora’im</i> <b>is like</b> the following dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> in a mishna: <b>The Paschal lamb that is found before the slaughter</b> of its substitute <b>shall be left to graze</b> until it becomes unfit; it is then sold, and the proceeds are used to purchase an animal that will be sacrificed as a peace-offering. If it is found <b>after the slaughter, it</b> itself <b>is to be sacrificed</b> as a peace-offering. This is parallel to the explanation of Rabba. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says</b> that if it is found <b>before midday it shall be left to graze,</b> but if it is found <b>after midday it is to be sacrificed</b> as a peace-offering, which is parallel to the explanation of Rabbi Zeira.

### Part 10
It was stated in the mishna that if the original lamb is found <b>after the slaughter of the</b> replacement <b>Paschal lamb, one</b> should <b>bring</b> the original lamb as a <b>peace-offering,</b> and the same applies to its substitute. <b>Rava said: They taught</b> that the substitute may be sacrificed as a peace-offering <b>only when</b> the original lamb <b>was found after the slaughter</b> of the replacement lamb <b>and one performed the substitution after the slaughter,</b> when the original lamb itself was fit to be offered as a peace-offering. <b>But</b> if the original lamb <b>was found before the slaughter,</b> even if <b>one performed the substitution after the slaughter</b> of the replacement lamb, the substitute lamb may not be sacrificed as an offering. The reason for this is that the original lamb may no longer be sacrificed as an offering and must be left to graze until it develops a blemish. Therefore, the sanctity of <b>its substitute comes on the strength of deferred sanctity, and</b> the substitute <b>may not be sacrificed.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava based on a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the verse: <b>“If</b> he brings <b>a lamb</b> for his offering” (Leviticus 3:7), <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “If</b> he brings <b>a lamb”?</b> What is added by the word “if”? It comes <b>to include the substitute of a Paschal lamb after</b> the slaughter of the replacement <b>Paschal lamb</b> and teaches <b>that it is offered as a peace-offering.</b>

### Part 12
Abaye clarifies the meaning of this <i>baraita</i>: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the case under discussion? <b>If we say</b> it is a case in which the lamb <b>was found after the slaughter and one performed the substitution after the slaughter, it is obvious,</b> as any Paschal lamb found after the slaughter of its replacement becomes a peace-offering; in that case, <b>why do I</b> need <b>a verse</b> to teach this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rather, is it not</b> addressing a case in which the original lamb <b>was found before the slaughter</b> of its replacement <b>and one performed the substitution after the slaughter</b> of the replacement, and nonetheless the substitute lamb may be offered as a peace-offering, in opposition to Rava’s ruling?

### Part 13
The Gemara responds: <b>No; actually</b> it can be explained as referring to a case in which the original lamb <b>was found after the slaughter</b> of the replacement, <b>and one performed the substitution after the slaughter.</b> It is indeed obvious and no verse is necessary to teach this <i>halakha</i>; <b>the verse</b> cited is not the source for this ruling but <b>is a mere support.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> then <b>for what</b> purpose does this <b>verse come?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The word <b>“lamb”</b> comes <b>to include the Paschal lamb</b> in the requirement that <b>the fat tail</b> be offered on the altar, as this <i>halakha</i> is not explicitly mentioned in the verses that relate to the Paschal lamb.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>When it says: “If</b> he brings <b>a lamb,”</b> which alludes to additional types of offerings it comes <b>to include</b> a lamb consecrated as <b>a Paschal lamb whose</b> first <b>year has passed</b> and is therefore too old to be offered as a Paschal lamb, or <b>peace-offerings that come due to a Paschal lamb,</b> both those separated as a substitute for a Paschal lamb and those that were actually consecrated as a Paschal lamb but the owner fulfilled his obligation with a different Paschal lamb, <b>in all the mitzvot of peace-offerings.</b> These offerings are no longer considered Paschal lambs and are treated as peace-offerings in every way. Therefore, <b>they require leaning and libations and the waving of the breast and thigh.</b>

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And when it says: “And if</b> his offering is a <b>she-goat”</b> (Leviticus 3:12), <b>it interrupted the</b> previous <b>matter and taught that the</b> offering of a <b>she-goat does not require</b> the <b>fat tail</b> to be burned on the altar.

### Part 17
The Gemara has concluded one version of the dispute between Rava and Abaye. However, <b>some teach this</b> dispute <b>with regard to the first clause</b> of the mishna, which states that <b>a Paschal lamb which is</b> first lost and then <b>found before the slaughter of the</b> replacement <b>Paschal lamb</b> must be <b>left to graze until it becomes unfit, and it is</b> then <b>sold, and one</b> must <b>bring a peace-offering with its proceeds; and likewise,</b> the same is the case with regard to <b>its substitute.</b>

### Part 18
With regard to this <i>halakha</i>, <b>Rava said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the original lamb <b>was found before the slaughter and one performed the substitution before the slaughter; but</b> if the original lamb <b>was found before the slaughter and one performed the substitution after the slaughter</b> of the replacement lamb, <b>its substitute is offered as a peace-offering. What is the reason</b> for his opinion? <b>The slaughter</b> of the replacement <b>establishes</b> a halakhic reality only with regard to <b>something which is fit for it;</b> in other words, it is only with regard to a Paschal lamb itself that it matters whether it was found before or after the slaughter. However, with regard to <b>something that was not fit for it,</b> such as the substitute, which cannot be offered as a Paschal lamb in any event, the slaughter <b>does not establish</b> its status. Therefore, it can later be sacrificed as a peace-offering.

### Part 19
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava based on the same <i>baraita</i> quoted previously: <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “If</b> he brings <b>a lamb”?</b> It comes <b>to include the substitute of a Paschal lamb after Passover, which is offered as a peace-offering.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC