
### michna 1
At three periods of the year, the priests shall raise their hands [to bless the people], in each prayer, [and] four times [in one of them], in the morning, additional, afternoon, and closing [or concluding] prayers. [The three mentioned periods are] on the fast-days, on the fast of the standing men, and on the day of atonement.

### michna 2
These are ‏ ma'amadot ; [standing men]. [The reason for this institution is] as it is written (Numbers 28:2), "Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, viz. my bread," &amp;c. How can an offering be brought for a person without his standing near it [at the time of its being sacrificed]? Therefore did the elder prophets institute twenty-four "mishmar" [or divisions of orders]; each mishmarah always always a "ma'amad" [or section of standing men], composed of Kohanim [priests], Levites, and Israelites, stationed at Jerusalem. When it came to the turn of each mishmarah to go up [from their cities to the Temple], the priests and Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the Israelites who belonged to that mishmarah, assembled in [the synagogues of] their cities to read the history of the creation [Genesis 1].

### michna 3
The standing men used to fast four times in the week; viz., from Monday until Thursday (inclusive), but they did not fast on Friday, on account of the honor due the Sabbath, nor on Sunday, that they might not (too suddenly) pass over from rest and pleasure to weariness and fasting--for that might endanger their lives. On Sunday the standing men read (the sections commencing): 'In the beginning,' etc. (Genesis 1:1-5), and, 'Let there be an expansion,' etc. (Genesis 1:6)

### michna 4
On those days on which Hallel is sung, the standing men used not to attend during the morning prayer [in Jerusalem]. When there was an additional offering of the korban mussaf, they did not assemble at the time of the closing prayer. When a wood-offering was brought, they did not assemble during the afternoon prayer. So says Rabbi Akivah; but Ben Azzai said to him, "Rabbi Yehoshua taught as follows: When there was an additional offering, the standing men did not assemble during the afternoon prayers; when a wood-offering was brought, they did not assemble at the time of the closing prayer." Then Rabbi Akivah changed [his opinion] and taught like Ben Azzai.

### michna 5
The times [of the delivery] of wood [for the altar] by priests and people, were on nine appointed days; on the first of Nissan, the family Arah of Yehudah [delivered]; on the twentieth of Tamuz, the family of David of Yehudah; on the fifth of Av, the family of Parosh of Jehudah; on the seventh, the family of Jonadav ben Rechav; on the tenth, the family of Sinha of Benjamin; on the fifteenth, the family of Zatu of Jehudah, and with them priests and Levites, and all those who did not know from what tribe [they were descended], also the family of Gonve Eli, and the family of Kotzei Ketziot; and on the twentieth the family Pachat Moav of Jehudah; on the twentieth of Elul, the family Adin of Jehudah; on the first of Tevet, the family Parosh, [offered a] second time. There was no meeting of the standing men on the first of Tevet; because Hallel was recited, and an additional sacrifice and wood-offering were brought [on that day].

### michna 6
Five events befell out ancestors on the seventeeth of Tamuz and five on the Ninth of Av. On the seventeenth of Tamuz, the Tablets were broken, the Tamid offering was ended, the city walls were breached, Apaustamous burned the Torah, an idol was placed in the temple courtyard. On the Ninth of Av, it was decreed upon our ancestors that they would not be allowed to enter the Land of Israel, the First and Second temples were destroyed, Beitar was captured, The city of Jerusalem was plowed over. From when the month of Av starts, we reduce joy.

### michna 7
During the week in which the ninth of Av happens, it is prohibited to a person to shave himself, or to wash [his clothes], but on Thursday it is allowed in honour of the Sabbath. On the day before the ninth of Ab, a person may not partake of two [different kinds] of cookeries [or dishes], eat meat, or drink wine thereon. Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel says "[It is sufficient to] alter [from one's customary mode of living]." Rabbi Yehudah considers it obligatory to turn over the bed places, but the sages do not agree in this.

### michna 8
R. Simeon ben Gamaliel said, "Never were more joyous festivals in Israel than the fifteenth of Av and Yom Kippur, for on them the maidens of Jerusalem used to go out dressed in white garments—borrowed ones, in order not to cause shame to those who had them not of their own;—these clothes were also to be previously immersed, and thus they went out and danced in the vineyards, saying, Young men, look and observe well whom you are about to choose [as a spouse]; regard not beauty [alone], but rather look to a virtuous family, for 'Gracefulness is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing, but the woman that feareth the Lord, she is worthy of praise' (Prov. 31:3); and it is also said (Prov. 31:31), 'Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the gates.' And thus is it said [in allusion to this custom], 'Go out, maidens of Jerusalem, and look on King Solomon, and on the crown wherewith his mother has encircled [his head] on the day of his espousals, and on the day of the gladness of his heart' (Song of Songs 3:11); 'the day of his espousals,' alludes to the day of the gift of the law, and 'the day of the gladness of his heart,' was that when the building of the Temple was completed." May it soon be rebuilt in our days. Amen!

>Credit : Sefaria Community Translation
>License : CC0