
### Part 1
<b>and</b> the agent <b>went and brought him a robe with three</b> <i>sela</i> <b>and a cloak with three</b> <i>sela</i>, <b>both of them are liable for misuse.</b> The homeowner is liable because his agency was performed with the purchase of the robe for three <i>sela</i>, and the agent is liable because he deviated from the homeowner’s instructions by purchasing the cloak. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The <b>homeowner is not liable for misuse, as he</b> can <b>say to</b> the agent: <b>I was seeking a large robe</b> worth a gold dinar <b>and you brought me a small, inferior</b> robe worth three <i>sela</i>, i.e., twelve silver dinars.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara notes: One can <b>learn from</b> the mishna the resolution to an unresolved dilemma in tractate <i>Ketubot</i> (98b), that in a case of <b>one who said to his agent: Go</b> and <b>sell</b> on <b>my</b> behalf <b>a <i>kor</i> of land, and he went and sold for him a half</b>-<b><i>kor</i>, the purchaser acquires</b> the half-<i>kor</i> of land that he purchased. Although the agent did not fulfill his agency entirely, the part that he did perform is valid.

### Part 3
Some Sages <b>say</b> that one cannot infer this resolution from the mishna. <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the mishna <b>here?</b> It is referring a case <b>where</b> the agent <b>brought him</b> a robe <b>worth six</b> <i>sela</i>, i.e., the value of the gold <i>dinar</i> that the homeowner gave him, which he acquired <b>for three</b> <i>sela</i>. If so, the homeowner received exactly what he wanted and the agent did not deviate from the agency, except that he also purchased a cloak without being instructed to do so. This is dissimilar to the case of an agent who sells a half-<i>kor</i> of land.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: If that is the case of the mishna, <b>say the latter clause: Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The <b>homeowner is not liable for misuse, as he</b> can <b>say to</b> the agent: <b>I was seeking a large robe</b> worth a gold dinar, <b>and you brought me a small, inferior robe</b> worth three <i>sela</i>. It is clear from the mishna that the homeowner did not receive exactly what he wanted, but rather an inferior robe.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains that Rabbi Yehuda means <b>that</b> the homeowner could have <b>said to</b> the agent: Since you chanced upon a merchant who reduced his prices to such a degree, <b>if you had given the entire dinar</b> as I requested, <b>you</b> could have <b>brought me</b> a much finer robe, <b>worth</b> at least <b>two dinars.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara adds: <b>This too stands to reason,</b> that this is the correct interpretation of the mishna, <b>as it teaches</b> in <b>the latter clause,</b> i.e., it is taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> (2:4): <b>Rabbi Yehuda concedes in</b> a case where the agent purchased only part of the <b>legumes</b> which the one who appointed him requested, <b>that both are liable for misuse of consecrated property.</b> The reason for this ruling is <b>that</b> a small amount of <b>legumes</b> is always sold <b>for one <i>peruta</i> and</b> a larger amount of <b>legumes</b> is invariably sold <b>for a dinar.</b> One can infer from Rabbi Yehuda’s statement that in the case of another item, e.g., a robe, purchasing a superior-quality robe for a higher price would bring additional benefit to the homeowner.

### Part 7
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is referring <b>to a town where they sell</b> legumes <b>by appraisal</b> of an item’s value, then <b>with regard to</b> these <b>legumes as well,</b> purchasing a larger quantity should reduce the price, which would mean <b>that</b> if one <b>gave a <i>sela</i></b> the price of the legumes would <b>become cheaper. Rav Pappa said:</b> The <i>Tosefta</i> is referring <b>to a town where they sell</b> and set the price <b>by containers,</b> and each <b>container</b> is the same price: <b>Each and every container</b> is sold <b>for one <i>peruta</i>.</b> The significance of this fact is <b>that there the matter is fixed,</b> i.e., each container of legumes is sold for the same price, regardless of the quantity of legumes purchased; there is no reduction for buying in bulk.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who deposits</b> consecrated <b>money with a money changer, if</b> the money <b>is bound,</b> the money changer <b>may not use it. Therefore, if</b> the money changer <b>spent</b> the money, <b>he is liable for</b> its <b>misuse.</b> If the money <b>was unbound he may use it,</b> and <b>therefore if</b> the money changer <b>spent</b> the money, <b>he is not liable for</b> its <b>misuse.</b> By contrast, if one deposited money <b>with a homeowner, whether</b> it <b>is bound or whether</b> it <b>is unbound,</b> the one with whom it was deposited <b>may not use it,</b> and <b>therefore if he spent</b> the money, <b>he is liable for misuse.</b> In this regard, the halakhic status of <b>a storekeeper is like</b> that of <b>a homeowner;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The halakhic status of a storekeeper is <b>like</b> that of <b>a money changer.</b>

### Part 9
If <b>a consecrated <i>peruta</i> fell into one’s purse,</b> in which there were non-sacred <i>perutot</i>, <b>or</b> in a case <b>where one said: One <i>peruta</i> in this purse is consecrated, once he spent the first</b> <i>peruta</i> from the purse for non-sacred purposes, <b>he is liable for</b> its <b>misuse.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. And the Rabbis say:</b> He is not liable for misuse <b>until he spends</b> all the <i>perutot</i> <b>in the entire purse,</b> as only then is it certain that he spent the consecrated <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Akiva concedes to the Rabbis in</b> a case where <b>one says: One <i>peruta</i> from</b> the coins in <b>this purse is consecrated, that he may continue spending</b> the <i>perutot</i> in the purse for non-sacred purposes and becomes liable for misuse only <b>once he spends</b> all the <i>perutot</i> <b>in the entire purse.</b> His formulation indicates that his desire was that the final remaining <i>peruta</i> in the purse would be consecrated, and therefore one is liable for misuse only when he spends that <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that Rabbi Akiva concedes to the Rabbis in a case where one says: One <i>peruta</i> from the coins in this purse is consecrated, that he may continue spending the <i>perutot</i> in the purse for non-sacred purposes and that he becomes liable for misuse only once he spends all the <i>perutot</i> in the entire purse. With regard to this case, the Gemara relates that <b>when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> that <b>Reish Lakish raised a contradiction to Rabbi Yoḥanan: What is different</b> in <b>the first clause,</b> which addresses a situation where one says: One <i>peruta</i> in this purse is consecrated, in which case Rabbi Akiva disagrees with the Rabbis, <b>and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause,</b> where he agrees with them?

### Part 12
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>The latter clause</b> of the mishna is referring to a case <b>where one said: This purse will not be exempt from consecration.</b> In other words, his desire was that he would not spend all of the <i>perutot</i> in the purse without consecrating one to the Temple. Consequently, he is liable for misuse only when he uses the last coin in the purse for non-sacred purposes and leaves none to be consecrated.

### Part 13
The Gemara further relates that <b>when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> that Reish Lakish <b>raised a contradiction to</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>between</b> the mishna here, discussing <b>purses, and</b> another mishna, discussing <b>bulls. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Menaḥot</i> 108b): With regard to <b>one who says: One of my bulls is consecrated,</b> if <b>he had two</b> bulls, then <b>the larger of them is consecrated.</b> The reason is that there is an assumption that one consecrates generously, and therefore he would have had the larger of the two bulls in mind. If so, in the case of the purses, why does the mishna not rule that his intent was for the best, i.e., the least worn-out, of the <i>perutot</i>? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: The latter clause</b> of the mishna is referring to a case <b>where one said: This purse will not be exempt from consecration.</b> In other words, he did not have in mind the best of the <i>perutot</i>, but the last of the coins.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC