
### Part 1
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> With regard to <b>eating creeping animals,</b> one <b>is flogged for</b> eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of them. <b>What is the reason?</b> It is because the term <b>“eating” is written</b> in the Torah <b>with regard to them.</b> The verse states: “And every creeping thing that swarms upon the earth is a detestable thing; it shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 11:41). The term “eating” is invariably referring to consuming an olive-bulk.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a difficulty. <b>But didn’t Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥanina teach</b> the following <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> The verse states: <b>“You shall separate between the kosher animal and the non-kosher, and between the non-kosher bird and the kosher; and you shall not make your souls detestable by animal, or by bird, or by anything that swarms on the ground, which I have set apart for you as impure”</b> (Leviticus 20:25). <b>The verse opens with eating</b> creeping animals, in the phrase “You shall not make your souls detestable,” <b>and</b> it <b>ends with</b> the <b>ritual impurity</b> of creeping animals: “Which I have set apart for you as impure.”

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> explains: This teaches that <b>just as</b> the carcass of a creeping animal imparts <b>ritual impurity</b> through contact <b>when</b> it is the volume of <b>a lentil-bulk, so too,</b> one is liable for the prohibition of <b>eating</b> a creeping animal <b>when</b> it is the volume of <b>a lentil-bulk. And Rabbi Yoḥanan praised [<i>vekilseih</i>]</b> Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥanina for citing this <i>baraita</i>. <b>And</b> this poses <b>a difficulty to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> who maintains that one is flogged only if he eats an olive-bulk of creeping animals.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to eating creeping animals <b>when they are dead,</b> at which stage they impart ritual impurity and one is liable for eating a lentil-bulk. By contrast, <b>there,</b> Rav is speaking about eating creeping animals <b>when they are alive,</b> which do not yet impart ritual impurity. For this reason one is flogged only if he eats an olive-bulk.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>But</b> in his statement <b>Rav</b> was <b>referring to the mishna, and the mishna teaches: And all the creeping animals</b> join together to constitute the requisite olive-bulk measure to render one who consumes it liable to receive lashes. This indicates that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even when they are dead.</b> Is the mishna <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where there is a bit of this</b> live creeping animal <b>and a bit of that</b> carcass of a creeping animal, which together combine to amount to an olive-bulk? <b>Rav Yosef said to</b> Abaye: <b>This</b> deductive <b>inference,</b> that Rav is referring to the mishna, <b>is yours.</b> But in fact <b>Rav</b> was <b>merely saying a <i>halakha</i></b> unconnected to the mishna. Therefore, there is no proof that Rav was speaking about the carcasses of creeping animals.

### Part 6
The Gemara stated: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan praised</b> Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥanina for citing the <i>baraita</i> that rules that one is liable for violating the prohibition of eating a creeping animal by the amount of a lentil-bulk. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Oholot</i> 1:7): <b>The</b> whole <b>limbs</b> of impure bodies <b>have no</b> minimum <b>measure</b> with regard to imparting ritual impurity. <b>Even</b> if the limbs were <b>less than an olive-bulk of a carcass or less than a lentil-bulk of a creeping animal,</b> they <b>impart</b> ritual <b>impurity. And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> This mishna is referring to the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity; but with regard to the minimum measure which renders one liable for consumption, <b>one is flogged for</b> eating <b>them only</b> if they amount to <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rava says</b> in resolution of the apparent contradiction between Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statements: When Rabbi Yoḥanan said that one is flogged for eating even a lentil-bulk of a creeping animal, he was referring only to those eight creeping animals of which <b>the verse speaks, which are separated</b> from all other creeping animals. The Torah (Leviticus 11:29–32) lists eight types of creeping animals, and Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring specifically to those eight. He maintains that one is flogged for eating a lentil-bulk of such creatures, whereas in the case of other creeping animals one is flogged only for eating an olive-bulk of them.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said to Rava: If that is so,</b> that there is a difference in the measure of liability for consumption between various types of creeping animals, the same should <b>also</b> apply with regard to <b>an animal.</b> Since the Torah in Leviticus 20:25 juxtaposes both kosher animals and non-kosher animals to creeping animals, one can say that an analogous difference should apply here as well: <b>Let</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>distinguish between</b> flesh from the carcass of kosher animals, which is <b>separated</b> from other types in that it is permitted in consumption by the Torah, and flesh from the carcass of a non-kosher animal, <b>which is not separated,</b> i.e., which is not permitted by the Torah. Consequently, if the carcass of a kosher animal imparts ritual impurity by the amount of an olive-bulk of flesh, the measure of flesh from the carcass of a non-kosher animal that imparts ritual impurity should be larger, i.e., an egg-bulk.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC