### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that one is liable for the prohibition of <i>notar</i> and the prohibition of eating an item while ritually impure, both with regard to items that have permitting factors and items that do not have permitting factors. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? The Gemara answers that this is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that one is <b>liable due to</b> partaking of sacrificial food in a state of <b>ritual impurity only with regard to an item that has permitting factors.</b>

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> this <b>is a logical inference: If</b> with regard to <b><i>piggul</i>, which</b> renders one who eats it unwittingly liable <b>through one awareness,</b> i.e., for one to be liable to bring a sin offering it is enough for him to become aware after the fact that he had sinned unwittingly, <b>and its offering</b> for one who eats it unwittingly <b>is fixed, and</b> there are <b>no</b> circumstances in which <b>its general prohibition was permitted,</b> i.e., it is never permitted to eat <i>piggul</i>, and yet <b>one is liable due to</b> the prohibition of partaking of <i>piggul</i> <b>only for an item that has permitting factors,</b> the same should certainly apply to ritual impurity.

### Part 3
The Gemara elaborates: Then with regard to <b>ritual impurity, where</b> one is liable only in a case <b>of two awarenesses,</b> i.e., one is liable only if he was aware of his impurity before eating the meat, and then forgot and ate, and afterward again became aware of his impurity; <b>and its offering</b> to atone for this transgression is <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering, which varies according to the offender’s financial status; <b>and</b> there are circumstances in which <b>its general prohibition was permitted</b> to the community, as communal offerings are sacrificed in the Temple in a state of impurity, under certain circumstances; <b>is it not right that one should be liable</b> for violating the prohibition of partaking of the meat while ritually impure <b>only for an item that has permitting factors?</b>

### Part 4
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Say to them: Anyone of all your seed throughout your generations, that approaches</b> the sacred items, which the children of Israel consecrate to the Lord, while his impurity is on him, that soul shall be cut off from before Me: I am the Lord” (Leviticus 22:3). <b>The verse,</b> which deals with eating while ritually impure, <b>is speaking of all the sacred items,</b> whether or not they have a permitting factor. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they should be liable for</b> eating <b>them immediately,</b> as soon as they have been verbally consecrated, even before they have been placed into a service vessel. <b>The verse states: “That approaches</b> the sacred items.” This clause is puzzling, as it apparently leads to the unlikely conclusion that liability applies after one has touched the item.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> explains that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: But is there</b> a case of one who <b>touches</b> an item <b>who is liable?</b> Rather, <b>how</b> is <b>this</b> possible? The answer is that the phrase “approaches [<i>yikrav</i>] the sacred items” can also be understood as: The sacred items that are fit to be sacrificed [<i>yikarev</i>], and therefore with regard to <b>any item that has permitting factors,</b> one is <b>not liable until the permitting factors</b> have been <b>sacrificed. And</b> in the case of <b>any item that does not have permitting factors,</b> one is <b>not liable until it is sanctified in</b> a service <b>vessel.</b>

### Part 6
end of chapter

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna, which also appears in tractate <i>Temura</i>, deals with the five sin offerings left to die. It is cited here because of its relevance to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse. The mishna first mentions three of those offerings: <b>The offspring of a sin offering, and</b> an animal that is <b>the substitute for a sin offering,</b> whether or not the owners achieved atonement by means of another offering, <b>and a sin offering whose owners have died</b> before the offering was sacrificed, <b>shall die.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And</b> the other two sin offerings left to die are the sin offering <b>whose year</b> since birth <b>passed</b> and is therefore unfit for sacrifice, <b>and</b> a sin offering <b>that was lost and</b> when it was <b>found</b> it was <b>blemished,</b> with regard to which the <i>halakhot</i> are as follows: <b>If</b> the sin offering was found <b>after the owner achieved atonement</b> through the sacrifice of another animal as a sin offering, then the blemished animal <b>shall die, and it does not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute,</b> as it is has neither inherent sanctity, which would make it fit for sacrifice on the altar, nor sanctity that inheres in its value. <b>And</b> one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from the found animal <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but</b> if he derived benefit from the animal he is <b>not</b> liable for its <b>misuse.</b>