
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> All items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar join together</b> to constitute the measure with regard to liability <b>for misuse</b> of consecrated property, which is deriving benefit equivalent to one <i>peruta</i>. <b>And</b> they join together <b>to</b> constitute an olive-bulk, which is the measure that renders one <b>liable due to</b> violation of the prohibitions of <b><i>piggul</i>, or <i>notar</i>, or</b> partaking of the item while <b>ritually impure.</b> All items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance join together</b> to constitute the measure with regard to liability for misuse. <b>Both</b> items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar and</b> items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance join together</b> to constitute the measure with regard to liability <b>for misuse.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Now</b> that <b>one says that</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> in the latter clause: <b>Both</b> items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar and</b> items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance</b> join together, which is a case <b>where this</b> one, i.e., items consecrated for the altar, have <b>inherent sanctity and that</b> one, i.e., items consecrated for Temple maintenance, have <b>sanctity</b> that inheres in its <b>value,</b> and <b>even so</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that they <b>join together for misuse,</b> if so, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to teach in the first clause that items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar</b> join together <b>with</b> other items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: It is necessary for the <i>tanna</i> to teach the first clause, <b>because he teaches with regard to</b> that case: They join together <b>to</b> render one <b>liable due to</b> violation of the prohibitions of <b><i>piggul</i>, or <i>notar</i>, or</b> of partaking of the item while <b>ritually impure.</b> With regard to these matters, only items consecrated to be sacrificed on the altar join together, not items consecrated for Temple maintenance, <b>as these</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>do not</b> apply to items consecrated for <b>Temple maintenance.</b> The concepts of <i>piggul</i>, <i>notar</i>, and ritual impurity are relevant only to items consecrated to be sacrificed on the altar. It is <b>due to that</b> reason that the <i>tanna</i> <b>divides</b> the first clause from the latter clause.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that items consecrated for Temple maintenance are subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse. <b>Rabbi Yannai said: It is clear</b> that one is <b>liable for misuse</b> by Torah law <b>only for</b> items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance and a burnt offering alone. What is the reason?</b> The reason is <b>that the verse states: “If anyone commit a misuse, and sin through error, in the sacred items of the Lord,</b> then he shall bring his guilt offering to the Lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to your valuation in silver by shekels, after the shekel of the Sanctuary, for a guilt offering” (Leviticus 5:15).

### Part 5
Rabbi Yannai explains that it is derived from this verse that only those <b>consecrated</b> items <b>that are uniquely for the Lord are subject to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>misuse; but</b> with regard to items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar,</b> e.g., guilt offerings or sin offerings, as they <b>have</b> a portion that belongs <b>to the priests and</b> other items such as peace offerings also <b>have</b> a portion that belongs <b>to the owners,</b> they are not uniquely for the Lord, and therefore the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse do not apply.

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to the statement of Rabbi Yannai. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: All items <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar join together</b> to constitute the measure with regard to liability <b>for misuse,</b> which is deriving benefit worth one <i>peruta</i>. Evidently, one is liable for misusing all items consecrated to be sacrificed on the altar, not merely burnt offerings. The Gemara answers that the mishna is referring to a prohibition that applies <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a further difficulty with the statement of Rabbi Yannai, from another mishna (2a): In the case of <b>offerings of the most sacred order that</b> were disqualified before their blood was sprinkled on the altar, e.g., if <b>one slaughtered them in the south</b> of the Temple courtyard, rather than in the north as required, one is liable for <b>misusing them.</b> Offerings of the most sacred order include sin offerings and guilt offerings, not merely burnt offerings. Once again, the Gemara answers that the mishna is referring to a prohibition <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises yet another difficulty with regard to the statement of Rabbi Yannai. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna (18a): <b>One who derives benefit from</b> a blemished <b>sin offering while it is alive has not</b> violated the prohibition of <b>misuse until he</b> causes one <i>peruta</i> worth of <b>depletion</b> of its value. Since the blemished animal will be redeemed, one lessens its value by removing wool from it. But <b>when it is dead</b> it will not be redeemed, which means that it cannot be devalued, and therefore <b>once he derives</b> one <i>peruta</i> worth of <b>benefit</b> from a dead sin offering <b>he is liable for misuse.</b> The Gemara again answers that the mishna is referring to a prohibition <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And by Torah law</b> is there <b>no</b> liability for misuse of items consecrated for sacrifice on the altar? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The verse states at the conclusion of the passage discussing the sacrifice of a peace offering: “And the priest shall make them smoke upon the altar, it is the food of the offering made by fire, for a pleasing aroma; <b>all the fat is the Lord’s”</b> (Leviticus 3:16). The term “all” serves <b>to include the portions of offerings of lesser sanctity</b> as subject <b>to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>misuse.</b> This is a source from the Torah for the <i>halakha</i> that one is liable for misuse of items consecrated for sacrifice on the altar.

### Part 10
The Gemara again answers that the mishna is referring to a prohibition <b>by rabbinic law.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>cites a verse</b> as the source for this <i>halakha</i>, which indicates that it applies by Torah law. The Gemara answers: The verse is <b>a mere support,</b> but it is not the actual source for the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 11
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But didn’t Ulla say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Sacrificial</b> animals <b>that died</b> without being sacrificed <b>are excluded from</b> the potential <b>of misuse by Torah law?</b> The Gemara clarifies the objection: <b>To what</b> is Rabbi Yoḥanan referring? <b>If we say</b> that he is referring <b>to</b> items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance,</b> then <b>even when they are dead</b> they are also subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse, as even if you say that this can <b>be</b> considered <b>only</b> like a case <b>where one consecrated a garbage</b> heap <b>to</b> the <b>Temple maintenance, isn’t that</b> also <b>subject to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property?

### Part 12
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan must be referring to dead animals that had been <b>consecrated</b> for sacrifice on the <b>altar,</b> and he is teaching that once they die they are no longer subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse by Torah law. This indicates that while they are alive they are subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse <b>by Torah law.</b> The Gemara states the difficulty: According to Rabbi Yannai, <b>are</b> animals consecrated for sacrifice on the altar <b>subject to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>misuse</b> by Torah law?

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara rejects the previous version of Rabbi Yannai’s opinion, and states that in fact he maintains that animals consecrated for sacrifice on the altar are subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse by Torah law. As <b>the school of Rabbi Yannai says as follows: From this verse:</b> “If anyone commit a misuse, and sin through error, in the sacred items of the Lord” (Leviticus 5:15), <b>we learn</b> that items <b>consecrated</b> for <b>Temple maintenance</b> are subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse. But <b>we do not learn</b> from this verse that animals consecrated for the <b>altar</b> are subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse. Instead, that <i>halakha</i> is derived from the verse: “And if a man eat of the sacred items through error” (Leviticus 22:14), which is referring to all sacred items, or from the verse (Leviticus 3:16): “All the fat is the Lord’s.”

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC