
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>the roots of</b> the non-sacred <b>tree of an ordinary person that enter into consecrated</b> land, <b>and</b> the roots of <b>a consecrated</b> tree <b>that enter into</b> the non-sacred land <b>of an ordinary person,</b> one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from them <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but</b> if he derived benefit from them he is <b>not</b> liable for their <b>misuse.</b> With regard to water of <b>a spring</b> that flows in a non-sacred field but <b>which emerges from</b> that field and flows <b>into a consecrated field,</b> when it is in the consecrated field one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from it <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but</b> if one derived benefit from it he is <b>not</b> liable for its <b>misuse.</b> Once the spring <b>emerges outside</b> the consecrated field <b>one may derive benefit from</b> the water.

### Part 2
With regard to <b>the water that</b> was drawn from the Siloam pool <b>into</b> the <b>golden jug,</b> which was not consecrated as a service vessel, to bring it to the altar for libation on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from the water <i>ab initio</i>, as it was drawn for use in the Temple service. <b>But</b> if one derived benefit from it he is <b>not</b> liable for its <b>misuse,</b> since it was not consecrated in a service vessel. Once <b>one places</b> the water from the jug for libation <b>into the flask,</b> which is a service vessel, the water is consecrated and he is liable for <b>misusing</b> the water.

### Part 3
With regard to the <b>willow</b> branches that are placed on the sides of the altar on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, before their placement one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from them <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but</b> if he derived benefit from them he is <b>not</b> liable for their <b>misuse.</b> After their placement their mitzva has been fulfilled, and therefore at that time one may derive benefit from the willow branches <i>ab initio</i>. <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, says: The elders were accustomed to derive benefit from</b> the willow branches even before their placement on the sides of the altar, by cutting small branches for use <b>in their <i>lulav</i>,</b> in fulfillment of the mitzva of the four species.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> When the mishna teaches that one is <b>not</b> liable for <b>misusing</b> the water in the golden jug awaiting use as a libation, it means that one is not liable for misuse of <b>all of</b> the water in the jug, if it contained more than three <i>log</i>. <b>But</b> one is liable for <b>misusing</b> the <b>three <i>log</i></b> required for the libation.

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But the latter clause</b> of the mishna <b>teaches</b> that once <b>one placed</b> the water from the jug <b>into the flask</b> he is liable for <b>misusing</b> the water. One can conclude <b>by inference that</b> in the case addressed in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, where the water is still in the jug, one is <b>not</b> liable for misuse in all circumstances, <b>even if</b> the jug contains only the requisite <b>three <i>log</i>.</b> This apparently contradicts the statement of Reish Lakish.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, if</b> a qualification <b>was stated</b> in this matter <b>it was stated with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which teaches that once the water is placed in the flask one is liable for <b>misusing</b> the water. The qualification is as follows: <b>Reish Lakish says</b> one is liable for <b>its misuse only if</b> the flask contains exactly <b>three <i>log</i></b> of water, which is the requisite amount for the mitzva. But if there is more than three <i>log</i> one is not liable for misusing any of the water, as it is not consecrated at all.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> disagrees and <b>says:</b> Even if the flask contained more than three <i>log</i> of water, one is liable for <b>misusing any of</b> the water. He maintains there is no fixed measure for water used in the libation, and therefore all the water is consecrated for the mitzva. The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that Reish Lakish holds there is</b> a maximum <b>measure for</b> the <b>water</b> used in the libation? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Zevaḥim</i> 110b) that deals with liability for sacrificing outside the Temple that <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> or Rabbi Elazar, <b>says: One who pours, as a libation, water</b> consecrated for the libation <b>of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>during the Festival, outside</b> the courtyard, is <b>liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i> just as though he sacrificed outside the Temple.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of</b> Rabbi <b>Menaḥem Yodafa: Rabbi Elazar says</b> that <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva,</b> his teacher, <b>who interprets</b> a verse dealing with the offerings of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>: “Beside the daily burnt offering, its meal offering, and <b>its libations”</b> (Numbers 29:31), as follows: The plural form indicates that the verse is speaking of two types of libations: <b>One</b> is the <b>water libation,</b> unique to the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> is the <b>wine libation,</b> which always accompanies the daily offering.

### Part 9
<b>And Reish Lakish said</b> to Rabbi Yoḥanan: <b>If</b> Rabbi Elazar derives the obligation for the water libation through the derivation taught by Rabbi Akiva, and that is why he rules that one who pours it as a libation outside the courtyard is liable, then he should equate the libations of wine and water, as follows: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>wine</b> the measure for the mitzva is <b>three <i>log</i>, so too</b> here, in the case of <b>water,</b> the measure for the mitzva should be <b>three <i>log</i>.</b> One may conclude <b>by inference</b> from this statement <b>that Reish Lakish</b> himself <b>holds there is no measure for</b> the <b>water</b> used in the libation. The Gemara answers: Actually, Reish Lakish maintains that there is a measure for the water, but he <b>stated</b> his question <b>according to</b> the <b>explanation of</b> Rabbi <b>Menaḥem Yodafa,</b> cited by Rabbi Yoḥanan.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to a bird’s <b>nest that is atop the consecrated tree,</b> one <b>may not derive benefit</b> from it <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but</b> if one derived benefit from it he is <b>not</b> liable for its <b>misuse.</b> In order to acquire a bird’s nest <b>that is</b> atop <b>a tree worshipped as idolatry,</b> from which one may not derive benefit even by climbing it, <b>one should dislodge</b> the nest from its place by striking it <b>with a pole.</b> In the case of <b>one who consecrates</b> his <b>forest, one is</b> liable for <b>misusing</b> everything <b>in the entire</b> forest.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC