
### Part 1
<b>and</b> a day of a laborer’s work during the <b>harvest is worth a <i>sela</i>,</b> the equivalent of four silver dinars, for each day, it is <b>prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit from him,</b> i.e., one may not employ the laborer under these conditions. The reason is that this is akin to taking interest, as the laborer works and receives less than he is entitled to in exchange for early payment. <b>But if one hires him</b> already <b>from now</b> to work <b>for</b> one <b>dinar a day</b> for an extended period of time, including the harvest season, <b>and</b> the work of a laborer during the <b>harvest is worth a <i>sela</i>,</b> this is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And if it enters your mind,</b> as Rav and Shmuel claim, that if a seller said: <b>I am selling you one <i>kor</i> for thirty</b> <i>sela</i>, each <b><i>se’a</i> for one <i>sela</i>,</b> he cannot fully renege on the sale in the middle of the transaction, as the buyer <b>acquires</b> each <i>se’a</i> <b>one</b> by <b>one</b> as it is measured, then the <i>halakha</i> in this case should be different. <b>Here too,</b> as he does not agree to one large sum but <b>fixes</b> a price for each day, <b>one</b> by <b>one,</b> it is akin to taking interest, as the laborer works and receives less than he is entitled to in exchange for early payment. <b>And</b> therefore, it should be <b>prohibited to</b> derive <b>benefit from him.</b> Whereas the <i>baraita</i> states: If one hires him from now to work <b>for</b> one <b>dinar a day</b> over an extended period of time, including the harvest, <b>and</b> one day of a laborer’s work during the <b>harvest</b> is <b>worth one <i>sela</i>,</b> this is <b>permitted. Why</b> is it permitted? <b>But isn’t it payment for waiting,</b> i.e., for advancing the money to the laborer?

### Part 3
<b>Rava said: And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> the <i>baraita</i> in that manner? <b>Is it prohibited</b> for one <b>to lower</b> his <b>hiring</b> price and receive lower wages in order to ensure that he is employed? This arrangement is not a form of interest and violates no prohibition. The Gemara asks: If this is not considered taking interest, then <b>what is different</b> in <b>the first clause,</b> where the laborer is not employed immediately and this arrangement is prohibited, <b>and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause,</b> where it is permitted?

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: In <b>the first clause, as</b> the laborer <b>does not work with him from now, it has the appearance of payment for waiting,</b> i.e., advancing the money to the laborer. In <b>the latter clause, as</b> the laborer <b>works with him from now, it does not have the appearance of payment for waiting.</b>

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And if</b> the flax <b>was attached to the ground and he detached any amount,</b> he has <b>acquired</b> it. The Gemara asks: Is it correct to say that <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he detached any amount,</b> he <b>acquired</b> it? If he does not perform an act of acquisition with all of the flax, how can he acquire all of it? <b>Rav Sheshet said: Here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the seller <b>said to him: Go</b> and <b>clear for yourself any amount of land, and</b> thereby <b>acquire everything that is on it.</b> When the buyer clears the land by detaching the flax from the ground, he is considered to be renting the land and thereby acquires all the flax that grows on it.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who sells</b> food or drink that has an established price, such as <b>wine and oil, to another, and</b> the price <b>rises or falls</b> and the buyer or the seller wishes to renege on the sale, <b>if</b> the price changed <b>before the measuring</b> vessel <b>is filled,</b> the merchandise still belongs <b>to the seller</b> and he can cancel the sale. <b>Once the measuring</b> vessel <b>is filled</b> the merchandise belongs <b>to the buyer,</b> and the seller can no longer cancel the sale. <b>And if there was a middleman [<i>sarsur</i>] between them</b> and <b>the barrel</b> belonging to the middleman, being used to measure the merchandise, <b>broke</b> during the transaction and the merchandise is ruined, <b>it broke for the middleman,</b> i.e., he is responsible for the ruined merchandise.

### Part 7
The mishna teaches an additional <i>halakha</i> with regard to sales: <b>And</b> anyone who sells wine, oil, or similar liquids is <b>obligated,</b> after he transfers the liquid into the buyer’s vessel, <b>to drip for him three</b> extra <b>drops</b> from the measure. After he drips those three drops, if <b>he turned</b> the barrel on its side <b>and drained</b> out the last bits of liquid that it contained, this <b>belongs to the seller</b> and he is not required to give these last drops to the buyer. <b>And a storekeeper is not obligated to drip three drops,</b> because he is too busy to do this constantly. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If the sale occurs on <b>Shabbat eve as nightfall</b> arrives, one is <b>exempt</b> from dripping these three drops, as there is a need to complete the transaction before Shabbat begins.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara clarifies the mishna’s statement that the sale occurs once the measuring vessel is filled. <b>This measuring</b> vessel, <b>to whom</b> does it belong? <b>If we say</b> that the <b>measuring</b> vessel belongs <b>to the buyer,</b> why does the mishna teach that <b>before the measuring</b> vessel <b>is filled</b> the merchandise still belongs <b>to the seller?</b> Since <b>it is the measuring</b> vessel <b>of the buyer,</b> he should acquire everything that is placed in his vessel, whether or not it is filled. <b>But</b> if we say that the <b>measuring</b> vessel belongs <b>to the seller,</b> why does the mishna teach that <b>once the measuring</b> vessel <b>is filled</b> the merchandise belongs <b>to the buyer?</b> Since <b>it is the measuring</b> vessel <b>of the seller,</b> the merchandise has yet to enter the possession of the buyer.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Ela says:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where the measuring</b> vessel belongs to the <b>middleman.</b> The middleman lends it to the seller, and once it is filled it is loaned to the buyer so that he can transfer its contents into his vessels. The Gemara asks: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches: And if there was a middleman between them</b> and <b>the barrel broke, it broke for the middleman, it may be inferred that</b> in <b>the first clause we are not dealing with a middleman.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The first clause</b> addresses <b>a measuring</b> vessel belonging to a middleman <b>without</b> the presence of the <b>middleman</b> at the transaction, whereas <b>the latter clause</b> is concerned <b>with a middleman himself,</b> who is present at the sale and therefore accepts responsibility for the barrel and its contents.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that if <b>he turned</b> the barrel on its side <b>and drained</b> out the last bits of liquid within it, this liquid <b>belongs to the seller.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabbi Elazar ascended</b> from Babylonia to Eretz Yisrael, <b>he found Ze’eiri</b> and <b>said to him: Who here</b> is <b>the <i>tanna</i> to whom Rav taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>measures?</b> Ze’eiri <b>showed him Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi.</b> Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi <b>said to</b> Rabbi Elazar: <b>What</b> is it about this <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> poses <b>a difficulty for you?</b> Rabbi Elazar said to him that the problem is <b>that we learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>he turned</b> the barrel on its side <b>and drained</b> out the last bits of liquid within it, that liquid <b>belongs to the seller.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC