
### Part 1
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 10:7): Concerning <b>a beehive, Rabbi Eliezer says: It is</b> considered <b>like land</b> with regard to the manner in which one purchases it and with regard to other matters, <b>and</b> therefore <b>one writes a document that prevents the Sabbatical Year from canceling an outstanding debt [<i>prosbol</i>]</b> based <b>on it,</b> as a <i>prosbol</i> can be written only if the debtor possesses land of some sort.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> a beehive <b>is not susceptible to ritual impurity,</b> provided that it is <b>in its place</b> and attached to the ground, as it is considered equivalent to the ground itself, which is not susceptible to impurity. <b>And one who takes</b> honey <b>out of it on Shabbat</b> is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering,</b> like one who uproots something from the ground. According to this opinion, honey in a beehive is not considered to have the status of either food or liquid with regard to ritual impurity, as it is attached to the ground.

### Part 3
The mishna continues: <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> A beehive has the status of movable property; <b>one may not write a <i>prosbol</i></b> based <b>on it, and it is not</b> considered <b>like land</b> with regard to its sale but is instead sold in the manner of movable property. <b>And it is susceptible to ritual impurity</b> even when it is <b>in its place, and one who takes</b> honey <b>out of it on Shabbat is exempt</b> from bringing a sin-offering. According to this opinion, the honey contained within the beehive is considered detached from the ground and is therefore susceptible to ritual impurity, as stated by Rav Kahana.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: What is the reasoning of Rabbi Eliezer? As it is written</b> with regard to Jonathan: “He put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, <b>and dipped it in the honeycomb [<i>ya’arat hadevash</i>]”</b> (I Samuel 14:27). <b>Now, what does a forest [<i>ya’ar</i>] have to do with honey [<i>devash</i>]?</b> Why is the honeycomb called a forest of honey [<i>ya’arat hadevash</i>]? <b>Rather,</b> this serves <b>to tell you: Just as</b> with regard to <b>a forest, one who picks</b> fruit <b>from</b> a tree <b>on Shabbat is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too,</b> with regard to <b>honey, one who removes</b> honey <b>from</b> a beehive <b>on Shabbat is liable</b> to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Honey that flows from one’s beehive is not</b> considered <b>either food or liquid. Granted, according to</b> the reasoning of <b>Abaye</b> this <b>works out well,</b> since he would explain here, as in the previous case, that this is referring to the two combs in the beehive designated for the sustenance of the bees, and is not intended for human consumption.

### Part 6
<b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rava,</b> who says that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the ruling of Rabbi Eliezer, this presents <b>a difficulty,</b> as even according to Rabbi Eliezer the honey is not considered attached to the ground once it leaves the beehive. <b>Rav Zevid said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the honey <b>flowed onto a repulsive vessel</b> and therefore is unfit for human consumption. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Yaakov said:</b> It is referring to a case <b>where it flowed onto straw [<i>kashkashin</i>]</b> and weeds, which renders it inedible.

### Part 7
The Gemara <b>raises</b> another <b>objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Honey in one’s beehive is not</b> considered <b>either food or liquid.</b> If <b>one intended to</b> use <b>it</b> as <b>food, it</b> is susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> as <b>food,</b> and if one intended <b>to</b> use it as <b>liquid, it is susceptible to ritual impurity as liquid. Granted, according to</b> the reasoning of <b>Abaye,</b> this <b>works out well,</b> as he can explain that this too is referring to the two combs of honey left for the bees, and that if one reconsidered and decided to eat the honey, it is once again considered fit for human consumption.

### Part 8
<b>But according to Rava,</b> who said that the ruling of the <i>baraita</i> that honey in a beehive does not have the status of food or liquid is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, this poses <b>a difficulty.</b> This <i>baraita</i> does not accord with the reasoning of Rabbi Eliezer, as he maintains that one’s intention is not enough for honey attached to the ground to be considered as though it were detached. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> must be in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, and yet it contradicts Rav Kahana’s statement that intention is not required for honey to be susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Rava</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is in fact in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, and you should resolve the difficulty <b>and answer like this:</b> If <b>one intended to</b> use the honey as <b>food, it</b> is <b>not</b> susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> as <b>food,</b> and if one intended <b>to</b> use it as <b>liquid, it is not susceptible to ritual impurity</b> as <b>liquid.</b> The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Kahana: Honey in one’s beehive is susceptible to ritual impurity</b> as <b>food</b> even if there was <b>no intention</b> to use it as food, as it has an innate status of food.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: If one buys <b>olive</b> trees <b>for felling, he must leave two shoots</b> from the tree. <b>The Sages taught: One who buys a tree from another for felling must cut</b> the tree <b>one handbreadth above the ground,</b> to allow the tree to grow again. In the case of <b>an untrimmed sycamore,</b> he must cut the tree a minimum of <b>three handbreadths</b> above the ground, and with regard to <b>a large sycamore,</b> which has strong roots because the sycamore has been cut down once already, he must cut the tree a minimum of <b>two handbreadths</b> above the ground. <b>In</b> the case <b>of reeds or of vines,</b> he may cut only <b>from the knot and above,</b> so that they will grow back. <b>In</b> the cases <b>of palm and of cedar</b> trees, <b>he may dig down and uproot</b> them, <b>because their trunks do not replenish</b> themselves after they are cut down, and therefore there is no reason to leave anything behind.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And do we require an untrimmed sycamore</b> to be cut a minimum of <b>three handbreadths</b> above the ground for it to grow back? <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 4:5): <b>One may not fell an untrimmed sycamore during the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>because it is</b> considered <b>work,</b> as it promotes the growth of the tree.

### Part 12
The mishna continues. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>prohibited</b> for one to fell the tree during the Sabbatical Year <b>in its</b> usual <b>manner; rather, he must cut</b> the tree <b>ten handbreadths</b> above the ground, <b>or raze</b> the tree until it is <b>even with the ground.</b> Neither of these methods promote the growth of the tree; in fact, they damage it. It can be inferred from here that it is only cutting the sycamore until it is <b>even with the ground that is harmful</b> for it, and it does not grow again. Cutting in <b>another</b> manner <b>is beneficial for it,</b> even if it is cut less than three handbreadths from the ground.

### Part 13
<b>Abaye said</b> that the mishna should be understood as follows: Cutting down a sycamore from a height of <b>three handbreadths is beneficial for it,</b> whereas cutting it so that it is <b>even with the ground is certainly harmful for it</b> and is permitted during the Sabbatical Year. Cutting it down <b>from this</b> point <b>onward,</b> i.e., between the ground and three handbreadths, is <b>neither</b> very <b>harmful for it nor</b> particularly <b>beneficial for it. With regard to the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>we perform</b> only <b>a matter that is certainly harmful to it,</b> so as to avoid enhancing it. <b>With regard to buying and selling, we perform</b> only <b>a matter that is certainly beneficial for it,</b> as the seller intended to sell the sycamore in such a manner that the tree would grow again.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: In the case <b>of palm and cedar trees,</b> a buyer may <b>dig down and uproot</b> them, <b>because their trunks do not replenish</b> themselves after being cut down. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is it correct with regard to <b>a cedar</b> that <b>its trunk does not replenish</b> itself? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Lulyani teach: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon”</b> (Psalms 92:13)? <b>If “palm tree” is stated, why is “cedar” stated? And if “cedar” is stated, why is “palm tree” stated?</b> What is added by this double comparison?

### Part 15
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Lulyani explains: <b>Had</b> the verse <b>stated</b> only <b>“cedar” and had not stated “palm tree,” I would have said</b> that <b>just as a cedar does not produce fruit, so too, a righteous person does not produce fruit,</b> i.e., he will have no reward in the World-to-Come. <b>Therefore, it is stated: “Palm tree,”</b> which is a fruit-bearing tree.

### Part 16
<b>And had</b> the verse <b>stated</b> only <b>“palm tree” and had not stated “cedar,” I would have said</b> that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>a palm tree its trunk does not replenish</b> itself after being cut down, <b>so too,</b> in the case of <b>a righteous person, his trunk does not replenish</b> itself, i.e., he will be unable to recover from misfortune. <b>There-fore, it is stated: “Cedar,”</b> to indicate that just as the trunk of the cedar replenishes itself, so too, the righteous will thrive again. This demonstrates that the trunk of a cedar does grow again.

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, with what are we are dealing here?</b> We are dealing <b>with other types of cedars,</b> as the trunks of certain species do not grow back after the tree is felled. This is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabba bar Rav Huna. As Rabba bar Rav Huna says</b> that <b>they say</b> in <b>the school of Rav: There are ten types of cedars; as it is stated: “I will place in the wilderness the cedar [<i>erez</i>], the acacia tree [<i>shitta</i>], and the myrtle [<i>hadas</i>] and the pine tree [<i>etz shemen</i>]; I will set</b> in the desert the juniper [<i>berosh</i>], the teak [<i>tidhar</i>], and the cypress [<i>te’ashur</i>] all together” (Isaiah 41:19). The Gemara elaborates: <b><i>Erez</i></b> means <b>cedar; <i>shitta</i></b> means <b>acacia tree [<i>tornita</i>]; <i>hadas</i></b> is the <b>myrtle; <i>etz shemen</i></b> is the <b>balsam tree; <i>berosh</i></b> means <b>juniper [<i>berati</i>]; <i>tidhar</i></b> is the <b>teak [<i>shaga</i>]; and <i>te’ashur</i></b> is the <b>cypress [<i>shurbina</i>].</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: But <b>these are seven</b> species of cedar, not ten. <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said: They added to</b> the list of cedars <b><i>allonim</i>, <i>almonim</i>,</b> and <b><i>almugim</i>. <i>Allonim</i></b> refers to <b>pistachio trees [<i>butnei</i>], <i>almonim</i></b> are <b>oaks [<i>balutei</i>],</b> and <b><i>almugim</i></b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC