
### Part 1
<b>is</b> in fact <b>worth ninety</b> dinars, <b>and the one who says</b> it is worth <b>twenty</b> <i>sela</i>, which is equivalent to eighty dinars <b>errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>ten</b> dinars <b>behind,</b> i.e., too low, <b>and the one who says</b> it is worth <b>one hundred dinars errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>ten</b> dinars <b>ahead,</b> i.e., too high. Therefore, the average of these two assessments is followed.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>On the contrary,</b> say that <b>this land is</b> in fact <b>worth one hundred and ten</b> dinars, <b>and the one who says</b> it is worth <b>one hundred dinars errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>ten</b> dinars <b>behind, and the one who says</b> it is worth <b>thirty</b> <i>sela</i>, which is equivalent to one hundred and twenty dinars, <b>errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>ten</b> dinars <b>ahead.</b> If so, the average of these two assessments, one hundred and ten dinars, should be followed. The Gemara replies: <b>In any event, grasp the first two</b> assessments <b>in your hand, as neither</b> of them <b>takes</b> the assessment <b>beyond the sum of one hundred dinars.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> teaches that <b><i>Aḥerim</i> say</b> that <b>an appraisal</b> is <b>performed</b> of the sum <b>between</b> the two most extreme assessments <b>and</b> then <b>divided by three.</b> This sum is then added to the lowest assessment. The Gemara explains this opinion: <i>Aḥerim</i> <b>hold</b> that <b>this land is</b> in fact <b>worth ninety-three and one-third</b> dinars. <b>The one who says</b> it is worth <b>twenty</b> <i>sela</i>, the equivalent of eighty dinars, <b>errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>thirteen</b> dinars <b>and one-third behind,</b> and <b>the one who says it is</b> worth <b>one hundred dinars errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>thirteen</b> dinars <b>and one-third ahead. By right,</b> that assessor <b>should have said more,</b> i.e., quoted a higher sum, since according to this calculation, he should have said it is worth one hundred and six and two-thirds dinars. <b>And</b> the reason <b>that he did not</b> do so is that he <b>thinks</b> as follows: <b>It is enough that I add this much above</b> and beyond the assessment of <b>my colleague</b> who says it is worth eighty dinars. Therefore, he lowers the sum of his assessment to one hundred dinars.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>On the contrary,</b> say that <b>this land is</b> in fact <b>worth one hundred and thirteen</b> dinars <b>and one-third,</b> and <b>the one who says</b> it is worth <b>one hundred dinars errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>thirteen</b> dinars <b>and one-third behind, and the one who says</b> it is worth <b>thirty</b> <i>sela</i>, which is equal to one hundred and twenty dinars, <b>errs</b> with an assessment that is <b>thirteen</b> dinars <b>and one-third ahead. By right, he should have said more,</b> i.e., quoted a higher sum, since according to this calculation, he should have said it is worth one hundred and twenty-six dinars and two-thirds. And the reason he did not do so is that he <b>thinks</b> as follows: <b>It is enough that I add this much above</b> and beyond the assessment of <b>my colleague</b> who says it is worth one hundred dinars. The Gemara answers: <b>In any event, grasp the first two</b> assessments <b>in your hand, as neither</b> of them <b>take</b> the assessment <b>beyond the sum of one hundred dinars.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Huna said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of <i>Aḥerim</i>,</b> who say that the sum of the difference between the two most extreme assessments is calculated and then divided by three, and this sum is then added to the lowest assessment. <b>Rav Ashi said: We do not</b> even <b>understand the reason of <i>Aḥerim</i>; shall we</b> then <b>establish the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with their</b> opinion? <b>The judges of the Diaspora taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> that accords with the opinion of <i>Aḥerim</i> in the previously cited <i>baraita</i>: <b>An appraisal</b> is <b>performed</b> to determine the sum of the difference <b>between</b> the two most extreme assessments <b>and</b> then that sum is <b>divided by three</b> and added to the lowest assessment. <b>Rav Huna said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with the judges of the Diaspora. Rav Ashi said: We do not</b> even <b>understand the reasoning of the judges of the Diaspora; shall we</b> then <b>establish the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with their</b> opinion?

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>If one says to another: I am selling you half a field,</b> without specifying which half he is selling, <b>an assessment is made</b> of the field, which is then divided <b>between them, and</b> the buyer <b>takes half of</b> the seller’s <b>field.</b> If the seller says: <b>I am selling you the half that is on the southern side</b> of the field, <b>an assessment is made</b> of the northern and the southern sides of the field, which is then divided <b>between them, and he takes the half on the southern side. And he accepts upon himself</b> to provide <b>the space for the fence</b> between the two halves of the field out of his own property. He also accepts to provide out of his own property the space for the larger <b>ditch and the smaller ditch,</b> which are meant to keep animals out of the field. <b>And how</b> wide <b>is</b> the larger <b>ditch? Six handbreadths. And</b> how wide is <b>the smaller ditch? Three</b> handbreadths.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> When one sells half of his field to another person, <b>the buyer takes the leaner part of</b> the field, the part that is of lower quality. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that in such a case <b>an assessment is made</b> of the field, which is then divided <b>between them,</b> which indicates that the buyer and the seller are given similar parcels of land? How then can you say that the buyer takes the leaner part? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him</b> in a sarcastic manner: <b>While you were eating dates in Babylonia</b> and neglecting your studies, <b>we explained</b> the matter <b>based on the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which proves that my understanding is correct.

### Part 8
<b>As the latter clause teaches:</b> If the seller says: <b>I am selling you the half that is on the southern side</b> of the field, <b>an assessment is made</b> of the northern and the southern sides of the field, which is then divided <b>between them, and he takes the half on the southern side.</b> If taken literally, this passage gives rise to a difficulty: <b>Why is an assessment made</b> of the northern and the southern sides of the field, which is then divided <b>between them?</b> In any case, <b>didn’t he say to him</b> that he is selling him <b>the southern half?</b> Let the seller give the buyer the southern half of the field. Why is an assessment necessary? <b>Rather,</b> it must be that the matter is more complicated than it seems, and the mishna is referring <b>to money.</b> That is to say, the buyer takes the southern half, but the seller must reimburse him with money for the difference in value between the two halves of the field. <b>Here too,</b> in the first case, the mishna is referring <b>to money:</b> The buyer takes the leaner half, but the seller must reimburse him with money for the difference in value between the two halves of the field.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that the buyer <b>accepts upon himself</b> to provide out of his own property <b>the space for the fence</b> between the two halves of the field and for the larger and smaller ditches. A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The larger <b>ditch</b> is dug <b>on the outside, while the smaller ditch</b> is dug <b>on the inside,</b> closer to the field. Both <b>this and that</b> are dug <b>behind the fence,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC