
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that one who sells a field has sold the stones in the field that are for its use. The Gemara clarifies: <b>What</b> is meant by <b>stones that are for its use? Here</b> in Babylonia <b>they interpreted</b> it as follows: <b>Stones</b> placed <b>on the sheaves</b> in the field to protect them from being scattered by the wind. <b>Ulla says:</b> The mishna is referring to <b>stones that are arranged for</b> the future building of <b>a fence</b> for the field. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya teach</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that they are <b>stones that are piled up for</b> the future building of <b>a fence,</b> and not necessarily arranged? The Gemara answers: <b>Teach</b> that Rabbi Ḥiyya said: They are stones that are <b>arranged</b> for the future building of a fence.

### Part 2
The Gemara elaborates on the two explanations: It was stated that <b>here</b> in Babylonia <b>they interpreted</b> the mishna as referring to <b>stones</b> that are placed <b>on the sheaves. According to Rabbi Meir</b> this should be understood as referring to stones <b>that are ready</b> to be used to protect the sheaves, <b>even though they are not</b> yet <b>placed</b> on them. This is in keeping with Rabbi Meir’s opinion that whenever a place is sold, all the accompaniments that are necessary for its proper utilization are included in the sale (see 78b). <b>According to the Rabbis,</b> the mishna is referring specifically to stones <b>that are</b> already <b>placed</b> on the sheaves.

### Part 3
<b>And according to Ulla, who says</b> that the mishna is referring to <b>stones that are arranged for</b> the future building of <b>a fence</b> for the field, <b>according to Rabbi Meir,</b> stones <b>that are ready</b> to be used for building a fence are also included in the sale, <b>even though they are not</b> yet <b>arranged</b> for that purpose. <b>According to the Rabbis,</b> the mishna is referring specifically to stones <b>that are</b> already <b>arranged</b> for building a fence.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues with its clarification of the mishna, which teaches that one who sells a field has <b>also</b> sold <b>the reeds in the vineyard that are for its use.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard to the <b>reeds, what is their purpose</b> in the vineyard? The Sages <b>of the school of Rabbi Yannai said:</b> These are <b>reeds that are split</b> on top and <b>placed under the vines</b> so that the boughs of the vines can rest on them. <b>According to Rabbi Meir,</b> this is referring to reeds <b>that have been smoothed</b> and made ready for this purpose, <b>even though they are not</b> yet <b>set in their place. According to the Rabbis,</b> the mishna refers specifically to reeds <b>that are</b> already <b>set in their place.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara continues expounding the mishna, which includes among the components that are sold with a field <b>the produce that is</b> still <b>attached to the ground.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Even though</b> the time <b>has</b> already <b>come</b> for the produce <b>to be cut down,</b> it is included in the sale since it is still attached to the ground. The mishna also includes among the things that are sold with a field <b>the cluster of reeds that</b> occupy <b>less than a <i>beit rova</i>.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Even though</b> these reeds <b>are thick,</b> they are still classified as part of the field.

### Part 6
The mishna teaches that one who sells a field sells with it <b>the watch station that is not plastered with clay.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Even though it is not fixed in the ground</b> and can still be moved, since it is not plastered, it is not significant enough to be considered an independent entity, and it is considered part of the field. The mishna also includes the following among the components that are sold with a field: <b>And the carob tree that has not been grafted, and the untrimmed sycamore.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Even though they are</b> big and <b>thick,</b> since they have not yet reached the stage of grafting, in the case of the carob, or trimming, in the case of the sycamore, they are considered part of the field.

### Part 7
The Gemara proceeds to explain the second half of the mishna, which teaches: <b>But he has not sold</b> along with the field <b>the stones that are not</b> designated <b>for use</b> in the field. On the assumption that the mishna speaks of stones that are placed on the sheaves to prevent them from being scattered, <b>according to Rabbi Meir,</b> the mishna is referring to stones <b>that are not ready</b> to be used for this purpose, whereas <b>according to the Rabbis,</b> even if the stones are ready to be used to protect the sheaves, they are not included in the sale if <b>they are not</b> yet <b>placed</b> on them.

### Part 8
<b>And according to Ulla, who says</b> that the mishna is referring to <b>stones that are arranged for</b> the future building of <b>a fence</b> for the field, <b>according to Rabbi Meir,</b> this clause addresses a case <b>where</b> the stones <b>were not ready</b> to be used for this purpose, whereas <b>according to the Rabbis,</b> it addresses a case <b>where</b> the stones <b>were not</b> yet <b>arranged</b> for building a fence, even though they were ready to be used for that purpose.

### Part 9
The mishna teaches that one who sells a field has <b>not</b> sold <b>the reeds in the vineyard that are not</b> designated <b>for its use.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>According to Rabbi Meir,</b> this is referring to a case <b>where</b> the reeds <b>are not smoothed,</b> whereas <b>according to the Rabbis,</b> the reference is to reeds <b>that are not</b> yet <b>set in their place,</b> even if they are smoothed. The mishna further teaches: One who sells a field has also <b>not</b> sold <b>the produce that is detached from the ground.</b> The Gemara comments: The produce is not included in the sale <b>even though it</b> still <b>requires the ground,</b> that is, it needs to be left in the field in order to dry out completely.

### Part 10
The mishna teaches that one who sells a field has <b>not</b> sold <b>the cluster of reeds that</b> occupy <b>a <i>beit rova</i>.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this is so <b>even though they are thin,</b> as since they occupy the area of a <i>beit rova</i> they are considered a separate entity and are not part of the field. Concerning this ruling, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>not only a cluster of reeds</b> that is considered a separate entity, and therefore not included in the sale; <b>rather, even a small garden bed of spices</b> that does not occupy the area of a <i>beit rova</i> <b>but has a distinct name is not sold</b> along <b>with</b> the field. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> What <b>this</b> means is <b>that</b> people <b>call it the roses [<i>vardda</i>] of so-and-so,</b> thereby establishing for it a name of its own.

### Part 11
The mishna teaches that the sale does <b>not</b> include <b>the watch station that is plastered with clay.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though it is attached to the ground,</b> as it is still considered a separate entity and not part of the field. The mishna teaches: He has also <b>not</b> sold <b>the carob tree that has been grafted, and</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the sycamore trunk.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Even though they are small,</b> they are considered their own entity.

### Part 12
Apropos the discussion of a watch station that is attached to the ground, the Gemara cites a discussion about the sale of a house: <b>Rabbi Elazar raised the dilemma:</b> With regard to wooden <b>door frames, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Are they sold together with the house, or not? The Gemara explains the question: <b>Do not raise the dilemma</b> in a case <b>where</b> the frames <b>are attached</b> to the house <b>with clay, as they are</b> certainly <b>attached</b> to the house and sold along with it. <b>When you can raise this dilemma is where they are connected</b> only <b>with small wooden pegs. What</b> is the ruling in that case? No resolution was found for this question, and so the dilemma <b>shall stand [<i>teiku</i>]</b> unresolved.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Zeira raises</b> a similar <b>dilemma</b> about what is included in the sale of a house: With regard to <b>window frames, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Are they sold together with the house, or not? <b>Do we say</b> that <b>they serve merely</b> as <b>an ornament,</b> and are not included in the sale, and the seller can remove them from the house and keep them for himself? <b>Or perhaps, since they are attached</b> to the window, <b>they are attached.</b> The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 14
And similarly, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya raised a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>stands for the legs of a bed</b> that are placed under the legs to prevent them from being damaged by moisture, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains the question: <b>Do not raise the dilemma wherever</b> the stands <b>move</b> along <b>with</b> the bed, <b>as they move</b> along with it and are therefore not considered part of the house. <b>Where you can raise this dilemma is where they do not move</b> along with the bed. <b>What</b> is the ruling in that case? No resolution was found for this question either, and therefore the dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 15
The mishna teaches: One who sells a field has <b>not</b> sold <b>the carob tree that has been grafted, and</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the sycamore trunk.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC