
### Part 1
<b>Rava objects to this</b> ruling that the buyer of the tree acquires the land beneath it: <b>And let</b> the seller <b>say to him: I sold you</b> only <b>the saffron crocus,</b> a small plant normally uprooted by the buyer and taken with him. Therefore, <b>uproot the saffron crocus and go. Rather, Rava said:</b> This ruling is stated <b>with regard to</b> one who <b>comes</b> to court <b>with</b> a specific <b>claim</b> that the seller had stipulated that he would acquire the land. Without this specific claim he does not acquire the land beneath the tree.

### Part 2
<b>Mar Kashisha, the son of Rav Ḥisda, said to Rav Ashi: And if,</b> in fact, the seller <b>sold him the saffron crocus, what was</b> there <b>for</b> the seller <b>to do</b> to prevent the buyer from claiming the land beneath the tree, as the buyer could claim that there had been an explicit stipulation that he receive it? Rav Ashi answered: <b>He should have protested</b> during the first three years and publicized that the land was not included in the sale.

### Part 3
The assumption that lodging a protest would be effective must be correct, <b>since if you do not say so,</b> then in the case of <b>these mortgages</b> according to the custom <b>in Sura,</b> a city in Babylonia, the debtor will not have a way to prevent the creditor from keeping his land. <b>As in</b> mortgages of that type it is <b>written like this: At the completion of these years this land will be released</b> to its prior owner <b>without</b> any need for the prior owner to give <b>money. If</b> the creditor were to <b>hide</b> the <b>mortgage document in his possession and say:</b> This land <b>is purchased</b> and that is why it is <b>in my possession, here</b> is it <b>also</b> the case <b>that</b> he would be <b>deemed credible?</b> That cannot be, as is it reasonable that <b>the Sages would institute a matter,</b> such as this type of arrangement, <b>that</b> people <b>can be led by it to</b> suffer <b>a loss? Rather,</b> in the case of the mortgage the debtor <b>should have protested,</b> and by not protesting, he causes his own loss. <b>Here too,</b> in the case of the tree, the owner <b>should have protested.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There are <b>three</b> independent <b>lands</b> in Eretz Yisrael <b>with regard to</b> establishing <b>presumptive ownership: Judea, and Transjordan, and the Galilee.</b> If the prior owner of the field <b>was in Judea and</b> another <b>took possession</b> of his field <b>in the Galilee,</b> or if he was <b>in the Galilee and</b> another <b>took possession</b> of his field <b>in Judea,</b> the possessor does <b>not</b> establish <b>presumptive ownership until</b> the one possessing the field <b>will be with</b> the prior owner <b>in one province. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The Sages <b>said</b> that establishing presumptive ownership requires <b>three years only in order that</b> if the owner <b>will be in Spain [<i>Aspamya</i>], and</b> another <b>possesses</b> his field for <b>a year,</b> people <b>will go and inform</b> the owner by the end of the next <b>year, and</b> the owner will <b>come</b> back <b>in</b> the <b>following year</b> and take the possessor to court.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What does the first <i>tanna</i> hold</b> in ruling that the prior owner and the field need be in the same province in order for the possessor to establish presumptive ownership? <b>If he holds</b> that <b>a protest that is</b> lodged <b>not in the presence of</b> the one possessing the field <b>is</b> a valid <b>protest, even</b> in the case where one is in <b>Judea and</b> one is in the <b>Galilee,</b> the protest should be valid <b>as well. If he holds</b> that <b>a protest</b> lodged <b>not in his presence is not</b> a valid <b>protest, even</b> in the case where one is in <b>Judea and</b> the other one is in <b>Judea,</b> the protest should <b>not</b> be valid <b>as well.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Abba bar Memel says</b> that <b>Rav says: Actually,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>a protest</b> lodged <b>not in his presence is</b> a valid <b>protest, and</b> the Sages <b>taught our mishna with regard to a period of crisis,</b> when travel is perilous and information cannot be transmitted between Judea and the Galilee. Therefore, although no word of a protest was received, the possessor does not establish presumptive ownership of the field. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if it is due only to the exigent circumstances that word of the protest does not reach the one possessing the field, <b>what is different</b> about <b>Judea and</b> the <b>Galilee that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>cited?</b> Ostensibly, even within one of the three lands, if travel and communications are restricted the same <i>halakha</i> would apply.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i>, by citing specifically a case where each is located in a different land, <b>teaches us this:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC