
### Part 1
<b>in a large building</b> with many residences, the renter <b>may make use of the</b> building’s <b>projections and of the</b> cavities in its external <b>walls up to</b> a distance of <b>four cubits</b> from his room, <b>and</b> he may make use <b>of the thickness of the wall in a place where it is customary</b> to do so. <b>But</b> as for making use <b>of the building’s</b> front <b>garden [<i>betarbatz</i>],</b> he may <b>not</b> do so. <b>And Rav Naḥman himself said:</b> He may make use <b>of even the building’s</b> front <b>garden. But</b> he may <b>not</b> use <b>the yard that is at the back of the house. And Rava said:</b> He may use <b>even the yard that is at the back of the house.</b>

### Part 2
Apropos the use of a wall between neighbors, <b>Ravina says:</b> If one’s <b>beam</b> supporting a covering <b>for shade</b> was resting on his neighbor’s wall <b>for up to thirty days, there is no acquired privilege</b> for him to continue using it, since the neighbor can claim that he had assumed that the beam was there only temporarily and for that reason he did not protest. But <b>after thirty days, there is an acquired privilege. And if it was</b> for <b>a <i>sukka</i></b> that was being used <b>for the mitzva</b> on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>for up to seven days there is no acquired privilege</b> for him to continue using it, since it is assumed that it is there for the mitzva and that after the Festival it will be removed. But if <b>after seven days</b> the neighbor did not protest, <b>there is an acquired privilege</b> for him to continue using it. <b>And if</b> the one using the beam <b>attached it with clay, there is immediately</b> such <b>an acquired privilege.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>Abaye says:</b> If there were <b>two houses on two sides of a public domain, this</b> one, the owner of one of the houses, must <b>build a fence for half his roof, and that</b> one, the owner of the other house, must <b>build a fence for half his roof.</b> They must position the fences so that <b>one</b> fence <b>is not opposite the other</b> fence, <b>and</b> each one must <b>add</b> to his fence a little beyond the midway point, so that each one should not be able to see the activity on the other’s roof.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> discuss <b>specifically</b> the case of two houses on opposite sides of <b>a public domain,</b> considering that the same <i>halakha</i> should apply <b>even</b> if the two houses are separated by <b>a private domain?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for</b> Abaye to mention <b>a public domain, lest you say</b> that one neighbor can <b>say</b> to the other: <b>Ultimately, you need to conceal</b> yourself <b>from people in the public domain.</b> Since in any event you have to build a fence across your entire roof, you cannot compel me to build a fence on my roof.

### Part 5
To counter this, Abaye <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so, because the second homeowner <b>can say to</b> the first in response: <b>The public can see me</b> only <b>during the day,</b> when pedestrians pass by, <b>but they cannot see me at night. You,</b> by contrast, <b>can see me both during the day and at night. Alternatively,</b> he can say: <b>The public can see me</b> from the street only <b>when I am standing,</b> but <b>they cannot see me when I am sitting. You,</b> by contrast, <b>can see me both when I am standing and when I am sitting.</b> And furthermore, <b>the public can see me</b> only <b>when they look</b> specifically at me, <b>but they cannot see me when they do not look</b> specifically at me, since the average pedestrian does not look up to see what is happening on the roofs. <b>You,</b> by contrast, <b>can see me in any case,</b> because you live opposite me.

### Part 6
<b>The Master,</b> i.e., Abaye, <b>said</b> above: <b>This</b> one, the owner of one of the houses, must <b>build a fence for half his roof, and that</b> one, the owner of the other house, must <b>build a fence for half his roof.</b> They must position the fences so that <b>one</b> fence <b>is not opposite the other</b> fence, <b>and</b> each one must <b>add</b> to his fence a little beyond the midway point. The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that each one must make a fence for half his roof?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> in a case where <b>one of them went ahead</b> on his own and <b>constructed</b> a fence on half his roof, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>the other can say to him: Take</b> from me compensation for <b>the expenditure [<i>uzinka</i>], and you build the entire</b> fence, and in that way we will not invade one another’s privacy. Therefore, Abaye <b>teaches us</b> that the neighbor who built the fence for half his roof <b>can say to him: What is the reason you do not</b> want to <b>build</b> a fence? It is <b>because</b> the added weight <b>will damage your house’s foundation. My foundation too will be damaged</b> if I continue to build on my roof.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> If one’s <b>roof is adjacent to his neighbor’s courtyard, he must build a fence</b> on the roof <b>four cubits high,</b> so that he will not be able to see into his neighbor’s courtyard, <b>but</b> he is <b>not</b> required to build a fence <b>between</b> one <b>roof and</b> another <b>roof. And Rav Naḥman him-self says: He is not required to</b> build a fence <b>four cubits</b> high on the roof, <b>but he is required to</b> build <b>a partition</b> that is <b>ten</b> handbreadths high.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> purpose, according to Rav Naḥman, does the neighbor have to build such a partition? <b>If</b> it is <b>to</b> prevent <b>damage</b> caused by exposure to the <b>sight</b> of others, <b>we require</b> a partition of <b>four cubits. If</b> it is <b>to catch</b> the neighbor <b>as a thief,</b> i.e., to set a boundary between the two properties so that any trespass will be construed as attempted theft, <b>a mere partition of pegs suffices.</b> And <b>if</b> it is to prevent <b>kid goats and lambs</b> from crossing from one roof to the other, a low partition that is high <b>enough so that</b> the goat or lamb <b>will not</b> be able to <b>leap headlong</b> from one roof to the other <b>suffices.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> it is built <b>to catch</b> the neighbor <b>as a thief. With a partition of pegs he can give an excuse and say</b> that <b>he was</b> merely <b>stretching himself,</b> but <b>with a partition of ten</b> handbreadths <b>he cannot give</b> such <b>an excuse.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav Naḥman from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If his courtyard was higher than the other’s roof, he is not required to attend to it. What, is it not</b> teaching <b>that he is not required to attend to it at all,</b> i.e., that he need not build any type of fence? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it means that <b>he is not required to attend</b> to building a partition <b>of four cubits, but he must attend to</b> building <b>a partition of ten</b> handbreadths, as maintained by Rav Naḥman.

### Part 11
<b>It was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> disagree about the following case: If there are <b>two</b> adjoining <b>courtyards, one higher than the other, Rav Huna says</b> that the owner of <b>the lower</b> courtyard <b>builds</b> the wall separating the courtyards <b>from his level and upward, and</b> the owner of <b>the upper</b> courtyard <b>builds</b> the wall <b>from his level and upward. And Rav Ḥisda says:</b> The owner of <b>the upper</b> courtyard <b>assists</b> the owner of the lower courtyard <b>and builds from below,</b> even including that part of the wall which is opposite the lower courtyard.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes that <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ḥisda:</b> If there were <b>two</b> adjoining <b>courtyards, one higher than the other,</b> the owner of <b>the upper</b> courtyard <b>cannot say: I will build from my level and upward, but</b> rather <b>he assists</b> the owner of the lower courtyard <b>and builds from below. And if his courtyard is higher than the roof of his neighbor, he is not required to attend to it.</b> The owner of the upper courtyard need not build a partition because people do not ordinarily use their roofs.

### Part 13
§ It is related that <b>two</b> people <b>were living</b> in a two-story building; <b>one was living in the upper</b> story, <b>and one was living in the lower</b> one. <b>The lower</b> story began to <b>collapse,</b> its walls sinking into the ground to the point that it was no longer fit for dwelling. The owner of <b>the lower</b> story <b>said to</b> the owner of <b>the upper</b> story: <b>Come and let us</b> demolish the whole building and <b>rebuild it</b> together. The owner of the upper story <b>said to him: I am living comfortably</b> and am under no obligation to rebuild your residence.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC