
### Part 1
those who reported the story to him <b>did not conclude it before him;</b> consequently, Rav Ami was not informed that Rava had indeed given the money to the gentile poor.

### Part 2
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The following <b>was said about Binyamin the righteous, who was appointed</b> supervisor <b>over the charity fund. Once, a woman came before him during years of drought</b> and <b>said to him: My master, sustain me. He said to her:</b> I swear <b>by the Temple service that there is nothing</b> left <b>in the charity fund. She said to him: My master, if you do not sustain me, a woman and her seven sons will die. He arose and sustained her with his own</b> funds. <b>After some time, he fell deathly ill. The ministering angels said to the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, You said</b> that <b>anyone who preserves a single life in Israel is</b> regarded <b>as if he has preserved an entire world. Should</b> then <b>Binyamin the righteous, who saved a woman and her seven sons, die after these few years,</b> still in his youth? <b>They immediately tore up his sentence.</b> A Sage <b>taught: They added twenty-two years to his life.</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving King Munbaz, who liberally gave away his treasures and the treasures of his ancestors in the years of drought,</b> distributing the money to the poor. <b>His brothers and his father’s household joined together against him</b> to protest against his actions, <b>and they said to him: Your ancestors stored up</b> money in their treasuries <b>and added to</b> the treasures <b>of their ancestors, and you are liberally distributing</b> it all to the poor. King Munbaz <b>said to them:</b> Not so, <b>my ancestors stored up below, whereas I am storing above, as it is stated: “Truth will spring out of the earth and righteousness will look down from heaven”</b> (Psalms 85:12), meaning that the righteous deeds that one has performed are stored up in heaven. <b>My ancestors stored up</b> treasures <b>in a place where the</b> human <b>hand can reach,</b> and so their treasures could have been robbed, <b>whereas I am storing up</b> treasures <b>in a place where the</b> human <b>hand cannot reach,</b> and so they are secure, <b>as it is stated: “Righteousness and justice are the foundation of Your throne”</b> (Psalms 89:15).

### Part 4
<b>My ancestors stored up something that does not generate profit,</b> as money sitting in a treasury does not increase, <b>whereas I am storing up something that generates profit, as it is stated: “Say of the righteous, that it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings”</b> (Isaiah 3:10). <b>My ancestors stored up treasures of money, whereas I am storing up treasures of souls, as it is stated: “The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and he that wins souls is wise”</b> (Proverbs 11:30). <b>My ancestors stored up for others,</b> for their sons and heirs, when they themselves would pass from this world, <b>whereas I am storing up for myself, as it is stated: “And it shall be as righteousness to you”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:13). <b>My ancestors stored up for this world, whereas I am storing up for the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And your righteousness shall go before you, the glory of the Lord shall be your rearguard”</b> (Isaiah 58:8).

### Part 5
§ The Gemara resumes its analysis of the mishna, which taught that one must reside in a place for twelve months in order to be considered a resident for the purposes of issues such as paying taxes. But if he <b>bought</b> himself <b>a residence in</b> the city, <b>he is</b> immediately considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: If he bought any amount of land in</b> the city, and not necessarily a residence, <b>he is</b> immediately considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> otherwise in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: If</b> one <b>bought land that is suitable for a residence, he is</b> immediately considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city.</b> This contradicts the first <i>baraita</i>. The Gemara answers: This is a dispute between <b>two <i>tanna’im</i> and</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The court <b>does not divide a courtyard</b> at the request of one of the joint owners <b>unless there will be</b> in it four by <b>four cubits for this one and</b> four by <b>four cubits for that one,</b> i.e., this minimum area for each of the joint owners. <b>And</b> the court does <b>not</b> divide <b>a</b> jointly owned <b>field unless there is</b> space <b>in it</b> to plant <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for this one and nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for that one. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The court does not divide a field <b>unless there is</b> space <b>in it</b> to plant <b>nine half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for this one and nine half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for that one. And</b> the court does <b>not</b> divide a jointly owned <b>garden unless there is</b> space <b>in it</b> to plant <b>a half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for this one and a half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed <b>for that one. Rabbi Akiva says</b> that half that amount is sufficient, i.e., the <b>area required for sowing a quarter-<i>kav</i> of seed [<i>beit rova</i>].</b>

### Part 8
Similarly, the court does <b>not</b> divide <b>a hall [<i>hateraklin</i>], a drawing room, a dovecote, a cloak, a bathhouse, an olive press, and an irrigated field unless there is enough for this one</b> to use the property in the usual manner <b>and enough for that one</b> to use the property in the usual manner. <b>This is the principle: Anything</b> for <b>which</b> when it <b>is divided,</b> each of the parts is large enough to <b>retain the name</b> of the original item, the court <b>divides</b> it. <b>But if</b> the parts will <b>not</b> retain the original name, the court <b>does not divide</b> it.

### Part 9
<b>When</b> does this rule apply? It applies <b>when</b> the joint owners <b>do not both wish</b> to divide the item; when only one of the owners wishes to divide the property, he cannot force the other to do so. <b>But when both of them wish</b> to divide the item, <b>they may divide</b> it, <b>even</b> if each of the owners will receive <b>less than</b> the amounts specified above. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>sacred writings,</b> i.e., a scroll of any of the twenty-four books of the Bible, that were inherited by two people, <b>they may not divide</b> them, <b>even if both of them wish</b> to do so, because it would be a show of disrespect to cut the scroll in half.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The four cubits</b> of the courtyard <b>which they said</b> each of the joint owners must receive is <b>in addition to</b> the space in front of <b>the entrances</b> to each of the houses that is assigned to the owner of the house for loading and unloading. <b>That</b> opinion <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The court <b>does not divide a courtyard unless</b> its area is sufficient so that <b>there will be in it eight cubits for this one and eight cubits for that one.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that it suffices that there be <b>four cubits for this one and four cubits for that one? Rather, conclude from it</b> that the <i>baraita</i> was taught <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Asi.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from it</b> that it is so.

### Part 11
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who raise</b> the <i>baraita</i> as a contradiction to what is taught in the mishna and use the previously mentioned point to reconcile the two texts. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: The court <b>does not divide a courtyard</b> at the request of one of the joint owners <b>unless there will be</b> in it four by <b>four cubits for this one and</b> four by <b>four cubits for that one. But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The court does not divide a courtyard unless there are <b>eight cubits for this one and eight cubits for that one?</b> About this <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The four cubits</b> of the courtyard <b>which they said</b> each of the joint owners must receive is <b>in addition to</b> the space in front of <b>the entrances</b> to each of the houses.

### Part 12
Further with regard to the division of a courtyard, <b>Rav Huna says: A courtyard is divided according to its entrances.</b> Each of the owners receives a share of the courtyard in proportion to the number of entrances that his house has opening onto the courtyard. <b>And Rav Ḥisda says: Four cubits are allotted</b> to each of the owners <b>for each and every entrance, and the rest</b> of the courtyard <b>is</b> then <b>divided equally</b> between them.

### Part 13
The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ḥisda:</b> Each of <b>the entrances</b> opening <b>to a courtyard</b> is allotted <b>four cubits.</b> If <b>this one has one entrance and that one has two entrances, the one who has one entrance takes four cubits, and the one who has two entrances takes eight cubits, and they divide the rest</b> of the courtyard <b>equally</b> between them. If <b>this one had an entrance eight cubits wide,</b> he <b>takes eight cubits adjacent to the entrance and four cubits in the courtyard.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise: <b>What are</b> these <b>four cubits in the courtyard doing here?</b> Doesn’t it all depend on the size of the courtyard? <b>Abaye said: This</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> For the entrance <b>he takes eight cubits along the length of the courtyard and four cubits along the width of the courtyard.</b> In other words, he takes a strip four cubits wide along the entire length of his entrance.

### Part 14
<b>Ameimar says: A pit for</b> holding <b>animal food [<i>peira desuflei</i>] has four cubits on each and every side</b> so that there will be sufficient space for the animals to stand. The Gemara adds: <b>And we said</b> this <b>only when</b> the pit <b>has no special entrance</b> to reach it, but rather it is accessed from all sides.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC