
### Part 1
<b>Even</b> if he plowed the land for <b>one day</b> in the first and third years respectively, it should be sufficient to establish the presumption of ownership. <b>Rather, everyone</b> agrees that <b>plowing is not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership, <b>and here</b> the difference <b>between</b> their opinions is whether in order to establish the presumption of ownership one needs to possess the land long enough to grow <b>major produce,</b> which requires three months to grow, <b>or</b> only <b>minor produce,</b> which requires one month.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Plowing is not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership. <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say: This is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership. <b>Whose</b> opinion is it that the <i>baraita</i> refers to as: <b>There are</b> those <b>who say? Rav Ḥisda said:</b> It <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Aḥa, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If the possessor <b>plowed</b> the field for <b>a year and sowed it</b> for <b>two</b> years, or if he <b>plowed it</b> for <b>two</b> years <b>and sowed it</b> for <b>a year,</b> it <b>is not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership. <b>Rabbi Aḥa says: This is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership, which indicates that he holds that plowing establishes the presumption of ownership.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi said: I asked all</b> of the <b>great</b> men <b>of the generation</b> about this, <b>and they said to me:</b> With regard to <b>plowing, this is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership. <b>Rav Beivai said to Rav Naḥman: What is the reason of the one who says</b> that <b>plowing is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership? Rav Naḥman answered: <b>A person is not apt to</b> have <b>his land plowed</b> by someone else <b>and</b> remain <b>silent.</b> Rav Beivai asked: <b>And what is the reason of the one who says</b> that <b>plowing is not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership? Rav Naḥman answered: The owner <b>says</b> to himself: Let <b>each and every clump [<i>shibba</i>]</b> of earth <b>enter</b> the plow. That is to say, the owner is amenable to having someone else plow the land for him, and then he will sow and harvest.

### Part 4
The <b>residents of Pum Nahara sent</b> a question <b>to Rav Naḥman bar Rav Ḥisda. Our teacher, instruct us: Is plowing</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership, <b>or is</b> it <b>not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership? Rav Naḥman bar Rav Ḥisda <b>said to them: Rabbi Aḥa and all</b> of the <b>great</b> men <b>of the generation say:</b> With regard to <b>plowing, this is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> Is it <b>a novelty to enumerate</b> great <b>men</b> who maintain an opinion without taking into account that of others? <b>But</b> what of <b>Rav and Shmuel in Babylonia, and Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva in Eretz Yisrael,</b> who <b>say: Plowing is not</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership?

### Part 6
The Gemara presents the sources for ascribing to these Sages the opinion that plowing does not establish the presumption of ownership. The basis for ascribing it to <b>Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva is the mishna,</b> as the Gemara explained above. <b>What is</b> the basis for ascribing this opinion to <b>Rav? As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: This</b> ruling that either a month or three months is sufficient use for the first and third years is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva, but the Rabbis,</b> whose opinion is accepted, <b>say:</b> With regard to a field, <b>its presumption</b> of ownership is established by <b>three years, from day to day.</b> The phrase: <b>From day to day,</b> serves <b>to exclude what?</b> Does it <b>not</b> serve <b>to exclude plowing, which does not</b> establish the presumption of ownership?

### Part 7
<b>What is</b> the basis for ascribing this opinion to <b>Shmuel? As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: This</b> ruling that either a month or three months is sufficient use for the first and third years is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva, but the Rabbis,</b> whose opinion is accepted, <b>say:</b> He does not establish the presumption of ownership <b>until</b> he <b>harvests three</b> date <b>crops, or harvests three</b> grape <b>crops, or harvests three</b> olive <b>crops.</b> This indicates that Shmuel holds that plowing does not establish the presumption of ownership. <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Rav and Shmuel? <b>Abaye said:</b> The difference <b>between</b> their opinions is whether three harvests of <b>a young [<i>na’ara</i>] date tree, which produces</b> a crop <b>three times in</b> one <b>year,</b> establishes the presumption of ownership.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yishmael said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> that eighteen months are required to establish the presumption of ownership of a non-irrigated field, <b>said? With regard to a white field,</b> i.e., a grain field. But with regard to an orchard, harvesting three different crops suffices. <b>Abaye said: From</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yishmael we infer</b> the proper understanding of a detail of the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> who disagree with him, and hold that three years of harvesting one crop is required to establish the presumption of ownership even with regard to an orchard: If <b>one had thirty trees</b> of one type in a field, and they were <b>planted</b> with a density of <b>ten trees per</b> each <b>area required for sowing one <i>se’a</i> of seed [<i>beit se’a</i>],</b> and one <b>consumed</b> the produce of <b>ten</b> trees <b>in this</b> first <b>year, and</b> of another <b>ten</b> trees <b>in this</b> second <b>year, and</b> of another <b>ten</b> trees <b>in this</b> third <b>year, this is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC