
### Part 1
<b>There,</b> in the case of the sale of land, the reason the buyer may keep the extra land when it is less than the acceptable limit is that the seller <b>said to him:</b> I am selling you this piece of land <b>whether it is</b> slightly <b>less or</b> slightly <b>more</b> than a <i>beit kor</i>, i.e., he agrees to accept a small deviation from the stated area. <b>But</b> while an extra <b>quarter</b>-<i>kav</i> area per <i>beit se’a</i> is <b>not significant,</b> and therefore the seller is willing to forgo it, <b>more than a quarter</b>-<i>kav</i> area per <i>beit se’a</i> <b>is significant,</b> and the seller is not willing to forgo any of it. Consequently, all of the extra land must be returned. By contrast, in the case of Rav Huna’s ruling, the buyer is aware that it is normal to have a certain proportion of impurities mixed in and accepts this possibility from the outset. Accordingly, even if the proportion of impurities is greater than the acceptable limit, it might be sufficient if the seller takes back only the quantity of impurities above the acceptable limit.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains why more than an area required to sow a quarter-<i>kav</i> of seed per <i>beit se’a</i> of land is significant: The reason is <b>that since</b> all those extra areas of land <b>are fit to combine together to</b> form an area in which one could sow <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed, the extra land <b>is a significant plot of land in its own right, and</b> therefore <b>it must</b> all <b>be returned.</b> The land that was sold was stated to be a <i>beit kor</i>, which is thirty <i>beit se’a</i>. If the area of the extra land was of a proportion somewhat more than an area required to sow a quarter-<i>kav</i> of seed per <i>beit se’a</i> of land, then thirty such areas would collectively be about equal to an area required to sow nine <i>kav</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a support for Rav Huna’s ruling from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The</b> <i>halakha</i> of price <b>exploitation</b> is that if the disparity is <b>less than one-sixth</b> of the value of the merchandise, the <b>merchandise is acquired</b> immediately and the sum of the exploitation need not be returned. If the disparity is <b>greater than one-sixth,</b> then <b>the transaction is nullified.</b> If the disparity is precisely <b>one-sixth,</b> the buyer has <b>acquired</b> the merchandise, <b>and</b> the one who benefited from the exploitation <b>returns</b> the entire sum of the <b>exploitation.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara explains the proof: <b>Why,</b> in the case where the disparity is precisely one-sixth, is the entire sum of the exploitation returned? Instead, <b>let him return</b> only a small amount of the exploitation <b>until</b> the difference is <b>less than one-sixth.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>Learn from</b> the fact that he must return the entire sum that <b>when one is required to return</b> part of a sale because of a discrepancy that is beyond the acceptable limit of deviation, <b>one is required to return</b> the <b>entire</b> discrepancy and not just the amount that is beyond the acceptable limit. This supports Rav Huna’s ruling.

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the case of exploitation, the seller <b>initially said to</b> the buyer that he would sell the merchandise for a sum <b>equal to its value.</b> Any price difference should be unacceptable. <b>But</b> a disparity of <b>less than one-sixth is not recognizable in</b> a sale worth <b>one hundred dinars, and a person</b> will <b>forgo</b> it. By contrast, a disparity of <b>one-sixth is considered</b> significant, <b>and a person will not forgo</b> it. Consequently, the entire sum of the exploitation must be returned. If the disparity is <b>greater than one-sixth, it is a mistaken transaction and the transaction is nullified.</b> By contrast, in the case of Rav Huna’s ruling, the buyer is aware that it is normal to have a certain proportion of impurities mixed in and accepted that possibility from the outset. Accordingly, even if the proportion of impurities was greater than the acceptable limit, it might be sufficient if the seller takes back only the quantity of impurities above the acceptable limit.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a support for Rav Huna’s ruling from a <i>baraita</i>: When <b>one receives a field from another</b> under a contract <b>to plant</b> trees in it, then <b>this</b> field owner <b>accepts upon himself</b> that there may be <b>ten deficient trees per</b> every <b>hundred</b> trees planted, as he is aware that not every tree planted will necessarily flourish. If the number of deficient trees is <b>more than this,</b> the court <b>imposes upon him</b> the responsibility to replace <b>all</b> of those trees, and not only the number of trees above the acceptable limit. This supports Rav Huna’s ruling.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> There is no proof from this case, because <b>any</b> time there are <b>more than this</b> number of deficient trees, the overall area that contains the deficient trees is of a size equivalent to a whole field. Therefore, the contractor is <b>comparable to one who comes to plant</b> a whole field <b>from the outset,</b> who has not fulfilled his remit if he plants only a few trees; rather, he must plant the entire area. But in the case of Rav Huna’s ruling, the impurities never constitute an independent unit; consequently, it might be sufficient if the seller takes back only the quantity of impurities that is above the acceptable limit.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: When purchasing <b>a cellar</b> containing barrels <b>of wine,</b> one accepts upon himself that up to ten barrels of souring wine may be present in each hundred barrels purchased. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the sale? <b>If</b> one <b>said to</b> the buyer: I am selling to you <b>a wine cellar, with-out specification</b> of which cellar he meant, it is <b>difficult,</b> as the Gemara will soon explain. And <b>if he said to him:</b> I am selling to you <b>this</b> particular <b>wine cellar,</b> it is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara elaborates: <b>If he said to him:</b> I am selling to you <b>this</b> particular wine <b>cellar,</b> it is <b>difficult, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one said to a buyer: <b>I am selling to you a wine cellar,</b> then he is required to <b>give him wine that is all</b> of <b>good</b> quality, i.e., the buyer does not have to accept any quantity of souring wine. If he said: <b>I am selling to you this</b> particular <b>wine cellar,</b> then he may <b>give him</b> the <b>wine</b> that is in his possession, even if it is of the quality <b>that is sold in the shops,</b> i.e., it is beginning to sour. If he said: <b>I am selling to you this</b> particular <b>cellar,</b> without mentioning the word: Wine, then <b>even</b> if <b>everything</b> he gives him is wine that had turned into <b>vinegar, it has come to</b> the buyer and the sale is valid. The mishna’s ruling that the buyer must accept that up to ten percent of the wine might be souring does not accord with any of the rulings of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the mishna concerns a case <b>when he said to</b> the buyer: I am selling to you <b>a wine cellar, without specification</b> of which cellar he was selling. <b>And</b> emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>teach</b> the following qualification <b>in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i>: And</b> the buyer <b>accepts upon himself</b> that up to <b>ten</b> barrels of <b>souring</b> wine may be present <b>in</b> each <b>hundred</b> barrels purchased.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges this addition: <b>But</b> if he sold the buyer a wine cellar <b>without specification</b> of which one he was selling, <b>does</b> the buyer <b>accept</b> upon himself any souring wine at all? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya teach: One who sells a barrel of wine to another</b> must <b>give him wine that is all</b> of <b>good</b> quality? The Gemara answers: <b>A barrel is different, because</b> the wine inside <b>is all one</b> body of <b>wine</b> of the same quality.

### Part 12
The Gemara once again challenges the addition: <b>But didn’t Rav Zevid teach</b> a <i>baraita</i> of the <b>school of Rabbi Oshaya:</b> If one says to a buyer: <b>I am selling to you a wine cellar,</b> then he is required to <b>give him wine that is all</b> of <b>good</b> quality? Similarly, if he said: <b>I am selling to you this</b> particular <b>wine cellar,</b> then he is required to <b>give him wine that is all</b> of <b>good</b> quality, but the buyer <b>accepts upon himself ten souring</b> barrels <b>per hundred</b> barrels.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC