
### Part 1
<b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 11:8): If one poured oil or wine of <i>teruma</i> from one vessel to another and <b>turned</b> the vessel on its side <b>and drained</b> out the last bits of liquid inside, <b>this is <i>teruma</i></b> and must be given to the priest? This indicates that the last remnants of the liquid in the vessel belong to the one who receives the oil or wine, not the owner, i.e., the seller. Why, then, does the mishna here teach that the last remnants belong to the seller?

### Part 2
Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi <b>said to</b> Rabbi Elazar: <b>But wasn’t it stated with regard to that</b> mishna that <b>Rabbi Abbahu says: Due to</b> of the <b>despair</b> of the <b>owner,</b> who relinquishes his right to such a small amount of wine or oil, the Sages <b>touched upon it</b> and ruled that any remnants extracted from the vessel belong to the seller? By contrast, with regard to <i>teruma</i>, which is forbidden to non-priests, the despair of the buyer is irrelevant, and therefore anything that remains in the vessels is <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And a storekeeper is not obligated to drip</b> three drops. Rabbi Yehuda says: If the sale occurs on Shabbat eve as nightfall arrives, one is exempt from dripping these three drops. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is <b>Rabbi Yehuda referring to the first clause</b> of the mishna, <b>and</b> if so his ruling <b>is lenient,</b> as the mishna states that one must drip three drops and he states that on Shabbat eve one is exempt from doing so? <b>Or perhaps he is referring to the latter clause and is stringent,</b> as the mishna teaches that a storekeeper is always exempt, whereas Rabbi Yehuda rules that this is the <i>halakha</i> only on Shabbat eve?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of this dilemma, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: On Shabbat eve at nightfall a storekeeper is exempt because</b> the <b>storekeeper is busy.</b> This proves that Rabbi Yehuda was referring to the latter clause of the mishna, i.e., he exempts the storekeeper from dripping the drops only on Shabbat eve.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who sends his son to a storekeeper with a <i>pundeyon</i>,</b> a coin worth two <i>issar</i>, <b>in his hand, and</b> the storekeeper <b>measured oil for him for</b> one <b><i>issar</i> and gave him the</b> second <b><i>issar</i></b> as change, and the son <b>broke the jug and lost the <i>issar</i>, the storekeeper</b> must compensate the father, as he gave the jug and coin to one who is not halakhically competent. <b>Rabbi Yehuda exempts</b> him from liability, <b>as</b> he holds that the father <b>sent</b> his son <b>in order to</b> do <b>this,</b> i.e., to bring back the jug and coin. <b>And the Rabbis concede to Rabbi Yehuda</b> with regard to a case <b>when the jug is in the hand of the child and</b> the <b>storekeeper measured</b> the oil <b>into it that</b> the <b>storekeeper</b> is <b>exempt</b> if the child breaks the jug.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Granted, with regard to</b> the <b><i>issar</i> and</b> the <b>oil,</b> one can explain that <b>they disagree over this</b> matter: <b>As the Rabbis hold</b> that the father <b>sent</b> his son <b>to inform</b> the storekeeper that he needed oil but did not intend for the storekeeper to send the oil with the boy. For this reason, if the storekeeper gave the child the oil he is liable for its loss. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>he sent</b> his son so that the storekeeper would <b>send him</b> back with the oil, and therefore the storekeeper is exempt from liability. <b>But</b> if the child <b>broke the jug,</b> why do the Rabbis hold that the storekeeper is responsible for it? <b>It is a deliberate loss</b> on the part of the father, as he entrusted the jug to his young son, who is not responsible enough to care for it.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Hoshaya said: Here we are dealing with a proprietor who sells jugs,</b> and the father sent his son with a jug in case the store owner might want to buy it. <b>And</b> this is a case <b>where the storekeeper took</b> the jug <b>in order to examine it, and</b> the ruling is <b>in accordance with</b> a statement <b>of Shmuel. As Shmuel says:</b> With regard to <b>one who takes a vessel from a craftsman in order to examine it</b> and buy it if he chooses, <b>and an accident occurred</b> while it was <b>in his possession</b> and it broke, he is <b>liable</b> to pay restitution for the vessel. He has the halakhic status of a borrower, and therefore he bears financial responsibility for the loss.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that the opinion <b>of Shmuel is</b> subject to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>?</b> Since Rabbi Yehuda disagrees with the Rabbis, his opinion evidently differs from that of Shmuel. <b>Rather, Rabba and Rav Yosef both say</b> that the disagreement in the mishna should be explained as follows: <b>Here, we are dealing with a storekeeper who sells jugs,</b> and the father sent his son to buy from him a jug filled with oil. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda follows his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> as explained above, that the father sent his son to bring back the merchandise, <b>and the Rabbis</b> follow <b>their</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the father sent the son to inform the storekeeper what he needed, but not to carry it back.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so, say the last clause: The Rabbis concede to Rabbi Yehuda</b> in a case <b>when the jug was in the hand of the child, and the storekeeper measured</b> the oil <b>into it, that the storekeeper</b> is <b>exempt.</b> Why would the Rabbis rule that the storekeeper is exempt? <b>But you said</b> that the father <b>sent</b> his son only <b>to inform</b> the storekeeper of his order, but he did not intend for the storekeeper to give anything to his son. <b>Rather, Abaye bar Avin and Rabbi Ḥanina bar Avin both say</b> that the disagreement in the mishna should be explained as follows: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC