
### Part 1
The reason is <b>that</b> we presume that the fetus <b>died first,</b> before its mother died, <b>and the son does not inherit from his mother</b> while <b>in the grave,</b> in order <b>to bequeath</b> the inheritance <b>to his paternal brothers.</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that if a son dies, and afterward his mother dies, the deceased son does not inherit from his mother and subsequently bequeath the inheritance to his paternal brothers, who are not related to the mother. But in other cases, where it is not his mother’s estate, a fetus inherits property.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that</b> it is certain that the fetus <b>died first? But there was an incident</b> where the mother died <b>and</b> the fetus <b>made three spasmodic motions</b> afterward. Apparently, a fetus can die after the mother. <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi said:</b> That incident was <b>just as it is with the tail of the lizard, which jerks</b> after being severed from the lizard, but it is just a spasmodic motion which does not indicate that it is still alive.

### Part 3
<b>Mar, son of Rav Yosef, says in the name of Rava:</b> The mishna comes <b>to say that</b> a one-day-old child <b>reduces the portion of the firstborn.</b> The firstborn is entitled to a double portion of the inheritance, and this is calculated taking into account the portion due to his dead brother. <b>And</b> it is in this context that <b>specifically</b> the portion of <b>a one-day-old</b> child is taken into account, <b>but</b> the portion of <b>a fetus is not</b> taken into account, even though a fetus also inherits property. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The Merciful One states</b> concerning the portion of the firstborn: “If a man has two wives, the one beloved, and the other hated, <b>and they bore him children,</b> both the beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated” (Deuteronomy 21:15). The term “children” excludes a fetus.

### Part 4
This is similar to another <i>halakha</i>, <b>as Mar, son of Rav Yosef, says in the name of Rava: A son who was born after his father’s death does not reduce the firstborn’s portion. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“And they bore him children,” and this</b> term “children” <b>does not</b> apply to a fetus.

### Part 5
The Gemara notes: <b>In Sura they taught</b> Mar’s statement <b>that</b> way, but <b>in Pumbedita they taught</b> it <b>this</b> way: <b>Mar, son of Rav Yosef, says in the name of Rava: A firstborn who was born after his father’s death does not receive a double</b> portion. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: “But <b>he shall acknowledge</b> the firstborn, the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion” (Deuteronomy 21:17), <b>and</b> in this case the father <b>is not</b> there <b>that</b> he can <b>acknowledge</b> him. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with all these versions</b> of that <b>which Mar, son of Rav Yosef, says in the name of Rava.</b> Accordingly, a one-day-old child reduces the portion of the firstborn, a son born after his father’s death does not reduce the firstborn’s portion, and a firstborn born after his father’s death does not receive a double portion.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to <b>one who transfers ownership</b> of an item <b>to a fetus,</b> the fetus <b>does not acquire</b> the item. <b>And if you say</b> that the statement of <b>our mishna</b> (140b), with regard to one who gives a gift to his unborn child, indicates that an item can be transferred to a fetus, the circumstances there are unique. <b>Since the disposition of a person</b> is to be <b>inclined toward his son,</b> the Sages validated such a transfer, but one cannot transfer an item to the unborn child of another.

### Part 7
<b>Shmuel said to Rav Ḥana of Baghdad: Go out</b> and <b>bring me an assembly of ten</b> men, <b>and I will say</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>to you in their presence,</b> so that it will be well publicized. The <i>halakha</i> was: With regard to <b>one who transfers ownership</b> of an item <b>to a fetus,</b> the fetus <b>acquires</b> the item. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that with regard to <b>one who transfers ownership</b> of an item <b>to a fetus,</b> the fetus <b>does not acquire</b> the item.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> man <b>who said to his wife,</b> before she conceived: <b>My property</b> is given <b>to the sons that I will have from you. His older son</b> from a previous marriage <b>came</b> and <b>said to him: That man,</b> i.e., me, <b>what will become of him,</b> i.e., will I receive nothing? <b>He said to</b> his son: <b>Go</b> and <b>acquire</b> a portion <b>like one of the sons</b> who will be born, i.e., you will receive a share as well. The Gemara comments: <b>Those</b> sons who were not yet born <b>certainly did not acquire</b> the property, and do not receive more than their share as heirs, <b>as they are not yet</b> in existence.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>this</b> son, <b>does the young man [<i>letalya</i>]</b> receive an additional <b>share</b> of the inheritance in a case <b>where</b> there are other <b>sons</b> from the second wife, since his father gave him an additional share, <b>or does the young man not</b> receive an additional <b>share</b> of the inheritance <b>where</b> there are other <b>sons?</b> There are <b>Rabbi Avin, and Rabbi Meyasha, and Rabbi Yirmeya, who</b> all <b>say: The young man does</b> receive an additional <b>share</b> of the inheritance <b>where</b> there are other <b>sons.</b> And there are <b>Rabbi Abbahu, and Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappi, and Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa, who</b> all <b>say: The young man does not</b> receive an additional <b>share</b> of the inheritance <b>where</b> there are other <b>sons.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said to Rabbi Yirmeya:</b> Is <b>the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with our</b> opinion, <b>or</b> is <b>the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with your</b> opinion? Rabbi Yirmeya <b>said to</b> Rabbi Abbahu: It is <b>obvious that the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with our</b> opinion, <b>as we are older than you, and the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not in accordance with your</b> opinion, <b>as you are youngsters [<i>dardekei</i>].</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yirmeya in reply: <b>Does the matter depend upon age? The matter depends upon the reason</b> behind the ruling. Rabbi Yirmeya asked him: <b>And what is</b> your <b>reason?</b> Rabbi Abbahu replied: <b>Go to Rabbi Avin, as I explained</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>to him,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC