
### Part 1
If <b>he found three</b> corpses lying parallel to each other, then <b>if there is between them,</b> i.e., the outer two corpses, a distance <b>of four to eight</b> cubits, then <b>this is</b> presumed to be <b>a graveyard</b> and the corpses may not be removed, <b>and he</b> must <b>examine from that</b> spot <b>outward twenty cubits</b> to discover whether there are other corpses buried there. If he <b>finds</b> even <b>one</b> corpse <b>up to</b> the distance of <b>twenty cubits, he</b> must continue to <b>examine from</b> the place he finds that corpse <b>outward</b> another <b>twenty cubits.</b> He continues to search for additional corpses, even if only one corpse was found within the twenty cubits, <b>as there is a basis for</b> anticipating <b>the matter;</b> it is probable that he has stumbled upon an ancient cemetery. He is not permitted to relocate the corpses, despite that fact <b>that if he had found</b> the single corpse by itself <b>at first,</b> without being aware of the gravesite, he would have been permitted to <b>remove it and its surrounding</b> earth.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes that mishna. <b>The Master said:</b> If there is between them a distance <b>of four to eight</b> cubits, then it is presumed to be a graveyard. The reason is that corpses buried in this manner are indicative of the standard layout of a burial chamber. The fact that this is said only when the distance between the corpses is between four and eight cubits assumes that the size of a burial chamber is four cubits by eight cubits. Based on this, the Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is this? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> in the mishna above (100b), <b>didn’t they say</b> that the size of a burial chamber is <b>four</b> cubits <b>by six</b> cubits? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, didn’t he say</b> that a burial cave is <b>six</b> cubits <b>by eight</b> cubits?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually</b> this mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and it is</b> in accordance with another version of Rabbi Shimon’s opinion, which is cited by <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one found</b> three corpses lying <b>in</b> close <b>succession, and there is not</b> a distance <b>of four cubits to eight</b> cubits <b>between them,</b> i.e., they are lying closer together, <b>they have</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the requirement to move their <b>surrounding</b> earth in which they are buried. <b>But they are not</b> considered to be part of <b>a graveyard,</b> since permanent graves are not placed so closely together. Perforce, their corpses were originally buried there on a temporary basis, but then they were never reinterred. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon: The</b> corpses in <b>the middle are viewed as if they are not</b> there, i.e., as if they were buried there incidentally, <b>and the other</b> corpses thereby <b>combine</b> to form a graveyard in which corpses are found with a distance <b>of four cubits to eight</b> cubits between them.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with which opinion did you interpret</b> the mishna? If it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> then <b>say the latter clause</b> of that mishna: If he finds an area of graves, <b>he</b> must <b>examine from there outward twenty cubits</b> to discover whether there are other corpses buried there. Since the burial formation is indicative of burial within a burial chamber of a catacomb, he should continue to investigate the whole area that would be occupied by a catacomb. The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is this? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> the distance one should be required to examine <b>would be twenty-two</b> cubits, which is the total length of a catacomb, i.e., two chambers of eight cubits with a courtyard of six cubits between them. <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> the distance one should be required to examine <b>would be eighteen</b> cubits, as each catacomb consists of two chambers of six cubits long with a chamber of six cubits between them.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> it is necessary to examine twenty cubits in a case <b>where he examined along the diagonal</b> of the catacomb, which is longer than its length.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But since</b> he examined <b>this</b> chamber along <b>the diagonal, this</b> second chamber on the other side of the courtyard should <b>also</b> be examined along <b>the diagonal.</b> If so, that <b>would be twenty-two</b> cubits. The Gemara answers: <b>We say</b> he should examine <b>one</b> chamber along <b>the diagonal,</b> but <b>we do not say</b> he should examine <b>two</b> chambers along <b>the diagonal.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC