
### Part 1
i.e., <b>a diver [<i>bar amoraei</i>]</b> went into the water <b>to bring</b> up this chest, <b>and</b> the fish <b>became angry and sought to sever his thigh, but</b> the diver <b>threw</b> upon it <b>a flask of vinegar and they descended</b> and swam away. <b>A Divine Voice emerged</b> and <b>said to us: What</b> right <b>do you have to</b> touch <b>the crate of the wife of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, as she is destined to insert sky-blue</b> wool <b>in it to</b> be used in the ritual fringes of <b>the righteous in the World-to-Come?</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yehuda from India relates: Once we were traveling in a ship and we saw a certain precious stone that was encircled by a snake. A diver descended to bring it</b> up, and the <b>snake came and sought to swallow the ship. A raven came</b> and <b>cut off its head,</b> and <b>the water turned into blood</b> due to the enormousness of the snake. <b>Another snake came, took</b> the precious stone, <b>and hung it</b> on the dead snake, <b>and it recovered. It returned</b> and again <b>sought to swallow the ship,</b> and yet again <b>a bird came and cut off its head, took that precious stone,</b> and <b>threw it onto the ship. We had with us these salted birds; we placed</b> the stone <b>on them,</b> and <b>they took</b> the stone <b>and flew away with it.</b>

### Part 3
§ Apropos the stories of large sea creatures, the Gemara discusses the large sea creatures mentioned in the Bible. <b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua, who were traveling on a ship, and Rabbi Eliezer was sleeping and Rabbi Yehoshua was awake. Rabbi Yehoshua trembled, and Rabbi Eliezer awoke.</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: What is this, Yehoshua; for what</b> reason <b>did you tremble?</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to him: I saw a great light in the sea.</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: Perhaps you saw the eyes of the leviathan, as it is written: “And his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning”</b> (Job 41:10).

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said: Huna bar Natan said to me: Once we were traveling in the desert, and we had a thigh of meat with us. We cut open</b> the thigh <b>and tore</b> off the sciatic nerve and the forbidden fat <b>and put it on the grass. By</b> the time <b>that we brought wood, the thigh had repaired</b> itself, <b>and we roasted it. When we returned</b> to that place <b>after twelve months</b> of <b>the year</b> had passed, <b>we saw that those coals were still glowing. When I came before Ameimar, he said to me: That grass was a drug of life [<i>samterei</i>],</b> while <b>those coals were of broom.</b>

### Part 5
The verse states: <b>“And God created the great sea monsters”</b> (Genesis 1:21). <b>Here,</b> in Babylonia, <b>they interpreted</b> this as a reference to the <b>sea oryx. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This is leviathan the slant serpent, and leviathan the tortuous serpent, as it is stated: “In that day the Lord with His sore</b> and great and strong <b>sword</b> will punish leviathan the slant serpent, and leviathan the tortuous serpent” (Isaiah 27:1).

### Part 6
§ The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the following statements of Rav Yehuda citing Rav: <b>Everything; time; Jordan. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Everything that the Holy One, Blessed be He, created in His world, He created male and female. Even leviathan the slant serpent and leviathan the tortuous serpent He created male and female. And if they would have coupled</b> and produced offspring, they would have <b>destroyed the entire world. What did the Holy One, Blessed be He, do? He castrated the male and killed the female, and salted</b> the female to preserve it for the banquet <b>for the righteous in the future. As it is stated: “And He will slay the serpent that is in the sea”</b> (Isaiah 27:1).

### Part 7
<b>And He created even the beasts on the thousand hills</b> (see Psalms 50:10) <b>male and female. And</b> they were so enormous that <b>if they would have coupled</b> and produced offspring, <b>they would have destroyed the entire world. What did the Holy One, Blessed be He, do? He castrated the male and cooled</b> the sexual desire of <b>the female and preserved it for the righteous in the future. As it is stated</b> about the beasts: <b>“Lo now, his strength is in his loins”</b> (Job 40:16); <b>this</b> is referring to the <b>male.</b> The continuation of the verse: <b>“And his force is in the stays of his body”; this</b> is the <b>female,</b> alluding to the idea that they did not use their genitals for the purpose of procreation.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>There too,</b> with regard to the leviathan, <b>let Him castrate the male and cool the female;</b> why was it necessary to kill the female? The Gemara answers: <b>Fish are unrestrained,</b> and therefore even if the female was cooled, the female would still procreate. The Gemara suggests: <b>And let Him do the opposite,</b> and kill and preserve the male leviathan. The Gemara responds: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the <b>salted female is better; if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that</b> since <b>it is written: “There is leviathan, whom You have formed to sport with”</b> (Psalms 104:26), the male must be left alive for sport, because it is <b>not proper conduct</b> to sport <b>with a female.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Here too,</b> with regard to the beasts, <b>let Him</b> preserve the <b>female in salt,</b> instead of cooling it. The Gemara answers: <b>Salted fish is good,</b> but <b>salted meat is not good.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: At the time when the Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to create the world, He said to the minister of the sea: Open your mouth and swallow all the waters of the world,</b> so that there will be room for land. The minister of the sea <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> it is <b>enough that I will stay within my own</b> waters. God <b>immediately struck him and killed him; as it is stated: “He stirs up the sea with His power, and by His understanding He smites through Rahab”</b> (Job 26:12).

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Conclude from here</b> that <b>the name of the minister of the sea is Rahab, and were it not for waters</b> of the sea that <b>cover him, no creature could withstand his smell,</b> as his corpse emits a terrible stench. <b>As it is stated: “They shall not hurt nor destroy in all My holy mountain;</b> for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, <b>as the waters cover the sea”</b> (Isaiah 11:9). <b>Do not read</b> this phrase as <b>“cover the sea”; rather</b> read it as: <b>Cover the minister of the sea,</b> i.e., the term sea is referring to the minister of the sea, not to the sea itself.

### Part 11
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: The Jordan issues forth from the cave of Pamyas. That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Jordan issues forth from the cave of Pamyas, and travels in the Sea of Sivkhi,</b> i.e., the Hula Lake, <b>and in the Sea of Tiberias,</b> the Sea of Galilee, <b>and rolls down to the Great Sea, and rolls down until it reaches the mouth of the leviathan. As it is stated: “He is confident, though the Jordan rush forth to his mouth”</b> (Job 40:23). <b>Rava bar Ulla strongly objects to this</b> explanation of the verse, stating: But <b>this</b> verse <b>is written about the beasts on the thousand hills. Rather, Rava bar Ulla said</b> that this is the meaning of the verse: <b>When are the beasts on the thousand hills confident? When the Jordan rushes forth into the mouth of the leviathan.</b>

### Part 12
§ The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the upcoming statements of Rav Dimi: <b>Seas; Gabriel; hungry. When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For He has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods”</b> (Psalms 24:2)? <b>These are</b> the <b>seven seas and four rivers that surround Eretz Yisrael. And these are</b> the <b>seven seas: The Sea of Tiberias, the Sea of Sodom,</b> i.e., the Dead Sea, <b>the Sea of Ḥeilat, the Sea of Ḥeilata, the Sea of Sivkhi, the Sea of Aspamya, and the Great Sea,</b> i.e., the Mediterranean. <b>And these are the four rivers: The Jordan, the Jarmuth, and the Keiromyon, and the Piga,</b> which are the rivers of Damascus.

### Part 13
<b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia he said that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: In the future, Gabriel will perform</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC