
### Part 1
<b>Rav Ashi raises a dilemma:</b> In the case of <b>a pit</b> situated between the trees, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the possibility <b>that it divides</b> between the trees, and therefore the owner of the trees does not acquire the ground? Similarly, in the case of <b>a stream of water, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the possibility <b>that it divides</b> between the trees? With regard to the <b>public thoroughfare</b> that divides between trees, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Finally, in the case of <b>a line of palm trees, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? No answer is found for these problems, and the Gemara states that the dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
<b>Hillel raises a dilemma before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: If <b>a cedar grew between</b> the three trees that one bought, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara asks: If it <b>grew,</b> then it <b>emerged in his domain,</b> as he already owns the ground, and therefore it is obvious that the cedar belongs to him. <b>Rather,</b> the dilemma is as follows: If, when one bought three trees, <b>there</b> already <b>was a cedar between them, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is it considered a division between the three trees? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him:</b> Since he bought the trees, <b>he</b> has thereby <b>acquired</b> the cedar <b>and acquired</b> the land between them.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>In what manner</b> must the three trees be <b>positioned</b> for the buyer to acquire the ground between them? <b>Rav says:</b> They may be planted <b>in a straight line, and Shmuel says:</b> They must be planted <b>in</b> the form of <b>a tripod.</b> The Gemara notes: According to <b>the one who says</b> that the trees may be positioned <b>in a straight line, all the more so</b> one acquires the ground when the trees are planted <b>in</b> the form <b>a tripod. But</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> they must be positioned <b>in a tripod,</b> the buyer acquires the ground only in this case; <b>but</b> if the trees were planted <b>in a straight line,</b> he does <b>not</b> acquire the ground. <b>What is the reason?</b> It is <b>because</b> when the trees are planted in the form of a straight line <b>one can sow between them,</b> and therefore the seller would not relinquish his right to the ground between the trees.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Hamnuna objects to this: And according to the one who says</b> that the trees must be planted <b>in</b> the form of <b>a tripod, what is the reason</b> that one who buys the trees acquires the ground? Is it <b>that one cannot sow between</b> the trees? <b>But if that is so,</b> in a case where <b>he sold him three Roman thorny shrubs, where one cannot sow between them, so too</b> would he say <b>that</b> the purchaser <b>has</b> ownership of the <b>ground?</b> The other Sage <b>said to</b> Rav Hamnuna: <b>Those</b> Roman shrubs <b>are not significant,</b> as they are merely shrubs and not trees, and therefore the ground is not acquired when one purchases them. By contrast, <b>these</b> trees <b>are important.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who sells the head</b> of <b>a large domesticated animal has not sold</b> along with it <b>the forelegs,</b> as each part is considered important in its own right. All the more so, if one <b>sold the forelegs he has not sold the head.</b> Similarly, if one <b>sold the windpipe</b> and the lungs <b>he has not sold the liver,</b> despite the fact that they are sometimes attached, and if he <b>sold the liver he has not sold the windpipe</b> and lungs. <b>But in</b> the case of <b>small</b> domesticated animals, if one <b>sold the head he has sold the forelegs,</b> although if one <b>sold the legs he has not sold the head.</b> Likewise, if one <b>sold the windpipe</b> and lungs <b>he has sold the liver,</b> but if he <b>sold the liver he has not sold the windpipe</b> and lungs.

### Part 6
There are <b>four</b> basic <b>cases with regard to sellers</b> and buyers. If the seller <b>sold him wheat</b> and said that the wheat was <b>good, and it is found</b> to be <b>bad, the buyer,</b> but not the seller, <b>can renege on</b> the sale. If the seller sold him what he thought was <b>bad</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>good, the seller can renege on</b> the sale but the buyer cannot. If he sold <b>bad</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>bad,</b> or <b>good</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>good, neither one of them can renege on</b> the sale, as the condition of the sale was met.

### Part 7
If the seller sold <b>reddish-brown</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>white,</b> or <b>white</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>reddish-brown,</b> and similarly, if he sold <b>olive wood and it is found</b> to be wood <b>of a sycamore,</b> or he sold wood <b>of a sycamore and it is found</b> to be wood <b>of an olive</b> tree, or if the seller sold him <b>wine and it is found</b> to be <b>vinegar,</b> or <b>vinegar and it is found</b> to be <b>wine,</b> in all of these cases <b>both</b> the seller and the buyer <b>can renege on</b> the sale. Since the sale was for a different item than that which was delivered, the transaction can be nullified even if there was no mistake with regard to the price.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Ḥisda says:</b> If the seller <b>sold him</b> an item that was <b>worth five</b> dinars <b>for six</b> dinars, <b>and</b> the item <b>became more expensive and</b> its value <b>stood at eight</b> dinars, and the seller wished to return the money and cancel the sale because the item’s value had increased, <b>who was exploited</b> here? <b>The buyer;</b> therefore, <b>the buyer, but not the seller, can renege on</b> the sale, despite the fact that in such a situation the seller loses out. This is <b>because</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC