
### Part 1
If a person on his deathbed says: So-and-so <b>shall benefit from</b> my property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is he <b>saying that all</b> of the property <b>shall be a gift? Or perhaps</b> he is <b>saying</b> that the recipient <b>shall derive some benefit from</b> the property. If he says: So-and-so <b>shall be seen in</b> my property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If he says: So-and-so <b>shall stand in</b> my property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If he says: So-and-so <b>shall rely on</b> my property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara concludes: All these dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If a person on his deathbed <b>sold all of his property, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: If he recovers, he cannot retract</b> the sale. <b>And</b> at <b>times, Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: If he recovers, he can retract</b> the sale. <b>And</b> these statements <b>do not disagree. This</b> statement, that he can retract the sale, applies in a case <b>where the dinars</b> he received as payment <b>are</b> still <b>extant,</b> i.e., in his possession. <b>That</b> statement, that he cannot retract the sale, applies in a case <b>where he paid his debt with</b> those dinars.

### Part 3
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: In the case of <b>a person on his deathbed who admitted</b> that he owed money to a certain person, where it was possible that he did not actually owe him money, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Does his admission qualify as the gift of a person on his deathbed? The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as Issur the convert had twelve thousand dinars</b> deposited in <b>the house of Rava. Rav Mari,</b> Issur’s <b>son, whose conception was not in</b> the <b>sanctity</b> of the Jewish people, i.e., he was conceived before his father converted, <b>but his birth was in</b> the <b>sanctity</b> of the Jewish people, i.e., he was born after his father converted, <b>was</b> in <b>a study hall</b> elsewhere when his father was on his deathbed.

### Part 4
<b>Rava</b> reasoned that he would acquire possession of the deposit for himself, as he <b>said: How can Rav Mari acquire these dinars? If</b> he attempts to acquire the money <b>as inheritance, he is not fit to inherit</b> from Issur. Since he was conceived before his father converted, he is therefore not halakhically considered his son. <b>If</b> he attempts to acquire it <b>as a gift, the Sages equated</b> the halakhic status of the <b>gift of a person on his deathbed with</b> that of <b>inheritance.</b> Therefore, <b>anywhere that</b> the property <b>can be</b> acquired <b>as inheritance, it can</b> also <b>be</b> acquired <b>as a gift,</b> and <b>anywhere that</b> the property <b>cannot be</b> acquired <b>as inheritance, it cannot be</b> acquired <b>as a gift.</b>

### Part 5
<b>If</b> he attempts to acquire the dinars <b>by pulling</b> them, which is a formal act of acquisition, he will not be able to do this, as the dinars <b>are not with him. If</b> he attempts to acquire them <b>by</b> means of symbolic <b>exchange,</b> a pro forma act of acquisition effecting the transfer of ownership of an article, <b>money cannot be acquired by</b> means of symbolic <b>exchange. If</b> he attempts to acquire them <b>by means of</b> the acquisition of <b>land,</b> Issur <b>does not have</b> any <b>land. If</b> he attempts to acquire them by means of verbal instruction made by his father <b>in the presence of</b> all <b>three</b> parties, i.e., the giver, the recipient, and the bailee, <b>if he sends for me,</b> the bailee, <b>I shall not go,</b> as without the presence of the bailee he cannot transfer ownership of the money.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ika, son of Rav Ami, objected to this: Why</b> is Rav Mari unable to acquire the money? <b>But</b> why not <b>let Issur admit that these dinars are</b> owned <b>by Rav Mari, and he shall transfer</b> ownership of <b>them</b> to Rav Mari <b>by</b> means of a document of <b>admission? In the meantime,</b> a document of <b>admission</b> stating that the dinars belonged to Rav Mari <b>emerged from Issur’s house. Rava became angry,</b> and <b>said: They are teaching people</b> legal <b>claims and causing me loss.</b> In any event, this incident proves that the admission of a person on his deathbed is a valid means of transferring ownership.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC