
### Part 1
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>the Rabbis do not</b> hold that in a case of exploitation of less than one-sixth one must return the money and that if it was more than one-sixth there is <b>nullification of</b> the <b>transaction,</b> can it be maintained that they do <b>not</b> accept these <i>halakhot</i>? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Metzia</i> 56b) that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who sells a Torah scroll, an animal, or a pearl,</b> these items <b>are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation,</b> as they have no fixed price. The Rabbis <b>said to him:</b> The early Sages <b>stated</b> that <b>only these</b> items listed earlier in the mishna, i.e., land, slaves, and documents, are not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation. Therefore, the Rabbis should agree that the sale of the yoke is nullified.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the mishna <b>that teaches</b> that according to the opinion of the Rabbis <b>the</b> sum of <b>money is not proof?</b> This means <b>that the transaction is nullified. And if you wish, say</b> instead that the sale of the yoke is not nullified, because <b>when the Sages spoke</b> of <b>exploitation and the nullification of a transaction,</b> they meant that these <i>halakhot</i> apply only in a case <b>where</b> the difference in price is an amount about <b>which one could be mistaken</b> and believe that this is the correct price. <b>But when</b> the difference in price is so great a sum <b>that one could not be mistaken,</b> this sale is <b>not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation. In that case, one must <b>say</b> that the buyer <b>gave</b> the extra money <b>to</b> the seller as <b>a gift;</b> he could not have thought that this was the actual price of the object.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who sells a donkey has not sold its vessels,</b> i.e., its equipment, with it. <b>Naḥum the Mede says:</b> He has <b>sold its vessels. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> There are <b>times</b> when the vessels <b>are sold,</b> and there are <b>times</b> when <b>they are not sold. How so? If the donkey was before him and its vessels</b> were <b>on it, and</b> the buyer <b>said to him: Sell me this donkey of yours, its vessels are sold.</b> If the buyer said to him: <b>Is the donkey yours;</b> I wish to purchase it, <b>its vessels are not sold.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Ulla says:</b> The <b>dispute</b> in the mishna is referring <b>to</b> the donkey’s <b>sack and</b> the <b>saddlebag [<i>disakkaya</i>] and</b> the <b><i>kumni</i>,</b> a term explained later in the Gemara. <b>As the first <i>tanna</i> holds: An ordinary donkey is</b> used primarily <b>for riding,</b> and therefore these articles, which are not used for riding but for carrying burdens, are not included in the sale. <b>And Naḥum the Mede holds: An ordinary donkey is</b> used <b>for carrying burdens,</b> and therefore the items that serve this purpose are sold along with the donkey. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>the saddle and the saddlecloth, the harness and the saddle band, everyone agrees</b> that <b>they are sold,</b> as they are used both for riding and for carrying burdens.

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>. If a seller says: <b>I am selling you a donkey and its vessels, this</b> one has <b>sold the saddle, and the saddlecloth, and the harness, and the saddle band. But he has not sold the sack, and the saddlebag, and the <i>kumni</i>. And when</b> the seller <b>said to</b> the buyer: I am selling <b>it and everything that is on it,</b> to you; the donkey and <b>all of these</b> items <b>are sold.</b> It can be inferred from here that the <b>reason that</b> the buyer <b>acquires the saddle and the saddlecloth</b> is <b>that</b> the seller <b>said to him:</b> I am selling you <b>a donkey and its vessels.</b> By inference, if the seller <b>did not say this,</b> the buyer does <b>not</b> acquire them.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>The same is true even if</b> the seller <b>did not say to him:</b> I am selling you <b>a donkey and its vessels.</b> In that case <b>as well, the saddle and the saddlecloth are sold. And this</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us: That even though</b> the seller <b>said to him:</b> I am selling you <b>a donkey and its vessels,</b> the buyer still <b>does not acquire</b> the <b>sack and</b> the <b>saddlebag and</b> the <b><i>kumni</i>.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara inquires: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>And</b> the <b><i>kumni</i>? Rav Pappa bar Shmuel said:</b> This is the <b>saddle</b> used <b>by women.</b>

### Part 8
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Does this <b>dispute</b> apply only to a case <b>where</b> the vessels <b>are on</b> the donkey, <b>but when</b> the vessels <b>are not on</b> the donkey, <b>Naḥum the Mede concedes to</b> the Rabbis that they are not sold? <b>Or perhaps</b> the <b>dispute</b> applies <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> the vessels <b>are not on</b> the donkey, <b>but when</b> the vessels <b>are on</b> the donkey <b>the Rabbis concede to Naḥum</b> that the vessels are sold. The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: <b>And when</b> the seller <b>said to</b> the buyer: I am selling <b>it and everything that is on it,</b> the donkey and <b>all of these</b> items <b>are sold.</b> In this case, the vessels are on the donkey, and everything is sold.

### Part 9
<b>Granted, if you say</b> that the <b>dispute</b> applies <b>when</b> the vessels <b>are on</b> the donkey, in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> ruling? <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> that although in general one does not acquire the vessels, if the seller explicitly says that he is selling the donkey and everything on it, the buyer acquires it all. <b>But if you say that</b> the <b>dispute</b> applies <b>when</b> the vessels <b>are not on</b> the donkey, <b>but when</b> the vessels <b>are on</b> the donkey <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>they are sold,</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> ruling? Even according to the opinion of the Rabbis there is no need to say explicitly that he is selling everything.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the <b>dispute</b> applies <b>when</b> the vessels <b>are not on</b> the donkey, <b>and</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> the language of the <i>baraita</i> should be emended to <b>say: And when he said to him:</b> I am selling <b>it and everything that is fit to be on it,</b> i.e., those items usually found on a donkey, everything is sold.

### Part 11
The Gemara suggests another proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution from the mishna. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> There are <b>times</b> when the vessels <b>are sold,</b> and there are <b>times when they are not sold. What, is it not</b> the case <b>that Rabbi Yehuda is referring to that which the first <i>tanna</i> said?</b> If so, the dispute between the Rabbis and Naḥum the Mede must be referring to a case where the vessels are on the donkey, as Rabbi Yehuda addresses the same set of circumstances. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No, Rabbi Yehuda</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC