
### Part 1
<b>She said to him: Who will give us of the dates of Jericho that I shall eat them,</b> hinting that she smelled the date he had brought with him. <b>The ruin collapsed upon her and she died. The Sages said: Since he went into</b> the ruin <b>after her only to check her</b> sense of smell, and not for the purpose of consummating their marriage, if <b>she dies, he does not inherit</b> from <b>her,</b> as the marriage was not effected, and a man does not inherit from his betrothed.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: If he sent <b>a few presents for her to use while in her father’s house,</b> they are not collected. <b>Ravin the Elder was sitting before Rav Pappa and he was sitting and saying: Whether she died, or whether he died,</b> or whether <b>he retracted</b> his agreement to the betrothal and divorced her, the <b>presents return</b> to the betrothed man or his heirs, but <b>food and drink do not return.</b> If <b>she retracted</b> her agreement to the betrothal and requested a divorce, <b>even a bundle of vegetables returns</b> to the betrothed man. <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> When the presents are returned, the court <b>appraises for</b> the betrothed woman’s family the sum that they must repay for any meat he gave her, according <b>to a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>value of</b> the <b>meat</b> and not according to the price the betrothed man paid. <b>How much</b> less is the <b>reduced</b> assessment? <b>Up to one-third</b> less than he paid.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>a person on his death-bed who wrote</b> a deed granting <b>all of his property to others, and he reserved</b> for himself <b>any amount of land, his gift stands</b> even if he subsequently recovers. If <b>he did not reserve</b> for himself <b>any amount of land,</b> and he recovered, <b>his gift does not stand,</b> as the gift was conditional upon his death, since is it evident that he did not intend to leave himself without means of support.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught that we follow</b> the principle of <b>assessing</b> a person’s intentions, even when he did not expressly state them? <b>Rav Naḥman said: This is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ketubot</i> 5:9): In a case <b>where one’s son went overseas and he heard that his son died, and</b> then he <b>arose and wrote</b> a document granting <b>all of his property to another, and then his son came</b> back, <b>his gift</b> to the other people <b>is</b> a valid <b>gift. Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya says: His gift is not</b> a valid <b>gift, as had he known that his son</b> was <b>alive he would not have written</b> a document granting <b>them</b> his property.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Sheshet said: This is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon Shezuri, as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Gittin</i> 65b): <b>Initially</b> the Sages <b>would say:</b> With regard to <b>one who was taken out in a collar</b> to be executed <b>and said: Write a bill of divorce for my wife, these</b> people <b>should write and give</b> her the document. Although he did not explicitly say the word give, this is understood to have been his intention, to release her from the necessity to perform levirate marriage or <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>They then said</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even to one who sets sail and one who departs with a caravan</b> to a far-off place. A bill of divorce is given to his wife under these circumstances even if her husband said just: Write. <b>Rabbi Shimon Shezuri says: Even</b> in the case of <b>one who is dangerously ill</b> who gives that instruction, they write the bill of divorce and give it to his wife.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman does not interpret</b> the mishna as being <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon Shezuri?</b> The Gemara answers: Rav Naḥman holds that it <b>is different there, as he said: Write</b> a bill of divorce, thereby partially stating his intention to divorce her, whereas in the case of the mishna here, he did not express his intention at all. The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that <b>Rav Sheshet does not interpret</b> the mishna as being <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>An assessment</b> of a person’s intentions <b>that is</b> clearly <b>proven is different,</b> and it is possible that Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya does not apply this principle where the person’s intentions are less evident.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught that which the Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ketubot</i> 4:15): If one <b>was ill and bedridden, and</b> those present <b>said to him: To whom</b> shall <b>your property</b> be given? <b>And he said to them:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC