
### Part 1
<b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to sustenance the deceased pledged to give <b>the daughter of his wife</b> from a previous marriage? Does it <b>reduce</b> the value of <b>the estate? What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the sustenance to which <b>his widow</b> is entitled? Does it <b>reduce</b> the value of <b>the estate?</b> Furthermore, with regard to <b>his widow and daughter, which of them takes precedence</b> if the estate is insufficient to provide sustenance for both?

### Part 2
Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yirmeya: <b>Go now and come</b> back <b>tomorrow. When he came</b> back, Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to</b> him: <b>Resolve at least one</b> of your questions, <b>as Rabbi Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi says:</b> The Sages <b>established</b> the status of the <b>widow in relation to the daughter as</b> equivalent to the status of the <b>daughter in relation to the brothers in</b> the case of <b>a small estate. Just as</b> in the case of <b>a daughter in relation to</b> her <b>brothers, the daughter is sustained and the brothers</b> go and <b>request</b> charity <b>at the doors, so too</b> in the case of <b>a widow in relation to the daughter, the widow is sustained and the daughter</b> goes and <b>requests</b> charity <b>at the doors.</b>

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Admon says,</b> rhetorically: <b>I lost out</b> just <b>because I am male?</b> Rather, he holds that the sons also receive sustenance. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying? Abaye said</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>he is saying: Because I am male, and I am fit to engage in</b> the study of <b>the Torah, I lost out</b> and must go begging instead of studying the Torah? <b>Rava said to him: If that is so,</b> should one conclude that <b>it is</b> only <b>one who engages in</b> the study of <b>the Torah who inherits,</b> whereas one <b>who does not engage in</b> the study of <b>the Torah does not inherit? Rather, Rava said</b> that <b>this</b> is what Admon <b>is saying: Because I am male, and I am fit to inherit in</b> the case of <b>a large estate,</b> should <b>I lose</b> my inheritance entirely <b>in</b> the case of <b>a small estate?</b>

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to one who <b>left</b> behind <b>sons and daughters and a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> whose halakhic status as male or female is indeterminate, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: <b>When the estate is large the males direct</b> the <i>tumtum</i> <b>to the females</b> and exclude him from the inheritance, claiming that perhaps the <i>tumtum</i> is female. When the <b>estate is small, the females direct</b> the <i>tumtum</i> <b>to the males</b> and exclude him from receiving sustenance, claiming that perhaps the <i>tumtum</i> is male.

### Part 5
With regard to <b>one who says: If my wife gives birth to a male</b> the offspring <b>shall receive</b> a gift of <b>one hundred dinars,</b> if <b>she</b> in fact <b>gave birth to a male,</b> the offspring <b>receives one hundred dinars.</b> If he says: If my wife gives birth to <b>a female</b> the offspring shall receive a gift of <b>two hundred</b> dinars, if <b>she</b> in fact <b>gave birth to a female,</b> the offspring <b>receives two hundred</b> dinars.

### Part 6
If he says: <b>If</b> my wife gives birth to <b>a male</b> the offspring shall receive a gift of <b>one hundred dinars</b> and <b>if</b> she gives birth to <b>a female</b> the offspring shall receive a gift of <b>two hundred</b> dinars, <b>and</b> in fact <b>she gave birth to</b> both <b>a male and a female,</b> the <b>male</b> offspring <b>receives one hundred dinars</b> and the <b>female</b> offspring <b>receives two hundred</b> dinars. If <b>she gave birth to a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> the <i>tumtum</i> <b>does not receive</b> anything. <b>If he said: Whatever</b> offspring <b>my wife gives birth to shall receive</b> a gift of a certain sum, and she gave birth to a <i>tumtum</i>, the <i>tumtum</i> <b>receives</b> it. <b>And if there is no heir other than</b> the <i>tumtum</i>, the <i>tumtum</i> <b>inherits all</b> of the estate.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna states that the males direct the <i>tumtum</i> to the females. The Gemara asks: Does this mean that <b>they direct him, and he takes</b> sustenance <b>like a daughter? Isn’t it taught</b> in the <b>latter clause</b> of the mishna that if one said that either his male or female child will receive a certain sum once his wife gives birth, and <b>she gave birth to a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> the <i>tumtum</i> <b>does not receive</b> anything? This indicates that the <i>tumtum</i> does not have the rights of a female. <b>Abaye says:</b> The mishna means that <b>they direct him</b> to the females, <b>but he has no</b> rights to sustenance.

### Part 8
<b>And Rava says: They direct him</b> to the females <b>and he has</b> a right to sustenance. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which grants the <i>tumtum</i> nothing at all, there <b>we arrive at</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Temura</i> 24b): If one consecrates a firstborn animal while it is still a fetus, stating that if it is male it shall be a burnt-offering and if it is female it shall be a peace-offering, and the mother <b>gave birth to a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite [<i>androginos</i>], Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: It is not imbued with sanctity,</b> as it is neither male nor female. So too, in the case discussed in the mishna here, Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel maintains that the <i>tumtum</i> receives nothing, as he is considered to be a distinct entity of indeterminate sex, neither male nor female.

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A <i>tumtum</i> inherits as a son and is sustained as a daughter. Granted, according to Rava,</b> the <i>baraita</i> can be explained to mean that the clause: <b>Inherits as a son,</b> is <b>in</b> the case of <b>a small estate,</b> as the daughters direct the <i>tumtum</i> to the sons, and just as there is no inheritance for the sons, there is none for the <i>tumtum</i> either. And the clause: <b>And is sustained as a daughter,</b> is <b>in</b> the case of <b>a large estate,</b> as the sons direct the <i>tumtum</i> to the daughters, and the <i>tumtum</i> receives sustenance along with them.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC