
### Part 1
Rabba Zuti asked Rav Ashi about another instance of the same phrase. In the case of <b>“this is the matter”</b> written <b>with regard to</b> the <b>heads of the tribes,</b> in the introductory verse to the <i>halakhot</i> of vows: “And Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, saying: This is the matter that the Lord has commanded” (Numbers 30:2), is it <b>also</b> the case <b>that</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of vows <b>will not be practiced except in this generation?</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him:</b> The <i>halakha</i> in <b>that</b> case, that of vows, <b>is derived through</b> a verbal analogy between the word <b>“this”</b> stated here, in the verse discussing vows, and the word <b>“this”</b> stated <b>there,</b> in the verse discussing offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple, which is applicable in all generations.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> <i>halakha</i>, concerning the daughter inheriting her father’s portion, <b>let it be derived through</b> a verbal analogy between the word <b>“this”</b> stated here, with regard to inheritance, and the word <b>“this”</b> stated <b>there,</b> in the verse discussing offerings, <b>as well.</b> The Gemara rejects that comparison: <b>What is this</b> suggestion? <b>Granted, there,</b> i.e., with regard to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple and with regard to vows, the phrase “this is the matter” <b>was necessary</b> for deriving other <i>halakhot</i> through <b>a verbal analogy,</b> as will be explained later. Therefore, the term may also be employed to teach that the <i>halakha</i> applies in all generations. But <b>here,</b> with regard to a daughter’s inheritance, <b>for what</b> other <i>halakha</i> <b>was</b> this phrase <b>necessary?</b> If the <i>halakha</i> truly applies for posterity, <b>let the verse be silent</b> and refrain <b>from</b> addressing when this <i>halakha</i> applies by not stating “this is the matter,” <b>and I</b> would <b>know that it is for all generations,</b> as is the case with all other mitzvot.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the <b>verbal analogy</b> for which the phrase was necessary? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>It is stated here,</b> with regard to vows: <b>“This is the matter,” and it is stated there,</b> with regard to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple: <b>“This is the matter.” Just as there</b> the mitzva applies to <b>Aaron and his sons and all Israel, so too here,</b> with regard to vows, the mitzva applies to <b>Aaron and his sons and all Israel. And just as here</b> the mitzva applies to <b>the heads of the tribes,</b> as explicitly stated in the verse cited above, <b>so too there,</b> with regard to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple, there is particular relevance to <b>the heads of the tribes.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara analyzes the cited <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master says: Just as there,</b> with regard to offerings, the mitzva applies to <b>Aaron and his sons and all Israel, so too here,</b> with regard to vows, the mitzva applies to <b>Aaron and his sons and all Israel.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is this verbal analogy stated? <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov says:</b> This is written <b>to say that</b> the <b>dissolution of vows</b> can be performed <b>by three laymen</b> with no particular expertise in the <i>halakhot</i> of vows, just as the prohibition of offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple applies to all of the Jewish people, including laymen.

### Part 5
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> the phrase <b>“the heads of the tribes” is written</b> explicitly <b>in</b> the portion of the vows, indicating that the matter is not entrusted to laymen. The Gemara answers: It is <b>as Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> in a different context: The mention of the heads of tribes teaches that vows may be dissolved <b>by a single expert</b> halakhic authority; <b>so too</b> here, this phrase teaches that vows can be nullified <b>by a single expert</b> halakhic authority.

### Part 6
The Gemara analyzes the next clause of the cited <i>baraita</i>: <b>And just as here</b> the mitzva applies to <b>the heads of the tribes, so too there,</b> with regard to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple, there is particular relevance to <b>the heads of the tribes.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> are the heads of the tribes linked to the prohibition of slaughtering offerings outside the Tabernacle or Temple? <b>Rav Sheshet says:</b> This is written <b>to say</b> that <b>there is</b> a concept of <b>requesting</b> dissolution of consecration <b>of consecrated</b> property, just as one can request dissolution of a vow.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Beit Shammai, who say</b> that <b>there is no</b> possibility of <b>requesting</b> that a halakhic authority dissolve a vow <b>of consecrated</b> property, this cannot explain the connection of the heads of the tribes to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nazir</i> 30b): <b>Beit Shammai say: Consecration</b> that one performed <b>in error is</b> nevertheless effective as <b>consecration,</b> because one’s mindset does not supersede his verbal declaration; <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> This is <b>not consecration.</b> Accordingly, in the opinion of Beit Shammai, <b>what do they do with this</b> seemingly analogous usage of <b>“this” and “this,”</b> in the portions of offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple and vows, respectively?

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: Beit Shammai <b>require “this is the matter”</b> written <b>of offerings slaughtered outside</b> the Tabernacle or Temple to teach that <b>for the</b> act of <b>slaughtering, he is liable</b> to receive excision from the World-to-Come [<i>karet</i>]; <b>but he is not liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i> <b>for the</b> act of <b>pinching</b> the neck of a consecrated bird outside the Tabernacle or Temple, which is excluded from the category of slaughtering in this mitzva. And Beit Shammai <b>require “this is the matter”</b> written of <b>the heads of the tribes</b> in the portion about vows <b>to</b> teach that only <b>a halakhic authority can dissolve</b> vows, <b>but a husband cannot dissolve</b> them. The halakhic authority can dissolve the vow for a petitioner, but a woman’s husband or father cannot dissolve her vow. And, conversely, <b>a husband can nullify</b> his wife’s or his daughter’s vows on the day that he hears the vow, regardless of her mindset, <b>but a halakhic authority cannot nullify</b> vows in this manner.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to Beit Shammai, who do not have</b> this <b>verbal analogy,</b> meaning that they do not recognize as authoritative the verbal analogy that links vows to offerings slaughtered outside the Tabernacle or Temple, <b>from where do they</b> derive that <b>dissolution of vows</b> can be performed <b>by three laymen?</b> The Gemara answers: Beit Shammai <b>derive it from that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states at the end of a passage relating to the <i>halakhot</i> of the Festivals: <b>“And Moses declared to the children of Israel the appointed seasons of the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 23:44). In explaining the verse, <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC