
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But can you establish that</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> that one who sells or consecrates property does so generously? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one consecrates three trees</b> in a field <b>where ten</b> trees are <b>planted in an area required for sowing one <i>se’a</i> of seed [<i>beit se’a</i>], he has consecrated</b> not only those trees, but also <b>the land and the</b> young <b>trees between them? Therefore,</b> if this is an ancestral field of his, <b>when he redeems</b> them, <b>he redeems</b> the land and everything contained within it according to the standard rate established by the Torah, whereby <b>an area</b> fit <b>for the sowing of a <i>ḥomer</i>,</b> i.e., a <i>kor</i>, of <b>barley seed</b> is redeemed <b>for fifty silver shekels.</b>

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If the ratio of land to trees was <b>less than this,</b> and the trees were planted more densely, <b>or</b> if the ratio of land to trees was <b>more than this,</b> and the trees were planted less densely, <b>or if he consecrated</b> each of the trees separately, <b>one after the other, this</b> person <b>has consecrated neither the land nor the</b> young <b>trees between them. Therefore, when he redeems</b> them, <b>he redeems the trees in accordance with their worth. And moreover, even if one consecrates the trees</b> where they are planted more densely, less densely, or one after the other, <b>and then</b> afterward <b>he consecrates the land,</b> so that everything belongs to the Temple treasury, <b>when he redeems</b> them, <b>he redeems the trees</b> separately <b>in accordance with their worth, and then he redeems</b> the land according to the standard rate, where <b>an area</b> fit <b>for the sowing of a <i>ḥomer</i></b> of <b>barley seed</b> is redeemed <b>for fifty silver shekels.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, doesn’t he say</b> that <b>one who sells, sells generously, and all the more so one who consecrates</b> does so generously? This being the case, even if the trees were consecrated one after the other, some of the land should be consecrated along with them. And <b>if</b> the <i>baraita</i> reflects the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, don’t they say</b> in the mishna that <b>it is</b> specifically <b>the seller who sells sparingly, but one who consecrates, consecrates generously,</b> and therefore the pit and the winepress are consecrated along with the field? Therefore, the <i>halakha</i> stated here is not in accordance with their opinion either. <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> in the mishna here, that even one who consecrates a field does not consecrate the cistern and the winepress along with it.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of whom? If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva, doesn’t he say</b> that <b>one who sells, sells generously, and all the more so one who consecrates</b> does so generously? <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that his opinion is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Akiva and say that one who sells, sells sparingly. <b>And Rabbi Shimon</b> disagrees with the Rabbis insofar as <b>he</b> himself <b>holds</b> that <b>just as one who sells, sells sparingly, one who consecrates also consecrates sparingly and retains the land</b> around the trees for himself.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC