
### Part 1
<b>Rav Pappa says:</b> It is a balance scale <b>for blacksmiths,</b> who weigh heavy pieces of metal.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Mani Bar Pattish says: Just as</b> the Sages <b>said with regard to the prohibition of</b> the scales that one may not use a scale that does not meet the criteria listed in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>so</b> too <b>they said</b> that this applies <b>with regard to their ritual impurity.</b> In other words, if the cords and pole are not attached in the proper manner, they are not susceptible to ritual impurity as part of the scale.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> this statement <b>teaching us? We learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Kelim</i> 29:5): With regard to the <b>rope</b> from which the <b>scales</b> are suspended, if the balance scale belongs <b>to a storekeeper or to homeowners</b> it must be <b>one handbreadth</b> in length for it to be susceptible to ritual impurity. Why, then, is the statement of Rabbi Mani Bar Pattish necessary? The Gemara answers: Although the mishna in tractate <i>Kelim</i> discusses the rope from which the scales are suspended, <b>it was</b> still <b>necessary for</b> Rabbi Mani Bar Pattish to mention the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the scale’s <b>lever and cord, which we did not learn about</b> in that mishna.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught: One may not prepare weights of tin [<i>ba’atz</i>], nor of lead, nor of a metal alloy [<i>gisteron</i>], nor of any other types of metal,</b> because all of these deteriorate over time and the buyer will ultimately pay for more merchandise than he receives. <b>But one</b> may <b>prepare</b> weights <b>of</b> hard <b>rock and of glass.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages</b> further <b>taught: One may not prepare the leveler,</b> used to remove the excess from the mouth of a vessel, <b>from a gourd, because it is a light</b> material and does not level effectively, thereby causing a loss for the seller. <b>And</b> it may <b>not</b> be made <b>of metal, because it weighs down</b> and removes too much of the merchandise, leading to a loss for the buyer. <b>But one</b> may <b>prepare it from</b> the wood <b>of an olive</b> tree, <b>or of a nut</b> tree, or <b>of a sycamore</b> tree, <b>or of a boxwood</b> tree,which are of medium weight.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught: One may not prepare the leveler</b> in such a manner that <b>one of its sides is thick and one</b> other <b>side is thin,</b> because in such a case the two sides will not level equally. Furthermore, <b>one may not level all at once,</b> by a single quick movement, <b>as one who levels all at once</b> acts in a manner that is <b>bad for the seller and good for the buyer,</b> because he removes less of the excess than one who levels in the regular fashion. <b>And</b> conversely <b>one may not level little by little,</b> i.e., with several slow movements, <b>as</b> this is <b>bad for the buyer and good for the seller.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said with regard to all</b> these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>Woe to me if I say</b> them, and <b>woe unto me if I do not say</b> them. <b>If I say</b> them, <b>perhaps swindlers will learn</b> new methods of cheating of which they were previously unaware. <b>And if I do not say</b> them, <b>perhaps swindlers will say: Torah scholars are not well versed in our handiwork. A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>Did</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai decide to <b>say</b> these <i>halakhot</i> in public <b>or did he not say</b> them? <b>Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak says: He said them, and he said them on</b> the basis of <b>this verse: “For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just walk in them; but transgressors stumble over them”</b> (Hosea 14:10).

### Part 8
§ The Gemara further discusses weights and measures. <b>The Sages taught: “You shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in measure [<i>bammidda</i>], in weight, or in measure [<i>uvamesura</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 19:35). The <i>baraita</i> defines these terms: <b>“In measure [<i>bammidda</i>],” this</b> is referring to <b>measuring land,</b> teaching <b>that</b> in order to measure land in a just manner <b>one may not measure for one</b> person <b>in the summer</b> when the measuring rope has become dry and short, <b>and for one</b> other individual <b>in the rainy season,</b> when the measuring rope is wet and limp, and therefore stretches more. <b>“In weight”</b> means <b>that one may not cover his weights in salt,</b> as salt erodes the weights, causing a loss for the buyer. <b>“Or in measure [<i>bamesura</i>]”</b> means <b>that one may not cause</b> liquid he is measuring <b>to foam</b> by pouring it speedily, as this results in a loss for the buyer, who receives less of the liquid than the amount for which he paid.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> it can be inferred by means of an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>that if</b> in the case of <b>a <i>mesura</i>, which is</b> a measure equivalent to merely <b>one thirty-sixth of a <i>log</i>, the Torah was particular that</b> one must measure honestly, so too, <b><i>a fortiori</i>,</b> one must be careful in the case <b>of one <i>hin</i>, and a half-<i>hin</i>, and a third-<i>hin</i>, and a quarter-<i>hin</i>,</b> which is twelve <i>log</i>, <b>and one <i>log</i>, and a half-<i>log</i>, and a quarter-<i>log</i></b>, <b>and a half-<i>tomen</i>,</b> i.e., one-sixteenth of a <i>kav</i>, <b>and</b> even <b>an <i>ukla</i>,</b> a smaller unit, as defined below.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: It is prohibited for a person to keep in his house a measure</b> that is <b>too small or too large</b> than its supposed volume or weight, <b>and</b> this is the case <b>even</b> if he does not measure with it but simply uses <b>it</b> as <b>a chamber pot for urine. Rav Pappa said: We said</b> this prohibition <b>only with regard to a place where</b> measures <b>are not stamped</b> with the government’s seal, which confirms that the measure is accurate. <b>But in a place where</b> the measures <b>are stamped, if</b> the buyer <b>does not see the seal he would not take</b> the merchandise. Since they could not be used dishonestly, one is permitted to utilize these measures for other purposes. <b>And in a place where</b> measures <b>are not stamped as well, we said</b> that it is prohibited to keep these measures in one’s house <b>only</b> in a place <b>where they do not inspect</b> measures to see if they are fit for use. <b>But</b> if <b>they do inspect</b> measures, <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with it.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> that <b>is not so;</b> one is never permitted to keep incorrect measures in his house, as <b>sometimes it happens</b> that one measures <b>at twilight,</b> when people are hurried, <b>and</b> consequently <b>it happens</b> that the buyer <b>takes</b> the merchandise despite the fact that it was measured with an incorrect measure. <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not keep in his house a measure</b> that is <b>too small or too large, even</b> if <b>it</b> is used as <b>a chamber pot for urine. But he</b> may <b>prepare</b> measures in accordance with the established format: Measurements of <b>a <i>se’a</i>; a <i>tarkav</i>,</b> which is three <i>kav</i> or one-half of a <i>se’a</i>; <b>and a half-<i>tarkav</i>,</b> which is one and one-half <i>kav</i>; <b>and a <i>kav</i>; and a half-<i>kav</i>; and a quarter-<i>kav</i></b>; <b>and a <i>tomen</i>,</b> which is one-eighth of a <i>kav</i>; <b>and a half-<i>tomen</i>;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC