
### Part 1
<b>he has financial involvement [<i>derara</i>], and for that</b> one, i.e., the seller, <b>he has financial involvement.</b> Since each of them has a definite claim to owning the offspring, as each of them owned the cow or maidservant at one point, it is reasonable for the court to divide the offspring between the two parties. By contrast, <b>here,</b> in the case of Rav Naḥman, <b>if</b> it belongs <b>to</b> this <b>Master</b> it does <b>not</b> belong <b>to</b> that <b>Master, and if</b> it belongs <b>to</b> that <b>Master</b> it does <b>not</b> belong <b>to</b> this <b>Master.</b> Only one of the two litigants has any claim to the property, as it belonged either to the ancestors of this one or of that one. Therefore, a ruling to divide it would not be appropriate.

### Part 2
The Sages <b>of Neharde’a say:</b> In a case where two parties disputed the ownership of a certain property and the court ruled that whoever is stronger prevails, <b>if one from the marketplace</b> who had no claim <b>came and took possession of it,</b> the court <b>does not remove it from his possession, as Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Bava Kamma</i> 10:14): <b>A robber of</b> the <b>public,</b> meaning a robber whose victim is unknown, <b>is not called a robber.</b> Since it is unclear whom he robbed, no one is able to demand payment. Here too, since it is unclear whose property it is, neither can demand that it be taken from the robber.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> in disagreement: <b>Actually,</b> he <b>is called a robber,</b> and the property is taken from him, <b>and what</b> is meant by: He <b>is not called a robber?</b> It means <b>that</b> the stolen item is <b>not subject to being returned,</b> and consequently he is unable to fully atone, as he does not know whom to repay.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches with regard to certain types of property that <b>their presumptive ownership</b> is established by use of a duration of <b>three years from day to day.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Rabbi Abba says:</b> Nevertheless, there are cases where presumptive ownership is established immediately. For example, <b>if</b> the prior owner <b>himself lifted a basket of fruit</b> from that field <b>for</b> the possessor, that <b>immediately is</b> sufficient to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership, and the prior owner can no longer lodge a protest. <b>Rav Zevid says: But if</b> the prior owner <b>stated a claim and said: I brought him down</b> into my field solely <b>to</b> consume the <b>produce,</b> e.g., as a sharecropper, he is <b>deemed credible. And that</b> <i>halakha</i>, that the prior owner is deemed credible were he to state such a claim, <b>applies</b> only if he stated it <b>within three</b> years of when the other took possession, <b>but after three</b> years he is <b>not</b> deemed credible.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi said to Rav Kahana: If</b> in fact he did <b>bring him down</b> into the field solely <b>to</b> consume the <b>produce, what was</b> there <b>for him to do</b> to prevent the possessor from establishing the presumption of ownership? Rav Kahana <b>said to him: He should have protested</b> during the first three years and publicized that he had granted the possessor rights to the produce alone.

### Part 6
The assumption that lodging a protest would be effective must be correct, <b>since if you do not say so,</b> then in the case of <b>this mortgage</b> according to the custom <b>in Sura,</b> a city in Babylonia, <b>in</b> which is <b>written: At the completion of these years this land will be released</b> to its prior owner <b>without</b> any need for the prior owner to give <b>money, if</b> the creditor were to <b>hide</b> the <b>mortgage document in his possession and say:</b> This land <b>is purchased</b> and that is why it is <b>in my possession, here</b> is it <b>also</b> the case <b>that</b> he would be <b>deemed credible?</b> That cannot be, as is it reasonable that <b>the Sages would institute a matter,</b> such as this type of arrangement, <b>that</b> people <b>can be led by it to</b> suffer <b>a loss? Rather,</b> in the case of the mortgage the debtor <b>should have protested,</b> and by not protesting, he causes his own loss. <b>Here, too,</b> in the case of the field, the owner <b>should have protested.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> With regard to <b>a Jew who comes</b> to claim land <b>due to</b> having received it from <b>a gentile, he is like a gentile</b> in terms of which legal claims are available to him. Therefore, <b>just as a gentile has</b> the ability to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership <b>only by</b> means of <b>a document, so too, a Jew who comes</b> to claim land <b>due to</b> having received it from <b>a gentile has</b> the ability to establish the <b>presumption</b> of ownership <b>only by</b> means of <b>a document. Rava said: And if</b> the <b>Jew said</b> to a prior owner, who claims to still own the land:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC