
### Part 1
<b>a mortar [<i>udaini</i>],</b> which people pay to use, <b>the rent</b> goes <b>to the middle? But isn’t</b> the profit accruing from <b>a mortar</b> considered profit accruing <b>on his,</b> i.e., the adult son’s, <b>own account,</b> as the adult son must supervise its operation, and there is no outlay from the property? The Gemara dismisses this objection: <b>A mortar is different, as for</b> its <b>typical use</b> it can suffice <b>with supervision, and even minors are able to supervise its</b> use. Since the adults do not contribute anything more than the minors, they cannot demand a greater share of the profits.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: If the adult sons <b>said</b> from the outset: <b>See that which</b> our <b>father left</b> behind; <b>we are</b> going to <b>engage</b> in business with our share of the property <b>and profit</b> from it, then <b>they enhanced</b> the property <b>for themselves.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Safra’s father left</b> him <b>dinars.</b> Rav Safra <b>took them</b> and <b>entered</b> into <b>a business venture with them. His brothers came</b> and <b>charged him in</b> a court of <b>law before Rava,</b> claiming their share of the profits. Rava <b>said to them: Rav Safra is a great man; he does not abandon his studies and toil for others.</b> It is therefore clear that if he invested the money, it was for his own profit, even if he did not explicitly declare so at the outset.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>a wife who enhanced the property</b> of her deceased husband, <b>she enhanced</b> it so that the profit goes <b>to the middle.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the deceased’s <b>wife doing with</b> the <b>orphans’ property?</b> What rights does she have to the property? <b>Rav Yirmeya said:</b> The mishna is referring <b>to a wife</b> who is <b>an heiress,</b> e.g., if she were the daughter of her husband’s brother, and both brothers died without leaving sons, in which case she inherits in her father’s stead.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that the <i>halakha</i> in this case is the same as with regard to any other heir? The Gemara replies: It is necessary to state this, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>since it is not</b> a woman’s <b>way to toil</b> to enhance property, then <b>even though she did not expressly state</b> that she is toiling for herself, <b>it is considered as though</b> she <b>had expressly stated</b> this. The mishna <b>teaches us</b> that only if she expressly stated this do the profits accrue to her.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches: <b>And if she said: See that which my husband left me; I am</b> going to <b>engage</b> in business with my share <b>and profit</b> from it, then <b>she enhanced</b> the property <b>for herself.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara explains: It is necessary to state this, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>since</b> it <b>is praiseworthy for her</b> to enhance the property on behalf of the orphans, <b>as</b> people will <b>say:</b> See how <b>she toils for the orphans, she relinquishes</b> her right to the profits and they should divide them equally. The mishna <b>teaches us</b> that this is not the case.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> In the case of <b>one who marries a woman to his eldest son</b> and arranges the wedding feast <b>in a house</b> that he designated for the purpose of the wedding canopy and the wedding feast, the son <b>acquires</b> the house as a gift. The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>specifically</b> in the case of the <b>eldest</b> son, <b>and specifically</b> if he is marrying <b>a virgin, and specifically</b> when this woman is <b>his first wife, and specifically when</b> the father <b>married him off first</b> among his sons. When all these conditions exist, it is presumed that the father has a particular fondness toward the son, due to which he gave him the house.

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies the details of this <i>halakha</i>: It is <b>obvious</b> that if <b>his father designated a house for</b> the son’s nuptials <b>and</b> there is <b>an upper story</b> above the house, the son <b>acquired the house,</b> but <b>he did not acquire the upper story.</b> If he designated <b>a house</b> for the son, <b>and</b> there is <b>a portico [<i>ve’akhsadra</i>]</b> in front of the house, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If there were <b>two houses, one within the other,</b> and the inner one was designated for the son’s nuptials, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara concludes: These questions <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>his father designated a house and furniture for his</b> son’s nuptials, the son <b>acquired the furniture,</b> but <b>he did not acquire the house. Rabbi Yirmeya says:</b> This is referring to a case <b>where his father’s storeroom was placed there.</b> It is clear that just as his father did not intend to give him the storeroom, neither did he intend to give him the house. The Sages <b>of Neharde’a say: Even</b> if there is only <b>a dovecote</b> in the house that belongs to the father, the son does not acquire the house. <b>Rav Yehuda and Rav Pappi say: Even</b> if there is only <b>a pot [<i>atzitza</i>] of</b> small <b>fried fish,</b> the son does not acquire the house. <b>Mar Zutra married off his son, and hung a sandal</b> in the house, to indicate that he did not intend to give the house as a gift. <b>Rav Ashi married off his son, and hung a jug [<i>ashisha</i>] of oil</b> in the house.

### Part 9
<b>Mar Zutra says: These three matters were instituted by the Sages as a <i>halakha</i> without any explanation</b> of their process, i.e., they instituted these enactments despite the fact that the mechanism by which they function is unclear: <b>One</b> is <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> with regard to the son acquiring the house designated for his nuptials. <b>Another</b> is that <b>which Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: One who writes</b> a deed granting <b>all</b> of <b>his property to his wife renders her only a steward</b> of his property, i.e., he intends only to put her in charge of the property and she does not acquire it. <b>Another</b> is that <b>which Rav says:</b> With regard to one who says to another: <b>I</b> have <b>one hundred dinars in your possession; give it to so-and-so,</b> if this occurred <b>in the presence of</b> all <b>three</b> parties, that third person <b>acquires</b> it, without need of witnesses or a formal act of acquisition.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC