
### Part 1
i.e., <b>Mar Yenuka and Mar Kashisha, sons of Rav Ḥisda,</b> said to <b>Rav Ashi: The</b> Sages <b>of Neharde’a</b> follow <b>their</b> usual line of <b>reasoning,</b> as Rav Ḥama, who was from Neharde’a, issued his ruling in accordance with the opinion of Shmuel, who was also from that city. <b>As Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> In the case of <b>brothers who divided</b> their father’s estate, <b>they do not have</b> a right-of-<b>way against each other.</b> Although the father would traverse the outer field from the inner field to access the public domain, the brother who received the inner field as an inheritance does not have the right to traverse his brother’s outer field.

### Part 2
Shmuel continues: <b>Nor</b> do they have the right of <b>windows against each other,</b> i.e., the right to prevent the other from building a wall facing his windows; <b>nor</b> do they have the right of <b>ladders against each other,</b> i.e., the right to set up a ladder in the other’s property in order to get to his own; <b>nor</b> do they have the right of <b>a water channel against each other,</b> i.e., the right to pass a water channel through the other’s property. <b>And be careful with these, since they are established <i>halakhot</i>. Rava says:</b> The brothers <b>do have</b> all of the aforementioned rights. Rav Ḥama agrees with Shmuel’s opinion, that each brother can do as he pleases on his own property without the other one preventing him from doing so.

### Part 3
Since Rav Ḥama’s rulings were mentioned, the Gemara cites another halakhic ruling in his name. There was <b>a certain promissory note</b> inherited <b>by orphans</b> from their father, stating that somebody owed them money, <b>against which a receipt was produced</b> by the borrower, stating that the debt was already paid. <b>Rav Ḥama said: We cannot</b> use the note to <b>collect</b> the debt on behalf of the orphans, <b>nor can we tear it up.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>We cannot collect</b> with the note because <b>a receipt against it was produced</b> by the borrower; and <b>we cannot tear</b> the note <b>up because perhaps when the orphans grow up they will bring proof</b> that the receipt was forged <b>and undermine it.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Ravina: What</b> is <b>the <i>halakha</i>?</b> Ravina <b>said to him: In all</b> the cases in this discussion, <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ḥama, except for</b> the case of <b>the receipt, because we do not presume that the witnesses are liars.</b> Since witnesses signed the receipt, the court trusts that the debt was paid and they tear up the promissory note.

### Part 5
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, said: In this</b> case <b>as well, the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ḥama,</b> because the validity of the receipt is in doubt. <b>As, if it is so</b> that <b>it</b> is <b>a valid receipt,</b> the borrower <b>should have produced it during their father’s lifetime. And since he did not produce it</b> at the proper time, <b>we learn from this that he</b> may have <b>forged it.</b> Even though this is not an absolute proof, it is sufficient reason not to tear up the promissory note.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The residents of a courtyard <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that courtyard <b>to</b> financially participate in the <b>building of a gatehouse and a door to the</b> jointly owned <b>courtyard. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> disagrees and <b>says: Not all courtyards require a gatehouse,</b> and each courtyard must be considered on its own in accordance with its specific needs. Similarly, the residents of a city <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that city <b>to</b> contribute to the <b>building of a wall, double doors, and a crossbar for the city. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> disagrees and <b>says: Not all towns require a wall.</b>

### Part 7
With regard to this latter obligation, the mishna asks: <b>How long</b> must one live <b>in the city to be</b> considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city</b> and therefore obligated to contribute to these expenses? <b>Twelve months.</b> But if he <b>bought</b> himself <b>a residence in</b> the city, <b>he is immediately</b> considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that</b> making <b>a gatehouse is beneficial? But</b> wasn’t there <b>that pious man, with whom</b> the prophet <b>Elijah was accustomed to speak,</b> who <b>built a gatehouse, and</b> after-ward Elijah <b>did not speak with him again?</b> The objection to the building of a gatehouse is that the guard who mans it prevents the poor from entering and asking for charity. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult: This,</b> the case presented in the mishna, is referring to a gatehouse built <b>on the inside</b> of the courtyard, in which case the poor can at least reach the courtyard’s entrance and be heard inside the courtyard; <b>that,</b> the story of the pious man and Elijah, involves a gatehouse that was built <b>on the outside</b> of the courtyard, completely blocking the poor’s access to the courtyard’s entrance.

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that in <b>both</b> cases the gatehouse was built <b>outside</b> the courtyard, <b>and</b> yet this is <b>not difficult:</b> In the one case, <b>there is a door</b> to the gatehouse, so that the poor cannot be heard inside the courtyard, while in the other case <b>there is no door. Or if you wish, say</b> that in <b>both</b> cases <b>there is a door, and</b> still this is <b>not difficult:</b> In the one case, <b>there is a key</b> needed to open the door, and the key is not available to the poor people, whereas in the other case, <b>there is no key</b> needed. <b>Or if you wish, say</b> that in <b>both</b> cases <b>there is a key</b> needed, <b>and</b> even so this is <b>not difficult:</b> In the one case <b>the key is on the inside,</b> so that the poor cannot reach it, while in the other case of the mishna, <b>the key is on the outside.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that the residents of a courtyard <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that courtyard <b>to</b> financially participate in the <b>building of a gatehouse and a door to the</b> jointly owned <b>courtyard. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Not all courtyards require a gatehouse. Rather, a courtyard that adjoins the public domain requires a gatehouse</b> to prevent people from peering in. <b>But</b> a courtyard <b>that does not adjoin the public domain does not require a gatehouse.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why don’t <b>the Rabbis</b> make this distinction? The Gemara answers: Even if a courtyard does not adjoin the public domain, <b>people in the public domain sometimes are forced</b> toward the courtyard due to crowding in the public domain, <b>and come and enter</b> the courtyard.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that the residents of a city <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that city <b>to</b> contribute to the <b>building</b> of a wall, double doors, and a crossbar <b>for the city. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The residents of a city <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that city <b>to build double doors and a crossbar for the city. And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Not all cities require a wall. Rather, a city that adjoins the</b> state <b>border requires a wall, whereas</b> a city <b>that does not adjoin the</b> state <b>border does not require a wall.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why don’t <b>the Rabbis</b> make this distinction? The Gemara answers: Even if a city does not adjoin the border, <b>it sometimes happens that</b> invading <b>troops come</b> into the area. Therefore, it is always good for a city to be protected by a wall.

### Part 12
With regard to this issue, <b>Rabbi Elazar asked Rabbi Yoḥanan: When</b> the residents of the city <b>collect</b> money to build a wall, <b>do they collect based on</b> the number of <b>people</b> living in each house, <b>or perhaps they collect based on the</b> net <b>worth</b> of each person? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: They collect based on the</b> net <b>worth</b> of each person, <b>and Elazar, my son,</b> you shall <b>fix nails in this,</b> i.e., this is an established <i>halakha</i>, and you must not veer from it.

### Part 13
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar asked Rabbi Yoḥanan: When they collect</b> money to build a wall, <b>do they collect based on the proximity of the houses</b> to the wall, so that those people who live closer to the wall pay more? <b>Or perhaps they collect based on the</b> net <b>worth</b> of each person. Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: They collect based on the proximity of the houses</b> to the wall, <b>and Elazar, my son,</b> you shall <b>fix nails in this.</b>

### Part 14
§ It is related that <b>Rabbi Yehuda Nesia</b> once <b>imposed</b> payment of the tax for <b>the wall</b> even <b>on the Sages. Reish Lakish said to him: The Sages do not require protection, as it is written:</b> “How precious are your dear ones to me, O God…<b>If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand”</b> (Psalms 139:17–18). <b>If I should count whom? If we say</b> this is referring to <b>the righteous,</b> and the verse is saying <b>that they are greater in number than the</b> grains of <b>sand,</b> this is difficult. <b>Now</b> if <b>it is written about all of Israel: “As the sand which is upon the seashore”</b> (Genesis 22:17), can <b>the righteous themselves,</b> who are a part of Israel, <b>be greater in number than the</b> grains of <b>sand?</b> How can they possibly outnumber the grains of sand upon the seashore?

### Part 15
<b>Rather, this</b> is what the verse <b>is saying:</b> If <b>I should count the deeds of the righteous, they are greater in number than the</b> grains of <b>sand. And</b> it follows by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If the</b> grains of <b>sand, which are fewer</b> in number, <b>protect</b> the shore from <b>the sea,</b> barring it from flowing inland (see Jeremiah 5:22), <b>do not all the more so the deeds of the righteous, which are greater</b> in number, <b>protect them?</b> Consequently the Sages do not need additional protection.

### Part 16
<b>When</b> Reish Lakish <b>came before Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> and reported the exchange to him, Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: What is the reason</b> that <b>you did not quote this</b> verse <b>to him: “I am a wall and my breasts are like towers”</b> (Song of Songs 8:10), which may be explained as follows: <b>“I am a wall”; this</b> is referring to <b>the Torah. “And my breasts are like towers”;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC