
### Part 1
In the case of <b>one who produces <i>tamad</i>,</b> a beverage made by steeping grape pomace in water, <b>and he placed a measured</b> amount of <b>water</b> into a container together with the pomace, <b>and</b> after removing the pomace <b>he found</b> that the volume of the <i>tamad</i> produced was <b>equivalent to the amount</b> of water used, one is <b>exempt</b> from the requirement to tithe the <i>tamad</i>, even though the pomace came from grapes that had not been tithed. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> one <b>liable</b> to tithe the <i>tamad</i>. The Gemara explains the difficulty posed by this mishna: It would appear that <b>they disagree only with regard to</b> a case <b>where</b> the volume of the <i>tamad</i> produced was <b>equivalent to the amount</b> of water used, <b>but</b> in a case where the volume of the <i>tamad</i> produced was <b>greater than the amount</b> of water used, <b>they do not disagree;</b> rather, they all agree that it must be tithed because it is regarded as wine. This would appear to contradict Rava’s explanation.

### Part 2
The Gemara resolves the difficulty: Actually, <b>the same is true</b> in <b>that they would disagree even where</b> the volume of the <i>tamad</i> produced was <b>greater than the amount</b> of water used. <b>And</b> the reason <b>that</b> the mishna records only that <b>they disagree</b> about a case <b>where</b> the volume of the <i>tamad</i> produced was <b>equivalent to the amount</b> of water used is in order <b>to convey to you the far-reaching nature of</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that one is liable to tithe the <i>tamad</i> even in this case.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak asked Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin:</b> If one steeps <b>pomace</b> and produces <i>tamad</i> <b>that has the taste of wine, what is</b> the blessing that one should recite before drinking it? Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin <b>said to him: Do you hold</b> that such a beverage <b>is wine? It is merely a sharp-flavored</b> beverage, not wine.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> concerning the production of successive batches of <i>tamad</i> of decreasing strengths by reusing the pomace after each time a <i>tamad</i> is produced: With regard to <b>pomace of <i>teruma</i></b> wine, the <b>first and second</b> products are considered to be <i>teruma</i>, and it is <b>prohibited</b> for a non-priest to drink it. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>the third</b> product, a non-priest <b>is permitted</b> to drink it. <b>Rabbi Meir says: Even</b> with regard to the <b>third</b> product, if the wine that seeps out of the pomace <b>imparts</b> the <b>flavor</b> of wine to the water, it is forbidden to a non-priest.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> with regard to water added to pomace <b>of</b> second<b>-tithe</b> wine, the <b>first</b> product is also considered to be second tithe, and it is <b>prohibited</b> to drink it outside Jerusalem. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>the second</b> product, it <b>is permitted</b> to drink it anywhere. <b>Rabbi Meir says: Even</b> with regard to the <b>second</b> product, if the wine that seeps out of the pomace <b>imparts</b> the <b>flavor</b> of wine to the water, it may be consumed only in Jerusalem. <b>And</b> with regard to water added to pomace <b>of</b> wine that was <b>consecrated</b> to the Temple, up to the <b>third</b> product it is <b>prohibited</b> to derive any benefit from it, as it is considered to be consecrated, <b>but</b> from <b>the fourth</b> product, it <b>is permitted. Rabbi Meir says: Even</b> with regard to the <b>fourth</b> product, if the wine that seeps out of the pomace <b>imparts</b> the <b>flavor</b> of wine to the water, it is prohibited.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a different <i>baraita</i>: <i>Tamad</i> produced from the pomace <b>of</b> wine that was <b>consecrated</b> to the Temple is <b>always forbidden,</b> even after having steeped them many times, <b>and</b> the beverage produced from pomace <b>of</b> second <b>tithe is always permitted,</b> even from the first such product. The Gemara explains: The ruling concerning <b>consecrated</b> pomace is <b>difficult,</b> as it is contradicted by the ruling of the first <i>baraita</i> concerning <b>consecrated</b> pomace. And the ruling concerning second-<b>tithe</b> pomace is <b>difficult,</b> as it is contradicted by the ruling of the first <i>baraita</i> concerning second-<b>tithe</b> pomace.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: The contradiction between the ruling of one <i>baraita</i> concerning <b>consecrated</b> pomace and the ruling of the other <i>baraita</i> concerning <b>consecrated</b> pomace is <b>not difficult,</b> as one can explain that <b>here,</b> the second <i>baraita</i> is referring to pomace <b>with inherent sanctity,</b> and <b>there,</b> the first <i>baraita</i> is referring to pomace <b>with sanctity</b> that inheres in its <b>value.</b> Also, the contradiction between the ruling of one <i>baraita</i> concerning pomace of second <b>tithe</b> and the ruling of the other <i>baraita</i> concerning pomace of second <b>tithe</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as one can explain that <b>here,</b> the first <i>baraita</i> is referring to pomace whose status as second <b>tithe</b> is <b>certain</b> and <b>there,</b> the second <i>baraita</i> is referring to pomace <b>of</b> second <b>tithe</b> of <b>doubtfully tithed produce [<i>demai</i>].</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzadak:</b> In the <b>same way in which</b> the Sages <b>said</b> concerning differing strengths of <i>tamad</i> that <b>with regard to their prohibition,</b> after a certain number of times the <i>tamad</i> produced is not considered to be wine, <b>so</b> too <b>they said</b> the same rulings <b>with regard to their capacity to render</b> foods <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: When the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>their capacity to render</b> other foods <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, why does it matter <b>which</b> kind of beverage the <i>tamad</i> is considered to be? <b>Whether</b> the <i>tamad</i> is regarded <b>as water</b> it can <b>render</b> food <b>susceptible</b> to impurity, or <b>whether</b> it is regarded as <b>wine it</b> can <b>render</b> food <b>susceptible</b> to impurity. The Gemara clarifies: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> in a case in <b>which one produced <i>tamad</i> with rainwater</b> that he had not previously intended to use. Rainwater does not render food susceptible to ritual impurity, so the <i>tamad</i> will do so only if it is regarded as wine.

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges this: <b>But since he took</b> the rainwater <b>and poured it into a container</b> holding the grape pomace, <b>he has</b> thereby <b>intended it</b> for a use. Even if the resulting <i>tamad</i> is regarded as water, such rainwater renders food susceptible to ritual impurity. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> in a case <b>where</b> the pomace <b>produced <i>tamad</i> by itself,</b> having been steeped in water that happened to fall upon it.

### Part 11
The Gemara persists: The <i>baraita</i> above states that from the third product, the <i>tamad</i> is regarded as water, which the Gemara has explained is referring to rainwater that one did not intend to use and that consequently cannot render food susceptible to impurity. The Gemara asks: <b>But since he draws off</b> each subsequent lot of <i>tamad</i> that is produced, <b>one by one,</b> in order to allow more rainwater to fall onto the pomace and produce more <i>tamad</i>, <b>he</b> thereby demonstrates his <b>intent to</b> use the rainwater. Therefore, even if the <i>tamad</i> is regarded as water, it should render food susceptible to impurity. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Pappa says</b> that this is a case <b>of a cow that drank</b> the lots of <i>tamad</i>, <b>one by one,</b> and some inadvertently dripped from the cow’s mouth onto food. Since no person intended to use the <i>tamad</i>, if it is regarded as water it will not render food susceptible to impurity.

### Part 12
§ <b>Rav Zutra bar Toviyya says</b> that <b>Rav says: One may recite the sanctification of the</b> Shabbat <b>day only over wine</b> of a quality that is <b>fit to be poured</b> as a libation <b>upon the altar.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: This statement is said <b>to exclude what? If we say</b> it is <b>to exclude</b> the use of <b>wine</b> fresh <b>from one’s press,</b> i.e., grape juice, which has not yet fermented, that is difficult. <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya teach: One may not bring wine</b> fresh <b>from his press</b> as a libation <i>ab initio</i>, <b>but if one brought</b> it as a libation, <b>it is valid</b> after the fact. <b>And since if one brought</b> it as a libation <b>it is valid</b> after the fact, <b>we</b> should <b>also</b> be able to use it for the sanctification of the Shabbat day, <b>even <i>ab initio</i>.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC