
### Part 1
<b>these are Torah scholars,</b> and towers do not require additional protection? The Gemara comments: <b>And Reish Lakish,</b> who did not cite this verse, <b>holds</b> in accordance with the way that <b>Rava expounded</b> the verse: <b>“I am a wall”; this</b> is referring to <b>the Congregation of Israel. “And my breasts are like towers”; these are the synagogues and study halls.</b>

### Part 2
It is similarly related that <b>Rav Naḥman bar Rav Ḥisda</b> once <b>im-posed</b> payment of <b>the</b> poll <b>tax [<i>karga</i>]</b> even <b>on the Sages. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to him: You have transgressed</b> the words of <b>the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings.</b>

### Part 3
You have transgressed the words of <b>the Torah, as it is written: “Even when He loves the peoples, all His holy ones are in Your hand”</b> (Deuteronomy 33:3), which is understood to mean that <b>Moses said to the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, even when You hold the</b> other <b>nations dear</b> and grant them dominion over Israel, let <b>“all His holy ones,”</b> meaning the Torah scholars, <b>be</b> exclusively <b>in Your hand</b> and free from the authority of the nations, and therefore be exempt from pay-ing taxes. The continuation of that verse can also be understood as referring to Torah scholars, as it states: <b>“And they sit [<i>tukku</i>] at Your feet,</b> receiving Your words” (Deuteronomy 33:3), and <b>Rav Yosef teaches: These are Torah scholars who pound [<i>mekhatetim</i>] their feet from city to city and from country to country to study Torah; “receiving [<i>yissa</i>] Your words,” to discuss [<i>lissa velitten</i>] the utterances of God.</b>

### Part 4
And you have transgressed the words of <b>the Prophets, as it is written: “Though they have hired lovers [<i>yitnu</i>] among the nations, now I will gather them, and they will begin to be diminished by reason of the burden of kings and princes”</b> (Hosea 8:10). With regard to this verse, <b>Ulla says:</b> Part of <b>this verse is stated in the Aramaic language;</b> the word <i>yitnu</i> should be understood here in its Aramaic sense: To learn. And the verse should be interpreted as follows: <b>If all</b> of Israel <b>learns</b> Torah, <b>I will gather them</b> already <b>now; and if</b> only <b>a few of them</b> learn Torah, <b>they will be excused from the burden</b> imposed <b>by kings and princes.</b> This indicates that those who study Torah should not be subject to paying taxes.

### Part 5
And furthermore, you have transgressed the words of <b>the Writings, as it is written: “It shall not be lawful to impose tribute, impost or toll upon them”</b> (Ezra 7:24), i.e., upon the priests and Levites who serve in the Temple. This <i>halakha</i> would apply to Torah scholars as well. <b>And Rav Yehuda says: “Tribute”; this</b> is referring to <b>the king’s portion,</b> a tax given to the king. <b>“Impost”; this</b> is referring to <b>the head tax. “Toll”; this</b> is referring to <b>a tax [<i>arnona</i>]</b> paid with property that was imposed from time to time.

### Part 6
It is related that <b>Rav Pappa</b> once <b>imposed</b> a tax for <b>the digging of a new</b> cistern even <b>on orphans. Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, said to Rav Pappa: Perhaps</b> they will dig, but in the end <b>they will not draw</b> any <b>water</b> from there, and it will turn out that the money will have been spent for nothing. The rest of the townspeople can relinquish their rights to their money, but orphans who are minors cannot do so. Rav Pappa <b>said to him: I shall collect</b> money <b>from</b> the orphans; <b>if they draw</b> water, <b>they</b> will <b>draw</b> water, <b>and if not, I will return</b> the money <b>to</b> the orphans.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda says: All</b> of the city’s residents must contribute <b>to</b> the building and upkeep of <b>the city gates [<i>le’aglei gappa</i>],</b> and for this purpose money is collected <b>even from orphans. But the Sages do not require protection</b> and are therefore exempt from this payment. <b>All</b> of the city’s residents must contribute <b>to the digging of cisterns [<i>lekarya patya</i>],</b> and for this purpose money is collected <b>even from the Sages,</b> since they too need water. The Gemara comments: <b>And we said</b> this <b>only when</b> the people are <b>not</b> required to <b>go out en masse [<i>be’akhluza</i>]</b> and do the actual digging, but are obligated merely to contribute money for that purpose. <b>But if</b> the people are required to <b>go out en masse</b> and actually dig, <b>the Sages</b> are <b>not</b> expected to <b>go out</b> with them <b>en masse,</b> but rather they are exempt from such labor.

### Part 8
It is related that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi once <b>opened</b> his <b>storehouses</b> to distribute food <b>during years of drought. He said: Masters of Bible, masters of Mishna, masters of Talmud, masters of <i>halakha</i>, masters of <i>aggada</i> may enter</b> and receive food from me, <b>but ignoramuses should not enter. Rabbi Yonatan ben Amram,</b> whom Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi did not know, <b>pushed</b> his way in, <b>and entered,</b> and <b>said to him: Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>sustain me.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: My son, have you read</b> the Bible? Rabbi Yonatan ben Amram <b>said to him,</b> out of modesty: <b>No.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi continued: <b>Have you studied</b> Mishna? Once again, Rabbi Yonatan ben Amram <b>said to him: No.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi then asked him: <b>If so, by what</b> merit <b>should I sustain you?</b> Rabbi Yonatan ben Amram <b>said to him: Sustain me like a dog and like a raven,</b> who are given food even though they have not learned anything. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi was moved by his words and <b>fed him.</b>

### Part 9
<b>After</b> Rabbi Yonatan <b>left, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>sat, and was distressed, and said: Woe is me, that I have given my bread to an ignoramus.</b> His son, <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>said to him: Perhaps he was your disciple Yonatan ben Amram, who never in his life wanted to</b> materially <b>benefit from the honor</b> shown to the <b>Torah? They investigated</b> the matter <b>and found</b> that such was the case. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi then <b>said: Let everyone enter,</b> as there may also be others who hide the fact that they are true Torah scholars.

### Part 10
Commenting on Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s opinion, the Gemara notes that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi conformed <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning,</b> as <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Suffering comes to the world only due to ignoramuses.</b> This is <b>like</b> the incident of <b>the crown tax [<i>kelila</i>] that was imposed on</b> the residents of the city of <b>Tiberias.</b> The heads of the city <b>came before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and said to him: The Sages should contribute</b> along <b>with us.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to them: No,</b> the Sages are exempt. <b>They said to him:</b> Then <b>we will run away</b> and the entire burden will fall on the Torah scholars. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to them: Run away</b> as you please. <b>Half</b> of the city’s residents <b>ran away.</b> The authorities then <b>waived half</b> the sum that they had initially imposed on the city.

### Part 11
<b>The half</b> of the population that remained in the city then <b>came before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, and <b>said to him: The Sages should contribute</b> along <b>with us.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to them: No,</b> the Sages are exempt. They said to him: Then <b>we</b> too <b>will run away.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to them: <b>Run away</b> as you please. <b>They all ran away,</b> so that only <b>one launderer was left</b> in the city. The authorities <b>imposed</b> the entire tax <b>on the launderer. The launderer</b> then <b>ran away</b> as well. <b>The crown tax was</b> then <b>canceled</b> in its entirety. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: You see</b> from this <b>that suffering comes to the world only due to ignoramuses,</b> for as soon as they all fled from the city, the crown tax was completely canceled.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And how long</b> must one live <b>in the city to be</b> considered <b>like</b> one of <b>the people of the city?</b> Twelve months. <b>And we raise a contradiction</b> from what is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a donkey caravan or a camel caravan that was journeying from place to place, and it lodged inside</b> an idolatrous city, <b>and its</b> members <b>were led astray</b> along <b>with</b> the other residents of the city, and they too engaged in idol worship, <b>they,</b> the members of the caravan, are liable to death <b>by stoning</b> like ordinary individual idolaters, <b>and their property escapes</b> destruction, i.e., they are not treated like the residents of an idolatrous city, who are liable to death by the sword and whose property is destroyed.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And if</b> the caravan members <b>had remained</b> in that city for <b>thirty days, they</b> are liable to death <b>by the sword and their property is destroyed,</b> just as it is for the rest of the residents of the city. This seems to indicate that once an individual has lived in a city for thirty days, he is already considered one of its residents.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. This</b> period, i.e., twelve months, is required in order to be considered one of the <b>members of the city;</b> and <b>that</b> period, i.e., thirty days, suffices in order to be considered one of the <b>residents of the city. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who is prohibited by a vow from deriving benefit from the people of a</b> particular <b>city</b> is <b>prohibited from deriving benefit from anyone who has stayed there</b> for <b>twelve months,</b> but it is permitted for him to derive benefit from anyone who has stayed there for <b>less</b> time <b>than that.</b> By contrast, if he prohibited himself by way of a vow from deriving benefit <b>from the residents of a</b> particular <b>city,</b> he is <b>prohibited from deriving benefit from anyone who has stayed there</b> for <b>thirty days,</b> but <b>it is permitted for him to derive benefit from</b> anyone who has stayed there for <b>less</b> time <b>than that.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And do we require</b> that one live in a city for <b>twelve months for all matters? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one lives in city for <b>thirty days,</b> he must contribute <b>to</b> the <b>charity platter</b> from which food is distributed to the poor. If he lives there for <b>three months,</b> he must contribute <b>to</b> the charity <b>box.</b> If he lives there for <b>six</b> months, he must contribute <b>to</b> the <b>clothing</b> fund. If he lives there for <b>nine</b> months, he must contribute <b>to</b> the <b>burial</b> fund. If he lives there for <b>twelve</b> months, he must contribute <b>to</b> the <b>columns of the city [<i>lepassei ha’ir</i>],</b> i.e., for the construction of a security fence. <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: When we learned twelve months in the mishna, we learned</b> that with regard to contributing <b>to</b> the <b>columns of the city,</b> money used for protecting and strengthening the city, but not for other matters.

### Part 16
<b>And Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: All</b> are required to contribute <b>to</b> the <b>columns of the city, and</b> money is collected for that purpose <b>even from orphans. But the Sages</b> are <b>not</b> required to contribute, <b>since the Sages do not need protection. Rav Pappa said:</b> Money is collected <b>even from orphans for the</b> city <b>wall, for the</b> city <b>horseman, and for the guard [<i>uletarzina</i>]</b> of the city armory, <b>but the Sages do not require protection. The principle of the matter</b> is: Money is collected <b>even from orphans</b> for <b>anything from which they</b> derive <b>benefit.</b>

### Part 17
It is reported that <b>Rabba imposed</b> a contribution to a certain <b>charity on the orphans of the house of bar Maryon. Abaye said to him: But didn’t Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda teach: One does not impose a charity</b> obligation <b>on orphans even for</b> the sake of <b>redeeming captives,</b> since they are minors and are not obligated in the mitzvot? Rabba <b>said to him: I did this to elevate them</b> in standing, i.e., so that people should honor them as generous benefactors; not in order that the poor should benefit.

### Part 18
Incidental to this story, the Gemara relates that <b>Ifera Hurmiz, the mother of King Shapur,</b> king of Persia, <b>sent a purse [<i>arneka</i>]</b> full <b>of dinars to Rav Yosef. She said</b> to him: <b>Let</b> the money be used <b>for a great mitzva. Rav Yosef sat and considered</b> the question: <b>What</b> did Ifera Hurmiz mean when she attached a condition to the gift, saying that it should be used for <b>a great mitzva? Abaye said to him: From what Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda taught,</b> that <b>one does not impose a charity</b> obligation <b>on orphans even for</b> the sake of <b>redeeming captives, learn from this</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC