
### Part 1
<b>Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him,</b> i.e., it is not my fault that we are not getting married, she is not required to return the betrothal money. <b>Here too, let him say: Give me my groomsman and I will rejoice with him.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yosef said: With what are we dealing here?</b> Shmuel’s statement is referring to a case <b>where</b> the original recipient, in reciprocation, <b>rejoiced with</b> the brother who brought the gifts of groomsmen during the <b>seven days of</b> the wedding <b>feast, but did not suffice to repay him before</b> the brother <b>died.</b> Since it was the usual practice to send the gifts of groomsmen after the groomsman rejoiced with the betrothed man for seven days, he is obligated to reciprocate the gifts of groomsmen, and the <i>yavam</i> cannot claim them for himself.

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Shall we say</b> that Shmuel’s statement that a betrothed woman can claim: <b>Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him, is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who betrothed a woman</b> and then he divorces her or dies, if she is <b>a virgin,</b> she <b>collects two hundred</b> dinars in payment of her marriage contract. <b>And</b> if she is <b>a widow,</b> she collects <b>one hundred dinars.</b> In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return the betrothal</b> money when the betrothed man or woman died, <b>they return</b> it. In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to return the betrothal</b> money, <b>they do not return</b> it. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Natan. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says: Actually they said:</b> In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return</b> it, <b>they return</b> it; in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to return</b> it, <b>they do not return</b> it.

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: The opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi is</b> identical to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> i.e., Rabbi Natan. <b>Rather, is it not</b> that the difference <b>between them</b> concerns the validity of the claim: <b>Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him?</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> the statement in the <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> With regard to <b>one who betrothed a woman</b> and then the betrothal is terminated, if she is <b>a virgin,</b> she <b>collects two hundred</b> dinars in payment of her marriage contract, <b>and</b> if she is <b>a widow,</b> she collects <b>one hundred dinars. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said <b>where he retracted,</b> i.e., he died or divorced her. <b>But</b> with regard to where <b>she died,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: In <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return</b> the betrothal money, <b>they return</b> it; in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to return</b> the betrothal money, <b>they do not return</b> it. <b>And</b> this applies <b>specifically</b> to <b>where she died; but</b> if <b>he died, they do not return</b> it. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? It is because <b>she can say: Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him.</b> This is the statement of Rabbi Natan.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi came to say: Actually they said: Whether he died or whether she died,</b> in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return</b> it, <b>they return</b> it; in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to return</b> it, <b>they do not return</b> it, <b>and she cannot say: Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this explanation: <b>No, everyone</b> agrees that <b>she can say: Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him, and</b> in a case <b>where he died, everyone agrees</b> that she does not have to return the betrothal money. <b>They disagree</b> in a case <b>where she died, and here</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the question of whether <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is given as a sunk</b> cost, i.e., that it is not returned even if the betrothal is not consummated, that <b>they disagree. Rabbi Natan holds</b> that <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is not given as a sunk</b> cost, and in a place where people were accustomed to return it, they return it. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds</b> that <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is given as a sunk</b> cost.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach</b> that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return</b> it, <b>they return</b> it? This indicates that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi does not hold that the betrothal money was given as a sunk cost. The Gemara replies: This is not referring to the betrothal money, which is not returned in any event. <b>This is</b> what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: But</b> with regard to <b>presents,</b> which the betrothed man sent his betrothed following the betrothal, <b>certainly</b> in <b>a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed to return</b> them, <b>they return</b> them.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: The dispute between <b>these <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>, <b>is like</b> the dispute between <b>those <i>tanna’im</i></b> just mentioned, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where the man <b>betrothed</b> a woman <b>with a talent</b> of silver, equivalent to six thousand dinars, if she was <b>a virgin</b> she <b>collects</b> in payment of her marriage contract <b>two hundred</b> dinars over and above this amount, <b>and</b> if she was <b>a widow</b> she collects <b>one hundred dinars</b> over and above this amount. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: A virgin collects two hundred</b> dinars <b>and a widow one hundred dinars, and she returns the rest</b> of the betrothal money <b>to him. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> If <b>he betrothed her with twenty, he gives her thirty halves;</b> if <b>he betrothed her with thirty, he gives her twenty halves,</b> as the Gemara will explain.

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies the <i>baraita</i>: <b>With what are we dealing? If we say</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>when she died, is she entitled</b> to receive payment of her <b>marriage contract? Rather,</b> perhaps the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>where he died,</b> in which case <b>why</b> does Rabbi Yehuda state that <b>she returns the rest</b> of the betrothal money <b>to him? Let her say: Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him. Rather,</b> perhaps the <i>baraita</i> is referring to the case <b>of the wife,</b> i.e., the betrothed, <b>of an Israelite, who committed adultery,</b> who cannot claim that she is available to marry her betrothed, as it is prohibited for her to engage in intercourse with him. The Gemara challenges: This is also difficult, as <b>with what</b> circumstance is the <i>baraita</i> dealing? <b>If</b> it is referring to <b>where</b> she committed adultery <b>willingly, is she entitled</b> to receive payment of her <b>marriage contract? Rather,</b> it is referring <b>to</b> a case of <b>rape.</b> But in that case, she <b>is permitted to him.</b> Why should she return the betrothal money?

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to the wife,</b> i.e., the betrothed, <b>of a priest, who was raped</b> and is prohibited from engaging in intercourse with her betrothed. She therefore cannot claim: Give me my husband and I will rejoice with him, yet she is entitled to receive payment of her marriage contract, <b>and</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree with regard to</b> whether <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is given as a sunk</b> cost: <b>Rabbi Meir holds that betrothal</b> money <b>is given as a sunk</b> cost. <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that it <b>is not given as a sunk</b> cost. <b>And Rabbi Yosei is uncertain if</b> it <b>is given as a sunk</b> cost <b>or not.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara explains Rabbi Yosei’s opinion: <b>And</b> since it is uncertain whether or not she is required to return the betrothal money, <b>therefore,</b> she returns only half the money: If <b>he betrothed her with twenty</b> <i>sela</i>, which are equivalent to eighty dinars, she owes him forty dinars. Yet, if she is widowed or divorced, she is entitled to one hundred dinars in payment of her marriage contract, so he or his estate <b>gives her thirty halves</b> of a <i>sela</i>, which are equivalent to sixty dinars, so that she receives one hundred dinars in all. If <b>he betrothed her with thirty</b> <i>sela</i>, which are equivalent to one hundred twenty dinars, she owes him sixty dinars. Since she is entitled to one hundred dinars in payment of her marriage contract, he <b>gives her twenty halves</b> of a <i>sela</i>, equivalent to forty dinars.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says: In every place where they were accustomed to return</b> the betrothal money, <b>they return</b> it. <b>And the interpretation</b> of this statement is that it is referring to <b>Neharde’a.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>the rest of Babylonia, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say:</b> The <b>presents are returned</b> and the <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is not returned. Rav Pappa said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>whether he died</b> or <b>whether she died or</b> whether <b>he retracted</b> his agreement to the betrothal and divorced her, the <b>presents are returned</b> and the <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is not returned.</b> If <b>she retracted</b> her agreement to the betrothal and requested a divorce, <b>even</b> the <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is returned.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Ameimar said:</b> The <b>betrothal</b> money <b>is not returned.</b> This is a rabbinic <b>decree, lest</b> people <b>say</b> that <b>betrothal takes effect with her sister.</b> If the betrothal money is returned, people are likely to think that the betrothal is retroactively nullified and that the man can betroth her sister, whereas in fact the betrothal was not retroactively nullified and he cannot betroth her. <b>Rav Ashi said: Her bill of divorce proves for her</b> that she was betrothed, so this concern is not in effect. The Gemara comments: <b>And this</b> statement <b>of Rav Ashi is a mistake, since there are</b> those <b>who heard about this,</b> i.e., the return of the betrothal money, <b>but did not hear about that,</b> i.e., the bill of divorce.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: If the gifts of groomsmen are reciprocated after the father’s death, they are reciprocated to the middle, <b>because gifts of groomsmen are</b> a legal debt owed to the father, <b>collectible in court. The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:8): <b>Five statements were said with regard to gifts of groomsmen:</b> They are <b>collectible in court; and</b> they are <b>reciprocated</b> only <b>at their</b> relevant <b>time,</b> i.e., at the time of the groomsman’s own wedding; <b>and they are not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>interest,</b> i.e., it is permitted to reciprocate with a gift of greater value than the original gift;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC