
### Part 1
<b>its leader, and woe to the ship that has lost its captain.</b>

### Part 2
With regard to leaders, the Gemara adds that it is stated in praise of God: <b>“And You are exalted as head above all”</b> (I Chronicles 29:11). <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rava says</b> that <b>Rav says: Even</b> one with the most insignificant position of authority, e.g., <b>an appointee over irrigation, is appointed by Heaven.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara returns to its discussion of the punishment of Elimelech and his sons, which Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says they received because they left Eretz Yisrael. <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: Heaven forfend</b> that they sinned in this manner, <b>as</b> if Elimelech and his sons <b>had found even bran they would not have left</b> Eretz Yisrael. <b>But rather, for what</b> reason were <b>they punished?</b> They were punished <b>because they should have requested mercy</b> of God <b>for their generation, and they did not request</b> this, <b>as it is stated: “When you cry, let those you have gathered deliver you”</b> (Isaiah 57:13).

### Part 4
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: They taught</b> that it is prohibited to leave Eretz Yisrael <b>only</b> if <b>money is cheap,</b> i.e., not excessively difficult to obtain, <b>and produce is expensive,</b> similar to the case in the <i>baraita</i> where two <i>se’a</i> of wheat are sold for a <i>sela</i>. <b>But</b> when <b>money is expensive,</b> i.e., it is difficult to earn money for sustenance, <b>even</b> if the price of <b>four <i>se’a</i></b> of grain <b>stood at a <i>sela</i>, one</b> may <b>leave</b> Eretz Yisrael in order to survive.

### Part 5
The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the following list of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s recollections: <b><i>Sela</i>; laborer; carob; boy; they would say.</b> The first statement is <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan said: I remember when four <i>se’a</i></b> of produce <b>were</b> sold <b>for</b> one <b><i>sela</i>, and</b> yet <b>there were many swollen from hunger in Tiberias, as they did not have</b> even one <b><i>issar</i></b> coin with which to purchase food. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> further <b>said: I remember when laborers would not</b> agree to <b>work on the east</b> side of the <b>city,</b> because <b>they would die from the smell of the bread</b> that would waft over them from the city’s west side.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues to relate other, more salutary, memories: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: I remember when a child would break a carob, and a line of honey would extend over his two arms. And Rabbi Elazar said: I remember when a raven would take</b> a piece of <b>meat, and a line of fat would extend from the top of the wall</b> upon which it was standing <b>to the ground. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: I remember when a boy and girl, of sixteen and seventeen years of age, would walk</b> together <b>in the market, and they would not sin. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: I remember when they would say in the study hall that one who agrees with</b> the gentiles <b>falls into their hands,</b> and <b>that one who relies on them</b> sees that which is <b>his</b> become <b>theirs.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara returns to its discussion of the story of Ruth. <b>It is written: “Mahlon and Chilion”</b> (Ruth 1:2), <b>and it is written</b> elsewhere: <b>“Joash and Saraph,</b> who had dominion in Moab” (I Chronicles 4:22). Apparently, both names refer to the same individuals who married Moabite wives. <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagreed with regard to their true names. <b>One says: Their</b> given <b>names were Mahlon and Chilion, and why were they called</b> by the <b>names Saraph and Joash?</b> One was called <b>Joash [<i>yoash</i>] because they despaired [<i>nitya’ashu</i>] of the redemption</b> of Eretz Yisrael, as they established themselves in Moab and lived there for many years. The other was called <b>Saraph, because they were liable</b> to receive the punishment of <b>burning [<i>sereifa</i>] for</b> their sins against <b>God,</b> because they left their community.

### Part 8
<b>And one</b> of them <b>says: Their</b> given <b>names were Joash and Saraph, and why were they called</b> by the <b>names Mahlon and Chilion?</b> One was called <b>Mahlon [<i>maḥlon</i>] because they made their bodies profane [<i>ḥullin</i>], and</b> the other was called <b>Chilion [<i>khilyon</i>] because they were liable to</b> receive the punishment of <b>destruction [<i>kelaya</i>] for</b> their sins against <b>God.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the one who says</b> that <b>their</b> given <b>names were Mahlon and Chilion. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had dominion in Moab, and Jashubi Lehem. And the matters are ancient”</b> (I Chronicles 4:22)? <b>“And Jokim,” this</b> refers to <b>Joshua, who established [<i>shehekim</i>]</b> and kept the <b>oath with people of Gibeon</b> (see Joshua, chapter 9). <b>“And the men of Cozeba,” these are the men of Gibeon, who lied [<i>shekizevu</i>] to Joshua</b> by saying that they came from a distant land. <b>“And Joash, and Saraph,” these are Mahlon and Chilion. And why were they called</b> by the <b>names Joash and Saraph?</b> One was called <b>Joash because they despaired [<i>shenitya’ashu</i>] of the redemption;</b> the other was called <b>Saraph because they were liable</b> to receive the punishment of <b>burning [<i>sereifa</i>] for</b> their sins against <b>God.</b>

### Part 10
<b>“Who had dominion in Moab,”</b> this means <b>that they married Moabite women. “And Jashubi Lehem,” this</b> is referring to <b>Ruth the Moabite, who returned [<i>sheshava</i>] and attached</b> herself <b>to Bethlehem</b> of <b>Judea. “And the matters are ancient,”</b> this means that <b>these matters were said by the Ancient of Days,</b> i.e., they occurred through God’s will, <b>as it is written: “I have found David My servant”</b> (Psalms 89:21); <b>and</b> the same term “found” also appears with regard to the daughters of Lot, as <b>it is written: “Your two daughters that are found</b> here” (Genesis 19:15). This teaches that David’s ancestry can be traced this far back, as he was destined to be born from Moab, who was the son of Lot’s daughter and Lot himself.

### Part 11
The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> that analyzes the next verse: <b>“These were the potters, and those who dwelt among plantations and hedges; there they dwelt occupied in the king’s work”</b> (I Chronicles 4:23). <b>“These were the potters [<i>yotzerim</i>],” these are the sons of Jonadab, son of Rechab, who kept [<i>natzeru</i>] their father’s oath.</b>

### Part 12
<b>“Those who dwelt among plantations,” this</b> is referring to <b>Solomon, who in his kingship</b> was <b>similar to a plant. “And hedges [<i>ugdera</i>],” this</b> is the <b>Sanhedrin, which fenced [<i>gaderu</i>] in the breaches of the Jewish people</b> by means of ordinances. <b>“There they dwelt occupied in the king’s work,” this</b> is referring to <b>Ruth the Moabite, who saw the kingship of Solomon,</b> the <b>grandson of her grandson. As it is stated</b> about Solomon: <b>“And he caused a throne to be set for the king’s mother”</b> (I Kings 2:19), <b>and Rabbi Elazar says:</b> This means <b>for the mother of the</b> dynasty of <b>kingship,</b> i.e., Ruth.

### Part 13
§ Since the Gemara has discussed times of famine in Eretz Yisrael, it concludes the chapter with a blessing of times of prosperity: <b>The Sages taught:</b> When the verse states: <b>“And you shall eat of the produce of the old store”</b> (Leviticus 25:22), referring to the produce grown in the sixth year of the Sabbatical cycle, this means <b>without <i>salmanton</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Without <i>salmanton</i>? Rav Naḥman said: Without worms [<i>retzinta</i>]</b> that consume the produce, <b>and Rav Sheshet said: Without blight,</b> which destroys the taste of the produce.

### Part 14
The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Sheshet,</b> and it <b>is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Naḥman.</b> It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Naḥman:</b> From the verse: “And you shall sow the eighth year, <b>and you shall eat</b> of the produce of <b>the old store,</b> until the ninth year” (Leviticus 25:22), one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the Jewish people will wait for the new</b> produce <b>because the old store has</b> been <b>destroyed.</b> Therefore <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “Until its produce comes in,”</b> to indicate that they will not stop eating the old produce <b>until the</b> new <b>produce comes of itself,</b> i.e., until it is fully ripe and they do not need the old produce. The old produce will last until then and will not become worm infested, as stated by Rav Naḥman.

### Part 15
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Sheshet:</b> From the verse: <b>“And you shall eat of the produce of the old store,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the Jewish people will wait for the new</b> produce <b>due to the old store because</b> the old store will have gone <b>bad,</b> since blight will ruin the taste of the produce. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Until its produce comes in,”</b> which indicates that they will not stop eating the old produce <b>until the</b> new <b>produce comes of itself,</b> as the stored produce will not suffer from blight.

### Part 16
<b>The Sages taught</b> with regard to a verse in the chapter of the blessings stated to the Jewish people: <b>“And you shall eat old store long kept”</b> (Leviticus 26:10). This <b>teaches that any</b> produce <b>that is older than other</b> produce of that same type will be <b>better than</b> that <b>other</b> produce. <b>And I have</b> derived that this is the case <b>only</b> with regard to <b>items</b> for <b>which</b> it is the normal <b>manner to age them. From where</b> do I derive in the case of <b>items</b> for <b>which</b> it is <b>not</b> the normal <b>manner to age them,</b> e.g., fruit, that they too will improve with age? <b>The verse states: “Old store long kept,”</b> a general expression that indicates that <b>in any case</b> the land will keep its produce from spoiling, as all types of produce will improve with age.

### Part 17
The continuation of the verse: <b>“You shall bring forth the old from before the new,” teaches that there will be storehouses full of old</b> produce <b>and threshing floors full of new</b> produce, <b>and the Jewish people will say: How will we</b> manage to <b>take out this</b> produce from the storehouse <b>before that</b> produce is brought in? <b>Rav Pappa said: Everything</b> that is <b>old is superior</b> in quality to the new, <b>except for dates, liquor, and small fish,</b> which are better when they are fresh.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC