
### Part 1
The party who builds the wall <b>should smear it</b> with clay <b>up to a cubit</b> at the top of the wall <b>on the outside.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let him do</b> this <b>on the inside.</b> The Gemara explains: In that case, <b>his neighbor might</b> also <b>do</b> it <b>on the outside,</b> that is, on the side facing his own property, <b>and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>If so,</b> that is, if there is a concern for such deception, <b>now also</b> when the person who builds the wall smears it with clay on the outside, <b>his neighbor can peel it off and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Peeling</b> clay <b>is noticeable</b> and the deception will not succeed.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: If he builds a partition of <b>palm branches,</b> how does he make a border mark? <b>Rav Naḥman said: He directs the tips of the branches to the outside.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let him do</b> this <b>to the inside.</b> The Gemara states: If he so directs the branches, <b>his neighbor might also do</b> the same <b>to the outside,</b> that is, to the side facing his own property, <b>and say:</b> The partition <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> that is, if there is concern for such deception, <b>now also</b> when the one who builds the partition directs the tips of the branches to the outside, the neighbor <b>can cut off</b> the tips <b>and throw</b> them away, <b>and say:</b> The partition <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara counsels: <b>He should smear</b> the tips of the palm branches <b>with clay.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Now also, the neighbor might come and peel</b> the clay off. The Gemara answers: <b>Peeling is noticeable.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said:</b> One who builds a partition of <b>palm branches has no remedy</b> to prove who erected it, <b>except with</b> a written <b>document.</b> The neighbor should draw up a document stating that he has no claim to the space or to the partition, because they belong exclusively to the other neighbor.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: Nevertheless, in a place where it is not customary to build a partition between two people’s fields, <b>if they made</b> such a partition <b>with the agreement of the two of them,</b> they build it in the middle, i.e., on the property line, and make a border mark on the one side and on the other side. Therefore, if the wall later falls, the assumption is that the space where the wall stood and the stones belong to both of them, to be divided equally. <b>Rava from Parzika said to Rav Ashi: Neither this one nor that one should make</b> a border mark. Rav Ashi <b>said to him: No,</b> this ruling <b>is necessary</b> in a case <b>where one of them went ahead and made</b> a border mark <b>for himself,</b> so that <b>if his neighbor does not make</b> one as well, the first one <b>will say</b> that <b>it is</b> entirely <b>his.</b>

### Part 5
Rava from Parzika asked him: <b>And is the <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>teaching us a remedy</b> to be used <b>against a swindler?</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him: But isn’t the former clause</b> of the mishna’s ruling also <b>a remedy</b> to be used <b>against a swindler?</b> That clause teaches that one who builds a wall should make a border mark to indicate that the wall is his.

### Part 6
Rava from Parzika <b>said to him: Granted,</b> in <b>the former clause</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught the <i>halakha</i></b> that if one wishes to build a partition between his own field and that of his neighbor, he does so at his own expense and on his own land, <b>and due to</b> the need to teach that <b><i>halakha</i> he</b> also <b>taught a remedy</b> to be used against a swindler. <b>But does he teach a <i>halakha</i></b> in <b>the latter clause,</b> so <b>that he</b> also <b>teaches a remedy</b> to be used against a swindler? <b>Ravina said: Here,</b> in the latter clause, <b>we are dealing with</b> a barrier made of <b>palm branches.</b> This is <b>to the exclusion</b> of the opinion <b>of Abaye, who said:</b> One who builds a partition of <b>palm branches has no remedy</b> to prove who erected it, <b>except with</b> a written <b>document. He teaches us that</b> a border <b>mark suffices.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who surrounds another on three sides,</b> that is, he owns parcels of land on three sides of the other person’s field, <b>and he built a partition</b> on <b>the first, the second, and the third</b> sides, the court <b>does not obligate</b> the neighbor who owns the inner field to contribute to the construction of the partition if he does not wish to do so. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: If he arose and built a partition</b> on <b>the fourth</b> side of the field, the court <b>imposes upon</b> the owner of the inner field the responsibility to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, who says</b> that <b>if he arose and built a partition</b> on <b>the fourth</b> side of the field, the court <b>imposes upon</b> the owner of the inner field the responsibility to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions. The Gemara comments: It <b>is no different</b> if it was the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field who <b>arose</b> and built a partition on the fourth side, and it <b>is no different</b> if it was the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field who <b>arose</b> and built a partition on the fourth side. The <i>halakha</i> is the same in both cases.

### Part 9
<b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disagreed with regard to the following point. <b>Rav Huna says</b> that when Rabbi Yosei said the court obligates the owner of the inner field to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions, he pays <b>in accordance with what</b> the other person actually spent when he <b>built the partitions.</b> That is, the owner of the inner field must contribute his share according to the cost of the partition his neighbor built. <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav says:</b> He must pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions <b>in accordance with a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds,</b> and no more. The owner of the surrounded field can claim he had no desire for a more substantial partition.

### Part 10
The Gemara attempts to bring a proof from what <b>we learned</b> in the mishna: With regard to <b>one who surrounds another on three sides,</b> that is, he owns parcels of land on three sides of the other person’s field, <b>and he built a partition</b> on <b>the first, the second, and the third</b> sides, the court <b>does not obligate</b> the neighbor who owns the inner field to contribute to the construction of the partition. By inference, if he also built a partition on the <b>fourth</b> side of the field, the court <b>does obligate</b> the owner of the inner field to contribute to the building of the partition. The Gemara continues with its proof: <b>Say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Rabbi Yosei says: If he arose and built a partition</b> on <b>the fourth</b> side of the field, the court <b>imposes upon</b> the owner of the inner field the responsibility to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions. The first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yosei seem to be stating the same ruling.

### Part 11
<b>Granted, according to Rav Huna, who says</b> that the owner of the inner field pays for <b>all</b> of the partitions <b>in accordance with what</b> the other person actually spent when he <b>built the partitions, this is</b> the difference <b>between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yosei: The first <i>tanna</i> maintains</b> that <b>yes,</b> he pays his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions <b>in accordance with a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds, but not</b> a larger sum in accordance with <b>what</b> the other person actually spent when he <b>built the partitions. And Rabbi Yosei maintains</b> that he pays his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions <b>in accordance with what</b> the other person actually spent when he <b>built the partitions.</b>

### Part 12
<b>But according to Ḥiyya bar Rav, who says</b> he pays his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions <b>in accordance with the value of</b> a partition fashioned from <b>inexpensive reeds, what</b> difference <b>is there between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yosei? If</b> according to the first <i>tanna</i> <b>he does not give him</b> his share for all of the partitions in accordance with <b>a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds, what does he give him?</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say there is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to <b>the wage of a watchman. The first <i>tanna</i> maintains</b> that <b>yes,</b> since his field is safeguarded by the partition which surrounds it, the one who built the partition can demand payment of <b>the wage of a watchman.</b> He cannot, however, demand the cost of building the partition, <b>not</b> even the other’s share for all of the partitions in accordance with <b>a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds. And Rabbi Yosei maintains</b> that he can demand the other’s share for all of the partitions in accordance with <b>a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds.</b>

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say there is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to the partitions built on the <b>first, second, and third</b> sides of the inner field. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> maintains</b> that the owner of the inner field must <b>give to</b> his neighbor money for the partition built on the <b>fourth</b> side, <b>but</b> he is <b>not</b> required to <b>give him</b> money for the partitions built on the <b>first, second, and third</b> sides. <b>And Rabbi Yosei maintains</b> that <b>he</b> must <b>also give him</b> money <b>for</b> the partitions built on <b>the first, the second, and the third</b> sides.

### Part 15
The Gemara suggests another difference between the two opinions: <b>If you wish, say there is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to the issue of whether the partition on the fourth side was built by the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field <b>or</b> by the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field. This is <b>because the first <i>tanna</i> maintains</b> that <b>the reason</b> the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field must contribute his share of the entire expense is <b>that he arose</b> and built a partition on the fourth side of his field. Therefore, the court <b>imposes upon him</b> the responsibility to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions, because his actions demonstrate that he wants the partition between their fields. <b>But</b> if the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field <b>arose</b> and built a partition on the fourth side of the field, the owner of the surrounded field <b>must give him only</b> his share of <b>the value of</b> the partition of the <b>fourth</b> side.

### Part 16
<b>And Rabbi Yosei maintains</b> that it is <b>no different</b> if it was the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field who arose and built a partition on the fourth side, <b>and</b> it is <b>no different</b> if it was the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field who arose and built a partition on the fourth side. <b>If</b> either one <b>arose and built a partition</b> on the fourth side, the court <b>imposes upon</b> the owner of the inner field the obligation to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the partitions.

### Part 17
The Gemara reports <b>another version</b> of this last answer: <b>There is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to the issue of whether the partition on the fourth side was built by the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field <b>or</b> by the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> maintains</b> that even <b>if</b> the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field <b>built a partition</b> on <b>the fourth</b> side, the owner of the surrounded field <b>also gives him</b> his share of the cost of the partitions. <b>And Rabbi Yosei maintains</b> that only <b>if</b> the owner of the <b>surrounded</b> field <b>arose</b> and <b>built a partition</b> on <b>the fourth</b> side <b>does he give</b> the owner of the surrounding field his share of the cost of the partitions. Why is that? <b>Because he reveals that he is pleased</b> with the partitions. <b>But if</b> the owner of the <b>surrounding</b> field <b>built a partition</b> on the fourth side, the owner of the surrounded field <b>does not give him anything,</b> as he can continue to claim that he has no interest in the partitions.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC