
### Part 1
<b>bloodletters</b> would <b>come and sit beneath them</b> and perform their work there, <b>and crows</b> would <b>come, eat the blood, and fly up to the palm trees and damage the dates. Rav Yosef said to</b> the bloodletters: <b>Remove these crowing</b> birds <b>from here,</b> i.e., leave in order to avoid further damage. <b>Abaye said to him: But it is an indirect</b> action, as the bloodletters themselves are not damaging the dates. Rav Yosef <b>said to him</b> that <b>Rav Tovi bar Mattana said</b> as follows: <b>That is to say</b> that it <b>is prohibited</b> to cause even <b>indirect damage.</b>

### Part 2
Abaye said to Rav Yosef: <b>But they have established an acquired privilege</b> to use that particular spot for their work. Rav Yosef replied: <b>Doesn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says: There is no acquired privilege</b> of use <b>in</b> cases of <b>damage,</b> i.e., an established situation may not be allowed to continue in the event that damage results. Abaye inquired further: <b>But wasn’t it stated with regard to that</b> statement of Rav Naḥman that <b>Rav Mari said</b> it is referring specifically <b>to smoke, and Rav Zevid said</b> it is referring <b>to a bathroom?</b> In other words, this principle was stated specifically in the context of damage caused by these substances. Rav Yosef <b>said to him: For me, as I am sensitive, these are like smoke and a bathroom to me,</b> which is why I have the right to demand that the bloodletters leave.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One must distance a dovecote fifty cubits from the city</b> to prevent doves from eating seeds in the town. <b>And a person should not establish a dovecote within his own</b> property <b>unless he has fifty cubits in each direction</b> between the dovecote and the edge of his property. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that one must have surrounding the dovecote the <b>area required for sowing four <i>kor</i></b> of seed on each side, which generally extends <b>as far as a dove flies</b> in a single flight. <b>And if one bought</b> the dovecote with the land, <b>he has the acquired privilege</b> of its use <b>even if</b> it has surrounding it only the <b>area required for sowing a quarter-<i>kav</i> of seed [<i>beit rova</i>]</b> around it, and he need not remove it from there.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: Must one distance a dovecote only <b>fifty cubits</b> from the city <b>and no more?</b> Is that as far as one can expect a dove to fly? <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 79b): One <b>may spread out traps [<i>neshavin</i>] for doves only if</b> this was performed <b>at a distance of</b> at least <b>thirty <i>ris</i>,</b> or four <i>mil</i>, which is eight thousand cubits, <b>from</b> any <b>settled area,</b> to avoid catching birds that belong to another. Apparently, doves fly a distance of thirty <i>ris</i>, whereas the mishna here states fifty cubits.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said:</b> Doves do <b>fly great distances,</b> which is why one must avoid catching others’ birds by keeping traps thirty <i>ris</i> away from settled areas. <b>But</b> as they eat along their way, <b>their stomachs are filled</b> after a distance of <b>fifty cubits,</b> at which point they will do no more damage to seeds. The Gemara asks: <b>And do they fly</b> only <b>thirty <i>ris</i> and no more? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And in a settled area,</b> one <b>may not spread out</b> a trap <b>even</b> if the area under his control extends as far as <b>one hundred <i>mil</i></b> in each direction? <b>Rav Yosef says:</b> That <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a settled area of vineyards,</b> i.e., a contiguous region of vineyards and gardens. In that case the doves pass from place to place even over a great distance.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a settled area of dovecotes,</b> i.e., where many dovecotes are distributed. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to Rava, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>derive</b> that one may not establish a new dovecote there <b>due to</b> the other <b>dovecotes themselves,</b> as he will trap doves belonging to others. The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that this is referring to <b>his own</b> dovecotes. <b>And if you wish, say</b> it is referring to the dovecotes of <b>a gentile,</b> whose property one is not obligated to protect from harm. <b>And if you wish, say</b> it is referring <b>to ownerless</b> dovecotes.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that one must have surrounding the dovecote the <b>area required for sowing four <i>kor</i></b> of seed on each side, which is as far as a dove flies in a single flight. And if one bought the dovecote with the land, he has the acquired privilege of its use. <b>Rav Pappa said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Zevid: That is to say</b> that a court <b>issues a claim</b> on behalf <b>of a buyer, and issues a claim</b> on behalf <b>of an heir.</b> This is referring to the <i>halakha</i> of taking possession. If one has been physically in possession of an item for a period of time, generally three years, this serves as proof that he is in fact the legal owner. This possession must be accompanied by a claim of how one acquired the item; he cannot simply state that no one protested his possessing the item for three years. Rav Pappa is saying that the court will lodge a claim on behalf of a buyer or heir that they acquired the item from someone who was the owner, just as here the court assumes that the previous owner of the dovecote came to an agreement with his neighbors that he may use it.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: Why is it necessary for Rav Pappa to state this <i>halakha</i>? <b>We</b> already <b>learn</b> this with regard to <b>an heir</b> (41a): In the case of land <b>that comes as an inheritance, one is not required to make a claim</b> as to how the land came into his benefactor’s possession when one’s ownership of the land is challenged. The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for him</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a buyer.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>a buyer as well, we learn</b> this in a mishna (60a): If one <b>bought a courtyard in which there are projections and balconies [<i>ugzuztraot</i>]</b> extending into the public domain, this courtyard <b>retains its presumptive status,</b> i.e., the owner has the acquired privilege of their use, and the court does not demand their removal.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: It was <b>necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna to state this <i>halakha</i> in both cases, <b>as, if he had taught us this</b> only <b>there,</b> in that mishna, one might have said that it applies specifically <b>with regard to</b> a protrusion or a balcony that extends into <b>the public domain, as</b> one can <b>say</b> that perhaps <b>it is</b> a case where the seller had <b>drawn back into his own</b> land before adding the projections and balconies, and they in fact do not extend into the public thoroughfare. <b>Alternatively,</b> perhaps <b>the public waived</b> their right <b>to him</b> and allowed him to place them over the common area, as otherwise they would have protested. <b>But here,</b> where he causes damage to private individuals, one might have thought that the buyer does <b>not</b> have a privilege of use, and therefore the mishna teaches us otherwise.

### Part 10
<b>And if he had taught this</b> only in the mishna <b>here,</b> one might <b>say</b> that <b>since</b> the party potentially suffering damage <b>is an individual,</b> the owner of the dovecote <b>appeased</b> his neighbor by paying him to permit him to construct it. <b>Alternatively,</b> the neighbor might have <b>waived</b> his right <b>to him. But</b> in a case where damage is caused to <b>the public,</b> one might argue: <b>Whom did he appease, and who yielded</b> to him? Consequently, one might <b>say</b> that the purchaser does <b>not</b> retain the privilege of use. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> to state the <i>halakha</i> in this case as well.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that if one bought the dovecote with the land, <b>he has the acquired privilege</b> of use. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says: There is no acquired privilege</b> of use <b>for</b> cases of <b>damage?</b> Why should he retain his acquired privilege of use when his doves cause damage? <b>Rav Mari said:</b> Rav Naḥman’s statement is referring specifically <b>to smoke,</b> which causes serious damage, and that is why it overrides an acquired privilege. <b>Rav Zevid said:</b> It is referring <b>to a bathroom,</b> whose odor is particularly strong.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC