
### Part 1
It is the type in which <b>one gives</b> the charity <b>without knowing to whom he gave it,</b> and the other <b>one takes it without knowing from whom he took it.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>One gives it without knowing to whom he gave it,</b> this serves <b>to exclude</b> the practice <b>of Mar Ukva,</b> who would personally give charity to poor people without their knowing he was the donor. The other one <b>takes it without knowing from whom he took it;</b> this serves <b>to exclude</b> the practice <b>of Rabbi Abba,</b> who would render his money ownerless, so that poor people would come and take it without his knowing whom he helped, although they would know from whom the money came. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, how</b> then <b>should one act</b> to conceal his own identity and also remain ignorant of the identities of the recipients? The Gemara answers: The best method is <b>to put</b> the money <b>into the charity purse.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from what is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What should a person do to have male offspring? Rabbi Eliezer says: He should distribute his money liberally among the poor. Rabbi Yehoshua says: He should gladden his wife before</b> engaging in the <b>mitzva</b> of conjugal relations. <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: A person should not donate a <i>peruta</i> to the charity purse unless</b> a great and trusted individual <b>like Rabbi Ḥananya ben Teradyon is appointed</b> as supervisor <b>over it.</b> This seems to indicate that putting money into the charity box is not always preferred. The Gemara answers: <b>When we say</b> that putting money into the charity box is the preferred way to give charity, this is referring to <b>when</b> a man <b>like Rabbi Ḥananya ben Teradyon is appointed</b> as supervisor <b>over it.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara discusses other matters concerning charity. <b>Rabbi Abbahu says: Moses said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, with what shall the horn of Israel be exalted?</b> God <b>said to him: With</b> the passage of <b>“When you raise,”</b> i.e., Israel will be exalted by way of the donations and charity that they will give, as it is stated: “When you raise the heads of the children of Israel…then shall they give” (Exodus 30:12).

### Part 4
<b>And Rabbi Abbahu says: They asked</b> King <b>Solomon, son of David: How far does the power of charity extend?</b> King Solomon <b>said to them: Go out and see what my father David explained: “He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures forever, his horn shall be exalted with honor”</b> (Psalms 112:9). <b>Rabbi Abba said:</b> It is derived <b>from here</b> how far the power of charity extends: <b>“He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the fortress of rocks; his bread shall be given, his water shall be sure”</b> (Isaiah 33:16). <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>“He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the fortress of rocks”? Because “his bread shall be given”</b> to the poor, <b>and “his water shall be sure,”</b> i.e., it shall be given faithfully and he can be trusted in the matter.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Abbahu says: They asked</b> King <b>Solomon: Who is one</b> who is destined <b>for the World-to-Come?</b> King Solomon <b>said to them: All</b> those about whom it is stated: <b>“And before His Elders will be His glory”</b> (Isaiah 24:23), referring to those who are honored in this world due to their wisdom. This is <b>like</b> the incident involving <b>Yosef, son of Rabbi Yehoshua, who became ill</b> and <b>fainted.</b> When he returned to good health, <b>his father said to him: What did you see</b> when you were not conscious? Yosef <b>said to him: I saw an inverted world. Those above,</b> i.e., those who are considered important in this world, were <b>below,</b> insignificant, while <b>those below,</b> i.e., those who are insignificant in this world, were <b>above.</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to him: You have seen a clear world.</b> The world you have seen is the true world, one in which one’s spiritual and moral standing determines his true importance. Rabbi Yehoshua further asked him: <b>And how did you see us,</b> the Torah scholars, there? Yosef <b>said to him: Just as we are important here, we are important there.</b>

### Part 6
Yosef added: <b>And I heard that they were saying</b> in that world: <b>Happy is the one who arrives with his studies in hand. And I</b> also <b>heard that they were saying: Those executed by the government</b> enjoy such exalted status that <b>no one can stand in their section.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who are these</b> martyrs to whom Yosef was referring? <b>If we say</b> that he was referring to <b>Rabbi Akiva and his colleagues,</b> who were killed by the Romans, this cannot be: Is their elevated status <b>due</b> only <b>to</b> the fact that <b>they were martyred by</b> the Roman <b>government and nothing more?</b> These men were exceptional in their piety and sanctity during their lives as well. Therefore <b>it</b> is <b>obvious that even without</b> their martyrdom they would be greater than other people. <b>Rather,</b> it is referring to those like <b>the martyrs of Lod,</b> who died for the sanctification of God’s name but were not Torah scholars.

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said to his students: My sons, what is</b> the meaning of <b>that which the verse states: “Righteousness exalts a nation, but the kindness of the peoples is sin”</b> (Proverbs 14:34)? <b>Rabbi Eliezer answered and said: “Righteousness exalts a nation”; these are</b> the people of <b>Israel, as it is written: “And who is like your people Israel, one nation on the earth?”</b> (I Chronicles 17:21). <b>“But the kindness of the peoples is sin,”</b> meaning that <b>all the</b> acts of <b>charity and kindness that the nations of the world perform is</b> counted as <b>a sin for them, since they perform them only to elevate themselves</b> in prestige, <b>as it is stated: “That they may sacrifice offerings of pleasing aroma to the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king and of his sons”</b> (Ezra 6:10). Even though they donated offerings, they did so only for their own benefit.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And if one acts this way, is it not full-fledged charity? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>one who says:</b> I am contributing <b>this <i>sela</i> to charity so that my sons will live, or</b> if he says: I am performing the mitzva <b>so that I will merit</b> a share in <b>the World-to-Come, this</b> person <b>is a full-fledged righteous person,</b> as far as that mitzva is concerned, even though he has his own welfare in mind? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the statement that he is considered absolutely righteous is <b>with regard to a Jew;</b> while <b>there,</b> the statement that such benefaction is not credited as charity is <b>with regard to a gentile.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua answered</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai’s challenge to interpret the verse <b>and said: “Righteousness exalts a nation”; these are</b> the people of <b>Israel, as it is written: “And who is like your people Israel, one nation</b> on the earth.” <b>“But the kindness of the peoples is sin”</b> means that <b>all the</b> acts of <b>charity and kindness that the nations of the world perform is</b> counted as <b>a sin for them, since they perform them only to perpetuate their dominion, as it is stated</b> by Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar: <b>“Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you, and break off your sins by charity, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; that there may be an extension of your serenity”</b> (Daniel 4:24). Since this is the argument that persuaded Nebuchadnezzar, it would appear that his actual motive was his own benefit.

### Part 10
<b>Rabban Gamliel answered and said: “Righteousness exalts a nation”; these are</b> the people of <b>Israel, as it is written: “And who is like your people Israel,</b> one nation on the earth.” <b>“But the kindness of the peoples is sin”</b> means that <b>all the</b> acts of <b>charity and kindness that the nations of the world perform is</b> counted as <b>a sin for them, since they perform them only in order to act haughtily through them, and whoever acts haughtily falls into Gehenna, as it is stated: “The proud and haughty one, scorner is his name, acts in arrogant wrath”</b> (Proverbs 21:24). <b>And wrath means nothing other than Gehenna, as it is stated: “That day is a day of wrath”</b> (Zephaniah 1:15).

### Part 11
<b>Rabban Gamliel said: We still need</b> to hear what <b>the Moda’i</b> has to say, as <b>Rabbi Eliezer HaModa’i says: “Righteousness exalts a nation”; these are</b> the people of <b>Israel, as it is written: “And who is like your people Israel, one nation on the earth.” “But the kindness of the peoples is sin”</b> means that <b>all the</b> acts of <b>charity and kindness that the nations of the world perform is</b> counted as <b>a sin for them, since they perform them only to taunt us with them, as it is stated</b> that the Babylonian officer Nebuzaradan said: <b>“The Lord has brought it, and done according as He has said; because you have sinned against the Lord and have not obeyed His voice, therefore this matter is come upon you”</b> (Jeremiah 40:3).

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Neḥunya ben HaKana answered and said: “Righteousness exalts a nation and kindness”</b> is referring to <b>Israel; and</b> in addition, <b>“of the peoples is sin.” Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said to his students: The statement of Rabbi Neḥunya ben HaKana appears</b> to be more precise <b>than</b> both <b>my statement and your statements, because he assigns</b> both <b>righteousness and kindness to Israel, and sin to the peoples</b> of the world. The Gemara asks: <b>By inference,</b> it appears <b>that he,</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai, <b>also offered</b> an interpretation of this verse. <b>What is it? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said to them</b> that the verse should be understood as follows: <b>Just as a sin-offering atones for Israel, so charity atones for the nations of the world.</b>

### Part 13
It is related that <b>Ifera Hurmiz, the mother of King Shapur,</b> king of Persia, <b>sent four hundred dinars to Rabbi Ami, but he did not accept them. She</b> then <b>sent them to Rava, and he accepted them for the sake of peace with the kingdom. Rabbi Ami heard</b> what Rava had done <b>and was angry. He said: Does</b> Rava <b>not accept</b> the lesson of the verse: <b>“When the boughs are withered, they shall be broken off; the women shall come and set them on fire”</b> (Isaiah 27:11), meaning that when righteousness has ceased from a particular nation, it is time for its citizens to be punished, and therefore we should not help them perform any meritorious deeds, which would delay their punishment? The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why did <b>Rava</b> accept the money? The Gemara answers: He did so <b>for the sake of peace with the kingdom.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> did <b>Rabbi Ami</b> not <b>also</b> see the importance of accepting the money <b>for the sake of peace with the kingdom?</b> The Gemara answers: Rabbi Ami maintains that Rava <b>should have distributed</b> the money <b>to the gentile poor</b> rather than to the Jewish poor, as it is a disgrace to the Jews to require the kindness of the nations of the world in order to support their poor. The Gemara comments: In fact, <b>Rava also gave</b> the money <b>to the gentile poor</b> and not to the Jewish poor. <b>And Rabbi Ami got angry</b> because

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC