
### Part 1
<b>And if</b> after this calculation <b>there is</b> still <b>a surplus</b> in excess of a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, equal in size to an area required <b>for</b> the sowing of <b>nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed, the entire surplus must be <b>returned.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rava raised an objection to Rav Naḥman:</b> The mishna teaches <b>that if the surplus in the field was an area required for the sowing of nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed, the buyer returns the land to the seller. <b>Isn’t this</b> the <i>halakha</i> even in a case <b>where he sold him</b> a field measuring <b>two <i>kor</i>?</b> This would seem to indicate that even if the surplus does not exceed a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, as a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i> in a field of two <i>kor</i> is fifteen <i>kav</i>, the sole determining factor is whether or not the surplus is equal in size to an area required for the sowing of nine <i>kav</i>. Rav Naḥman rejects this argument: <b>No,</b> the case in the mishna is specifically <b>where he sold him a</b> field measuring one <b><i>kor</i>.</b>

### Part 3
Rava raised a further objection to Rav Naḥman: We learned in the continuation of the mishna that if the surplus <b>in a garden</b> was <b>an area required for the sowing of a half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed, the buyer returns the land to the seller. <b>Isn’t this</b> the <i>halakha</i> even in a case <b>where he sold him</b> a garden measuring <b>two <i>se’a</i>?</b> Once again, this would seem to indicate that the surplus is returned to the seller, provided that it is equal in size to the minimum measure of a garden, even if the surplus does not exceed one-half of a <i>kav</i> per two <i>se’a</i>, which is equivalent to one-quarter of a <i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>. Rav Naḥman rejects this argument as well: <b>No,</b> the case in the mishna is <b>where he sold him a</b> garden measuring a <b><i>se’a</i>,</b> so that the surplus is proportionately twice as large.

### Part 4
Rava raised yet another objection to Rav Naḥman from the next clause in the mishna, which states: <b>Or, according to the statement of Rabbi Akiva,</b> if the surplus in the garden was <b>an area required for sowing a quarter-<i>kav</i> of seed,</b> the buyer returns the land to the seller. <b>What, isn’t this</b> the <i>halakha</i> even in a case <b>where he sold him a</b> garden measuring <b>a <i>se’a</i>?</b> In that case, the surplus does not exceed one-quarter of a <i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, and nevertheless the surplus is returned to the seller, provided that it is equal in size to the minimum measure of a garden. Rav Naḥman also rejects this argument: <b>No,</b> the case in the mishna is <b>where he sold him</b> a garden measuring <b>a half-<i>se’a</i>,</b> so that the surplus is proportionately twice as large.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches that in the case of a field, the buyer can return the land itself if the surplus was an area required for the sowing of nine <i>kav</i> of seed, and in the case of a garden, if the surplus was an area required for the sowing of a half-<i>kav</i> of seed. <b>Rav Ashi raises a dilemma:</b> If one sold <b>a field and it</b> turned out that the plot was larger than had been stipulated, but before the buyer returned the surplus, the plot <b>was turned into a garden, or</b> if it was initially <b>a garden and it was turned into a field</b> (see 11a), <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is the surplus governed by the <i>halakhot</i> applying to a field or by those applying to a garden? The Gemara answers: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved, as no answer has been found.

### Part 6
A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> the field being sold <b>was adjacent to</b> another <b>field</b> belonging to the seller, <b>then even</b> if the surplus was of <b>a minimal</b> amount, the buyer can <b>return the land</b> itself <b>to</b> the seller, and the seller cannot demand payment in money. This is because the seller loses nothing when he receives a small tract of land, as he can cultivate it along with his adjoining field.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Ashi raises</b> a set of <b>dilemmas:</b> With regard to <b>a pit</b> between the surplus in the sold field and the adjoining field belonging to the seller, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: <b>Should</b> the pit <b>be</b> considered <b>an interposition</b> between the two fields? With regard to <b>a water channel</b> between the two fields, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: <b>Should</b> the water channel <b>be</b> considered <b>an interposition?</b> With regard to <b>the public thoroughfare, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: <b>Should</b> the public thoroughfare <b>be</b> considered <b>an interposition?</b> With regard to <b>a row of palm trees, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: <b>Should</b> a row of palm trees <b>be</b> considered <b>an interposition?</b> The Gemara states: All these dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that if the surplus is greater than a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, <b>it is not only the quarter-</b><i>kav</i> <b>that</b> the buyer <b>returns; rather,</b> he returns <b>all of the surplus.</b> Since he is already required to make a refund, the refund must be made in the precise amount. The Gemara raises a question: <b>Isn’t it the opposite</b> [<b><i>kelappei layya</i></b>]? The buyer is required to return the surplus even when the quarters of a <i>kav</i> remain in his possession. <b>Ravin bar Rav Naḥman taught</b> the mishna as follows: <b>Not only must</b> the buyer <b>return the extra</b> land that is beyond the limit of a quarter<i>-kav</i> area per <i>beit se’a</i>, <b>but he must</b> also <b>return to him every one of the</b> extra <b>quarter-</b><i>kav</i> areas of land that he received beyond the stated area of a <i>beit kor</i>. When he is required to return the surplus, he returns not only the surplus, but also all the quarter-<i>kav</i> areas over and above what had originally been stipulated to be included in the sale.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the seller says to the buyer: <b>I am selling you</b> a plot of land of a certain size <b>measured</b> precisely <b>with a rope more or less,</b> thereby attaching to the sale two contradictory stipulations; in this case, the words: <b>More or less, nullify</b> the words: <b>Measured</b> precisely <b>with a rope.</b> Accordingly, if the surplus did not exceed a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, the sale is valid as is. Similarly, if the seller says to the buyer: I am selling you a plot of land of a certain size <b>more or less measured</b> precisely <b>with a rope,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC