
### Part 1
<b>Ultimately,</b> even <b>when</b> the bailee <b>says to</b> the depositor that the items were <b>taken</b> from him <b>under circumstances beyond his control, is he not required to take an oath?</b> How, then, can you assert that he is deemed credible to claim that he returned the items without taking an oath? Rav Ḥisda said to him: <b>Here too, what</b> did I mean when I said that he is <b>deemed credible?</b> It means that <b>he is deemed credible when</b> he takes <b>an oath.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that Rav Amram and Rav Ḥisda disagree <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between these <i>tanna’im</i>, as</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to <b>a purse document,</b> i.e., a document that records an arrangement whereby one gives another money as an investment in a joint venture on condition that the profits will be divided equally between the two parties. If the person who received the money died, and this document <b>was presented</b> by the lender <b>against the orphans, the judges of the exile say</b> that the lender <b>takes an oath</b> that the money had never been returned to him, <b>and</b> he <b>collects the entire</b> sum. <b>And the judges of Eretz Yisrael say</b> that he <b>takes an oath and collects</b> only <b>half</b> of the sum.

### Part 3
<b>And</b> it is understood <b>that everyone agrees with</b> the opinion of the Sages <b>of Neharde’a, as</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a say:</b> With regard to <b>this joint venture,</b> whereby one person gives money to another on condition that it will be used for business purposes and that the profits will be divided equally between the two parties, <b>half</b> of the invested money is considered <b>a loan,</b> for which the borrower is exclusively liable, <b>and half</b> is considered <b>a deposit,</b> so that if it is lost under circumstances beyond his control, the borrower is exempt from the liability to return it.

### Part 4
According to this assumption, everyone agrees that the claimant can recover from the orphans by means of an oath the half of the money that is considered a loan, just as he would have been able to demand that money from their father. Concerning the half that is considered a deposit, <b>what, is it not with regard to this</b> point that <b>they disagree, as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the judges of the exile, <b>holds</b> like Rav Amram <b>that</b> the depositor <b>can say to</b> the bailee: <b>What is your document doing in my possession?</b> Therefore, neither the father nor his children are deemed credible to claim that they had returned the half that is considered a deposit, and the investor can collect that half as well. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the judges of Eretz Yisrael, <b>holds</b> like Rav Ḥisda, that one <b>cannot assert</b> this claim, and therefore the investor can collect only the half that is considered a loan. But as for the half that is considered a deposit, the father would have been deemed credible in his claim that he had already returned it.

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this opinion: <b>No, everyone,</b> i.e., both the judges of the exile and the judges of Eretz Yisrael, <b>agrees with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ḥisda,</b> that the father can claim that he returned the money. <b>And here, they disagree about</b> the following issue, <b>as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the judges of the exile, <b>holds</b> that <b>if it is so</b> that he had in fact <b>repaid</b> the money, <b>he would have told</b> his children that he repaid it. Since he did not tell them, it may be assumed that he never repaid the money. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the judges of Eretz Yisrael, <b>holds</b> that you can <b>say</b> that <b>it was the Angel of Death that prevented him</b> from doing so, meaning he died before he had the opportunity to give his children a detailed report concerning his financial affairs.

### Part 6
Apropos this discussion, it is related that <b>Rav Huna bar Avin sent</b> the following ruling: If one <b>deposits</b> an item <b>with another</b> and receives <b>a document</b> attesting to the deposit, <b>and</b> the bailee later <b>says to him: I returned</b> the item <b>to you,</b> the bailee is <b>deemed credible</b> even if the document is still in the hands of the depositor. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>a purse document</b> attesting to a joint venture <b>that was presented</b> by the lender to support his claim <b>against the</b> borrower’s <b>orphans,</b> the lender <b>takes an oath</b> that the money had never been returned to him <b>and collects the entire</b> sum from the orphans.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: Don’t these <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i> contradict each other? If the father is deemed credible when he claims that he repaid a loan, the court should present this claim on behalf of his orphans. The Gemara answers: <b>It is different there, as if it is so</b> that the father had, in fact, <b>repaid</b> the money, <b>he would have told</b> his children that he repaid it. Since he did not tell them anything about it, it may be assumed that he never repaid the money.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said:</b> With regard to the case of a purse document that was presented to support a claim against orphans, <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is that the claimant <b>takes an oath</b> that the money had never been returned to him <b>and</b> then <b>collects half</b> of the sum recorded in the document, in accordance with the judges of Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara relates that two generations later, <b>Mar Zutra said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the judges of the exile. Ravina said to Mar Zutra: Didn’t Rava say</b> that the claimant <b>takes an oath and collects half</b> of the sum? Mar Zutra <b>said to him:</b> With regard to the opinion <b>of the judges of the exile, we</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC