
### Part 1
<b>collect for her one-tenth of</b> her father’s <b>estate,</b> in keeping with the rabbinic ordinance that states that if a man dies, his sons are obligated to give his daughter a tenth of his landed properties as a dowry, and collect it <b>even from</b> his immovable <b>lower millstones,</b> as they too are considered landed property. <b>Rav Ashi said: When we were</b> students <b>in Rav Kahana’s house we would collect</b> for this purpose <b>even from the rent of houses;</b> since this money is earned from real estate, it too has the status of landed property and is included in the dowry calculations.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells a courtyard</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold</b> with it <b>the houses, pits, ditches, and caves</b> found in the courtyard, <b>but</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the movable property. When</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold</b> along with the courtyard, even the movable property. <b>Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he executes the sale without specification, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he adds the phrase that includes the movable property, <b>he has not sold the bathhouse, nor</b> has he sold <b>the olive press that is in</b> the courtyard, as each is an entity with a discrete purpose and not an integral part of the courtyard. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One <b>who sells a courtyard</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold only the airspace,</b> i.e., the open space, <b>of the courtyard,</b> but nothing found in the courtyard, not even the houses.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, 3:1): One <b>who sells a courtyard has sold</b> with it <b>the outer houses</b> that can be accessed directly from the courtyard, <b>and the inner houses</b> that can be entered only via the outer houses, <b>and the area of the sand fields [<i>uveit haḥolsaot</i>].</b> As for the <b>stores,</b> those <b>that open into</b> the courtyard <b>are sold</b> along <b>with it;</b> those that <b>do not open into it,</b> but rather open into the public domain, even if they are located in the courtyard, <b>are not sold</b> along <b>with it;</b> and those that <b>open</b> both <b>into this</b> courtyard <b>and into that</b> other public domain are grouped together with those that open into this courtyard alone, and both <b>these and those are sold with it. Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One <b>who sells a courtyard</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold only the open space of the courtyard.</b>

### Part 4
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: Stores that <b>open</b> both <b>into this</b> courtyard <b>and into that</b> public domain <b>are sold</b> along <b>with</b> the courtyard. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya teach</b> a <i>baraita</i> that states that such stores <b>are not sold with</b> the courtyard? The Gemara answers that this is <b>not difficult: This</b> <i>baraita</i>, that teaches that the stores are sold along with the courtyard, is referring to a case <b>where the majority of their use is from within,</b> i.e., the stores are mainly accessed from within the courtyard, while <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> of Rabbi Ḥiyya, that teaches that the stores are not sold along with the courtyard, is referring to a case <b>where the majority of their use is from without,</b> i.e., the stores are accessed mainly from the public domain.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches, and it was similarly taught in the <i>baraita</i>, that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One <b>who sells a courtyard has sold only the airspace of the courtyard,</b> and he has sold nothing found in the courtyard, not even the houses. To clarify the disagreement between the unattributed opinion in the mishna and Rabbi Eliezer, <b>Rabba said: If</b> the seller <b>said to</b> the buyer that he is selling him <b><i>dirata</i>,</b> i.e., the place of residence, <b>everyone agrees that he means</b> to sell <b>the houses</b> and that they are also included in the sale. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>where he said to him</b> that he is selling him <b><i>darta</i>,</b> i.e., the courtyard. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds</b> that <b>he means</b> to sell only <b>the garden,</b> i.e., the space between the houses, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the unattributed first opinion in the mishna, <b>holds</b> that <b>he means</b> to sell also <b>the houses.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Some state</b> a different version of this discussion, according to which <b>Rabba says: If</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer that he is selling him <b><i>darta</i>, everyone agrees that he means</b> to sell also <b>the houses</b> and that they are included in the sale. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>where he said to him</b> that he is selling him the <b><i>ḥatzer</i>,</b> the Hebrew term for courtyard. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds</b> that when he says <b><i>ḥatzer</i>, he means</b> to sell him only <b>the airspace,</b> i.e., the open space of the courtyard itself, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the unattributed first opinion in the mishna, <b>holds</b> that houses are also included in the sale, just <b>as the courtyard of the Tabernacle</b> included the Tabernacle itself.

### Part 7
§ <b>And Rabba says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> If one <b>sold</b> another <b>a sand field</b> for glass making, <b>and a pond</b> for fishing or some other purpose, if the buyer <b>took possession of the sand field</b> in order to finalize the transaction, <b>he has not acquired the pond</b> and must therefore perform a separate act of acquisition for it. Conversely, if <b>he took possession of the pond, he has not acquired the sand field.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But doesn’t Shmuel say:</b> If one <b>sold</b> another <b>ten fields in ten</b> different <b>regions,</b> all in a single bill of sale, <b>once he takes possession of one of them, he has acquired them all;</b> and the two cases seem to be analogous.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects the parallel: <b>There,</b> in the case of the ten fields, <b>the land is</b> all located in <b>one</b> geographic <b>block, and it all has one use,</b> i.e., to be farmed. The buyer, therefore, acquires all of the fields when he takes possession of one of them, even if they are not adjacent. <b>But here,</b> in the case of the sand field and the pond, <b>this,</b> the sand field, has <b>a distinct use,</b> i.e., to supply sand for glass making, <b>and that,</b> the pond, has <b>a distinct use,</b> i.e., for fishing. Therefore, taking possession of one of them does not effect a transfer of the other.

### Part 9
<b>And some state</b> a different version of the previous discussion.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC