
### Part 1
<b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> did Reish Lakish say this? In any case the upper story is his, as when he sold the house, it was only the lower story that he sold to the buyer. <b>Rav Zevid says:</b> He said this to teach the <i>halakha</i> <b>that if</b> the seller <b>wishes to extend</b> from the upper story <b>projections</b> over the courtyard, which was included in the sale, <b>he may extend</b> them. <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> He said this to teach the <i>halakha</i> <b>that if</b> this upper story collapses and the seller <b>wishes to build an upper story on top of it</b> to replace it, <b>he may build</b> it.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> according <b>to Rav Zevid, this</b> explanation is consistent with <b>that which</b> Reish Lakish <b>teaches,</b> which begins with: <b>That is to say.</b> As according to Rav Zevid, Reish Lakish infers from the ruling of the <i>baraita</i> about tithes that even though the seller of the house did not explicitly withhold anything for himself, the court interprets his use of his superfluous stipulation as an indication that he wished to withhold for himself the space over the courtyard for the projections. <b>But</b> according <b>to Rav Pappa, what</b> did Reish Lakish mean when he said his statement that begins with the phrase: <b>That is to say?</b> The seller’s right to rebuild the upper story after it collapses is not derived from the superfluous stipulation that he attached to the transaction, and it is not inferred from the <i>baraita</i>. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, Rav Pappa’s interpretation is <b>difficult,</b> as it does not account for the wording of Reish Lakish’s statement.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara discusses what is included in the wordings of various contracts. <b>Rav Dimi from Neharde’a said:</b> Concerning <b>this one who sells a house to another</b> and wants the sale to include the entire property, <b>even if he writes for</b> the buyer in the bill of sale: I am selling you <b>the depth and the height</b> of the house, he <b>must</b> also <b>write for him: Acquire for yourself</b> the property <b>from the depth of the earth up to the height of the sky. What is the reason</b> for this addition? The reason is <b>that</b> the buyer <b>does not acquire the depth and the height</b> of the property <b>without</b> explicit <b>specification,</b> and therefore, unless the matter has been explicitly stipulated, the buyer may not dig under the house or build above it. The words: <b>The depth and the height, effect the acquisition of the depth and the height</b> of the house for the buyer, allowing him to dig below or build above the house. <b>And</b> the additional phrase: <b>From the depth of the earth up to the height of the sky, effects the acquisition of the pit and the cistern and the tunnels</b> associated with the house.

### Part 4
The Gemara proposes: <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna (64a) <b>supports</b> Rav Dimi’s opinion: One who sells a house has sold <b>neither the pit nor the cistern, even if he writes for</b> the buyer in the bill of sale that he is selling <b>him the depth and the height</b> of the house. <b>As if it enters your mind</b> to say that the buyer <b>acquires the depth and the height</b> of the house even <b>without</b> the <b>specification</b> that the depth and the height of the house are included in the sale, <b>let</b> the phrase <b>the depth and the height effect the acquisition of the pit and the cistern and the tunnels,</b> as he attached an additional stipulation to the transaction. The Gemara rejects this opinion: The mishna is referring to a case <b>where</b> the seller <b>did not write</b> these words <b>for him.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> this line of reasoning is difficult, as the mishna explicitly <b>teaches</b> that the pit and the cistern are not sold <b>even if</b> the seller <b>writes for</b> the buyer that he is selling <b>him</b> the depth and the height of the house. The Gemara answers that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying: Even though</b> the seller <b>did not write</b> these words <b>for him</b> in the bill of sale, <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>acquiring the depth and the height</b> of the house, <b>it is considered as if he wrote</b> them, as it is assumed that they were omitted by accident. By contrast, <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>acquiring the pit and the cistern and the tunnels, if</b> the seller explicitly <b>wrote for him</b> the words <b>the depth and the height,</b> the buyer <b>acquires</b> them, <b>but if he did not write</b> that phrase in the bill of sale, the buyer <b>does not acquire</b> them. No proof can be derived from this mishna.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara now considers a different mishna. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in the mishna (61a): One who sells his house without explicitly stating what is included in the sale has <b>not</b> sold <b>the roof</b> along with the house <b>when it has a parapet ten handbreadths high,</b> as such a roof is considered a separate entity and is not included in the sale of the house.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC