
### Part 1
the buyer can <b>say to</b> the seller: <b>If you had not exploited me, you would not be able to renege on</b> the sale, and I would receive the profit. <b>Now that you have exploited me, can you renege on</b> the sale and benefit? <b>And</b> similarly, <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna also <b>taught:</b> If the seller sold him wheat while claiming that the wheat was <b>good, and it is found</b> to be <b>bad, the buyer can renege on</b> the sale. This implies that the buyer can renege <b>but not the seller,</b> even in a situation where the seller would want to renege on the sale, e.g., if the item became more expensive.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> similarly, <b>Rav Ḥisda says:</b> If he <b>sold him</b> an item that was <b>worth six</b> dinars <b>for five</b> dinars, <b>and its price was reduced and</b> its value now <b>stood at three</b> dinars, <b>who was exploited</b> in this case? <b>The seller;</b> therefore, <b>the seller, but not the buyer, can renege on</b> the sale. The reason is <b>that</b> the seller <b>can say to him: If you had not exploited me, you would not be able to renege on</b> the sale. <b>Now</b> that you have exploited me, <b>can you renege on</b> the sale? <b>And</b> similarly, <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna also <b>taught:</b> If the seller sold him <b>bad</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>good, the seller can renege on</b> the sale, <b>but not the buyer.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>teaching us? It is</b> all already taught in <b>the mishna.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> were derived <b>from the mishna</b> alone, <b>I would say</b> that <b>perhaps</b> in the cases brought <b>by Rav Ḥisda, both</b> the buyer and the seller <b>are able to renege on</b> the sale. The reason is that this is a case of exploitation, as the item was sold for more than its value, and therefore as long the buyer can renege on the sale, the sale is not complete. Consequently, as the seller lost out as well, he can also renege on the sale. <b>And</b> as for <b>the mishna,</b> it <b>comes to teach us that</b> if the seller said that he is selling good wheat and it is found to be bad, <b>the buyer can renege on</b> the sale, as this is considered a case of exploitation.

### Part 4
It is necessary to teach this, <b>as</b> it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that this is not a case of exploitation <b>because it is written: “It is bad, it is bad, says the buyer;</b> but when he is gone his way, then he boasts” (Proverbs 20:14). In other words, it is the usual manner of sellers to praise their merchandise, while buyers disparage it. Therefore, the mishna teaches that the buyer can renege on the sale if the item was found to be bad, and the seller can change his mind if it was found to be good.

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches that if the seller said that he was selling <b>reddish-brown [<i>sheḥamtit</i>]</b> wheat <b>and it is found</b> to be <b>white,</b> both the seller and the buyer can renege on the sale. The Gemara assumes that <i>sheḥamtit</i> means the color of the sun [<i>ḥama</i>]. Therefore, <b>Rav Pappa said: From</b> the fact <b>that</b> the mishna <b>teaches: White,</b> in contrast to <i>sheḥamtit</i>, and there are two types of wheat, one white and the other red, <b>conclude from</b> the mishna that <b>this sun is red,</b> not white. <b>Know</b> that this is the case, <b>as it reddens in</b> the <b>morning and evening. And</b> the reason <b>that we do not see</b> the red color <b>all day</b> is because <b>our eyesight is not strong</b> and we cannot discern the redness of the sun.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this claim: With regard to a verse that speaks of leprosy: <b>“And, behold, if its appearance is deeper than the skin”</b> (Leviticus 13:30), the Sages explain: This means that it is <b>like the appearance of the sun,</b> which is <b>deeper than the shadow. But there,</b> leprosy <b>is white</b> and yet it is likened to the sun. The Gemara answers: There, it means that it <b>has an appearance like the sun</b> in certain respects, <b>but</b> it is <b>not like the appearance of the sun</b> in all respects. It is <b>like the appearance of the sun</b> in <b>that</b> it is <b>deeper than the shadow, and</b> it is <b>not</b> entirely <b>like the appearance of the sun, as there</b> the leprous spot is <b>white, and here</b> the sun is <b>red.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to that which entered our mind initially,</b> that the sun is white, doesn’t <b>it redden in</b> the <b>morning and evening?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>In the morning</b> it becomes red <b>as it passes over the site of</b> the <b>roses of the Garden of Eden,</b> whose reflections give the light a red hue. <b>In the evening</b> the sun turns red <b>because</b> it <b>passes over the entrance of Gehenna,</b> whose fires redden the light. <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say the opposite</b> in explaining why the sun is red in the morning and the evening, i.e., in the morning it passes over the entrance of Gehenna, while in the evening it passes over the site of the roses of the Garden of Eden.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: If the seller sold <b>wine and it is found</b> to be <b>vinegar, both</b> the seller and the buyer <b>can renege on</b> the sale. The Gemara suggests: <b>Shall we say</b> that <b>the mishna is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC