
### Part 1
<b>But according to the one who says</b> that <i>santar</i> means the land <b>registrar,</b> is it reasonable that <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>said</b> that the <b>gardens</b> within the city are included in the sale of the city, <b>and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel responded to him</b> that the land <b>registrar</b> is included? How are the two connected? The Gemara answers: <b>Do you maintain</b> that <b>what</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i></b> is <b>gardens?</b> This is <b>not</b> the case. Rather, <b>what</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i>?</b> This is referring to <b>the fields</b> that surround the city, <b>as it is written:</b> “Who gives rain upon the earth <b>and sends [<i>sholeaḥ</i>] waters upon the fields”</b> (Job 5:10). According to the first <i>tanna</i>, it is specifically the fields that are sold with the city, <b>but</b> the land <b>registrar is not sold. And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel comes to say</b> that <b>even</b> the land <b>registrar is also sold.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The <i>santar</i> is not sold</b> with the city, but <b>the city scribe [<i>ankolemus</i>] is sold</b> with it. <b>What, is it not</b> clear <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the city scribe is a man</b> that <b>the <i>santar</i> is also a man?</b> The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Are the cases comparable? This</b> case is <b>as it is, and that</b> case is <b>as it is,</b> and <i>santar</i> means fields, and not the land registrar.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>How can you say</b> that according to Rabbi Yehuda the fields surrounding the city are not sold along with it? <b>But isn’t it taught in the latter clause</b> of this <i>baraita</i>: <b>But</b> when one sells a city he has <b>not</b> sold <b>its remnants, and not its daughters,</b> i.e., the nearby rural villages, <b>and not the woods that are set aside</b> and designated <b>for</b> the city, <b>and not the enclosures [<i>beivarin</i>] for animals, for birds, and for fish. And we said</b> in explanation: <b>What</b> is meant by <b>its remnants? <i>Bizlei</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>bizlei</i>? Rabbi Abba said: The strips of the fields</b> that are separated from the main fields by a stretch that cannot be cultivated. From here, it may be inferred that <b>it is the strips of the fields that are not sold</b> with the city, <b>but the fields themselves are sold</b> with it.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Reverse</b> the statement found in the <i>baraita</i> so that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>the <i>santar</i>,</b> now understood to mean fields, <b>is sold</b> with the city, but the <b>city scribe is not sold</b> with it.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>How can you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel,</b> to the point that you adduce proof from the words of Rabbi Yehuda with regard to the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel? <b>But</b> doesn’t <b>Rabbi Yehuda hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis? As it is taught in the latter clause</b> of that same <i>baraita</i>: <b>But</b> when one sells a city he does <b>not</b> sell <b>its remnants, and</b> he does <b>not</b> sell <b>its daughters,</b> i.e., the nearby rural villages. <b>Whereas</b> with regard to <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, doesn’t he say</b> that one <b>who sold a city sold its daughters</b> along with it, i.e., the nearby rural villages, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>who sells a city has not sold its daughters; Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> disagrees and <b>says:</b> One <b>who sells a city has sold its daughters.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: This does not prove that Rabbi Yehuda disagrees with Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as it may be suggested that <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>with regard to one</b> issue, that the fields that surround the city are included in the sale, <b>and disagrees with him with regard to</b> another issue, as according to Rabbi Yehuda the nearby villages are not sold along with the city.

### Part 7
§ The <i>baraita</i> teaches: When one sells a city he has <b>not</b> sold, among other things, <b>the enclosures for animals, for birds, and for fish. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> the city <b>has daughters,</b> i.e., nearby villages, they <b>are not sold</b> along <b>with it. If it has one part on the sea and one part on dry land,</b> or if it has <b>enclosures for animals, for birds, or for fish, these are</b> all <b>sold</b> along <b>with</b> the city.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers that this is <b>not difficult,</b> as a distinction can be made between different cases: <b>Here,</b> the one <i>baraita</i> addresses animal enclosures <b>whose openings face inward,</b> i.e., toward the city, and they are therefore considered a part of the city, whereas <b>there,</b> the other <i>baraita</i> addresses animal enclosures <b>whose openings face outward,</b> i.e., away from the city, and therefore they are not included in its sale. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach: And</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the woods that are set aside for</b> the city, indicating that they face the city, and nevertheless they are not sold along with the city? The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be emended so that it reads instead: And he has not sold the woods <b>that are set apart</b> from the city, i.e., that are at a distance and do not face the city.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells a field</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold the stones</b> in the field <b>that are for its use, and the reeds in the vineyard that are for its use, and the produce that is</b> still <b>attached to the ground, and the cluster of reeds that</b> occupy <b>less than the area required for sowing a quarter-kav of seed [<i>beit rova</i>], and the watch station that is not plastered with clay, and</b> the young <b>carob tree that has not</b> yet <b>been grafted, and the untrimmed sycamore</b> that is still young.

### Part 10
<b>But he has not sold</b> along with the field <b>the stones that are not</b> designated <b>for use</b> in the field, <b>and not the reeds in the vineyard that are not</b> designated <b>for its use, and not the produce that is</b> already <b>detached from the ground. When</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold</b> along with the field. <b>Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he executes the sale without specification, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he adds the phrase that he is selling everything that is in the field, <b>he has not sold the cluster of reeds that</b> occupy <b>a <i>beit rova</i></b> or more, as they are considered a separate field, <b>and</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the watch station that is plastered with clay, and not the carob tree that has been grafted, and not the sycamore trunk.</b> All of these entities are significant in their own right and have a status independent from that of the fields, and they are therefore not included in the sale of the field.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC