
### Part 1
<b>but you do not pass an inheritance from the father even in a case</b> where there is <b>a daughter,</b> so that the father precedes the daughter in the order of inheritance? The Gemara answers: <b>If so, the Merciful One would not write: “Then you shall pass</b> the inheritance to his daughter” (Numbers 27:8). This indicates that the logical order of inheritance is being overridden, as the fact that the daughter precedes the brothers of the deceased is due to her being a closer relative of his. It is obvious that the Torah intends that she precede even the father.

### Part 2
Having quoted two derivations for the <i>halakha</i> that the father precedes the brothers, the Gemara proceeds to discuss them and asks: <b>And according to the one who derives it from</b> the term: <b>“And you shall pass,” what does he do with this</b> term: <b>“His kinsman,”</b> which was said to refer to the father? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires it for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“His kinsman.” This</b> is referring to <b>his wife,</b> and the Torah <b>teaches that a husband inherits</b> from <b>his wife.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who derives it from</b> the term: <b>“His kinsman,” what does he do with this</b> term: <b>“And you shall pass”? He requires it for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: In</b> the context of <b>all of</b> the relatives listed in the passage detailing the laws of inheritance, it <b>is stated concerning them</b> with the terminology of <b>giving, and</b> only <b>here,</b> in the context of daughters, it <b>is stated concerning them</b> with the terminology of <b>passing.</b> This teaches us <b>that you have no one who passes an inheritance</b> of land in Eretz Yisrael <b>from one tribe to another except for a daughter, since her son and husband inherit</b> from <b>her.</b>

### Part 4
§ The Gemara returns to discuss the interpretation of the term: “His kinsman” (Numbers 27:11). <b>And from where</b> does one know to derive <b>that</b> with regard to the term: <b>“His kinsman [<i>she’ero</i>],” this</b> is referring to <b>the father, as it is written</b> in the context of forbidden sexual relations: <b>“She is your father’s kinswoman [<i>she’er</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 18:12)? Perhaps one should <b>say</b> instead: <b>“His kinswoman,” this</b> is referring to <b>the mother, as it is</b> also <b>written: “For she is your mother’s kinswoman [<i>she’er</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 18:13).

### Part 5
<b>Rava said</b> in response that <b>the verse states:</b> “Then you shall give his inheritance to his kinsman who is next to him <b>of his family, and he shall inherit it”</b> (Numbers 27:11), emphasizing that “kinsman” is referring specifically to someone who is of his family, and it is <b>the father’s family</b> that <b>is called</b> one’s <b>family,</b> while one’s <b>mother’s family is not called</b> one’s <b>family.</b> Proof for this is found in another verse, <b>as it is written: “By their families, by their fathers’ houses”</b> (Numbers 1:2).

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>And</b> is one’s <b>mother’s family</b> indeed <b>not called</b> one’s <b>family? But it is written</b> in the episode of Micah forming an idol to be worshipped: <b>“And there was a young man of Bethlehem in Judah of the family of Judah who was a Levite, and he sojourned there”</b> (Judges 17:7). The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>This matter itself</b> is <b>difficult. You said: “Who was a Levite,”</b> as <b>apparently he came from</b> the tribe of <b>Levi,</b> but the verse says: <b>“Of the family of Judah,”</b> so <b>apparently he came from</b> the tribe of <b>Judah. Rather, is it not that his father</b> was <b>from</b> the tribe of <b>Levi and his mother</b> was <b>from</b> the tribe of <b>Judah, and</b> yet the verse <b>says</b> that he was: <b>“Of the family of Judah”?</b> This appears to prove that one’s mother’s family is also called his family.

### Part 7
<b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan said</b> in response: <b>No,</b> the verse speaks of <b>a man whose name</b> was <b>Levi,</b> but his father was of the tribe of Judah. The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> how <b>is that which Micah said</b> when that man agreed to serve as his priest: <b>“Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing that I have a Levite as my priest”</b> (Judges 17:13), understood? It is understood only if he was an actual Levite, not if he was from the tribe of Judah and named Levi. Rava bar Rav Ḥanan responded: <b>Yes,</b> it is understood. Micah understood the fact <b>that a man whose name</b> is <b>Levi happened upon him</b> as an auspicious sign.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks further: <b>But</b> is it <b>so</b> that <b>his name</b> was indeed <b>Levi; but wasn’t Jonathan his name, as it is stated: “And Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of the Danites”</b> (Judges 18:30)? Rava bar Rav Ḥanan <b>said to him: And according to your reasoning,</b> that his name was not Levi but he was from the tribe of Levi, there is also a difficulty from that same verse: <b>But</b> is it <b>so</b> that <b>he</b> was <b>the son of Manasseh; but wasn’t he the son of Moses, as it is written: “The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer”</b> (I Chronicles 23:15)?

### Part 9
Rava bar Rav Ḥanan explains the verse: <b>Rather,</b> although he was the son of Moses, <b>because he acted</b> as <b>Manasseh</b> the king of Judah, who was notorious for idol worship, <b>acted, the verse linked him to Manasseh</b> by calling him “the son of Manasseh.” <b>Here too,</b> in the verse from which you seek to prove that one’s mother’s family is called one’s family, <b>since he acted</b> as <b>Manasseh, who came from</b> the tribe of <b>Judah, acted, the verse linked him to Judah</b> by stating that he was “of the family of Judah,” but he was, in fact, a Levite.

### Part 10
In connection with this, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: From here</b> it is learned <b>that corruption is linked to one who is corrupt,</b> as this man was linked to Manasseh and Judah despite having no familial connection to them. <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina says:</b> That concept can be seen <b>from here,</b> in the matter of Adonijah, the son of David: <b>“And he was also a very handsome man; and she gave birth to him after Absalom,”</b> (I Kings 1:6) <b>but Adonijah wasn’t the son of Haggith and Absalom was the son of Maachah,</b> so why does the verse state: “And she gave birth to him after Absalom,” as if they were sons of the same mother? <b>Rather, since Adonijah acted</b> in a manner fit for <b>Absalom, who</b> also <b>rebelled against the monarchy, the verse linked him to Absalom,</b> referring to him as his full brother. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to Jonathan, <b>since he acted</b> as <b>Manasseh acted, the verse linked him to Manasseh.</b>

### Part 11
§ In connection with the story of Jonathan, son of Manasseh, the Gemara cites a related statement. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: A person should always cleave to good</b> people, meaning one should marry a woman from a good family, as this is beneficial for the offspring of that marriage. <b>As</b> in the case of <b>Moses, who married a daughter of Yitro,</b> who was a priest of idolatry, <b>Jonathan,</b> who was also a priest of idolatry, <b>descended from him,</b> while in the case of <b>Aaron, who married the daughter of Amminadab,</b> who was of distinguished lineage in the tribe of Judah, <b>Pinehas descended from him.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And did Pinehas not</b> also <b>come from Yitro? But it is written: “And Elazar, Aaron’s son, took one of the daughters of Putiel as a wife;</b> and she bore him Pinehas” (Exodus 6:25). <b>What, is it not</b> stating <b>that</b> Pinehas <b>came from</b> the family of <b>Yitro, who</b> was also called Putiel because he <b>fattened [<i>pittem</i>] calves for idol worship?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is stating <b>that he came from Joseph, who battled [<i>shepitpet</i>] with his desire</b> by resisting the advances of Potiphar’s wife.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t</b> the <b>tribes denigrated him</b> after he killed Zimri (see Numbers, chapter 25), <b>and would say</b> of him: <b>Have you seen this son of Puti, the son</b> of he <b>whose mother’s father fattened calves for idol worship? Should</b> such a man <b>kill a prince of a tribe of Israel?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC