
### Part 1
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof. The verse states: “According to the lot shall their inheritance be divided <b>between the more and the fewer”</b> (Numbers 26:56). Evidently, whether the tribe had many or few people, the tribe as a whole received a portion equal to that of every other tribe, and each individual within the tribe received a different amount of land than those in other tribes.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> another proof can be seen from that which <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Eretz Yisrael is destined to be divided among thirteen tribes</b> during the messianic era, unlike the division in the time of Joshua. <b>As, initially</b> the land was <b>divided only among twelve tribes,</b> as the Torah does not allot a portion to the tribe of Levi. The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the land was <b>divided only with money,</b> such that each tribe that received a portion more valuable than average compensated another tribe that had received a portion less valuable than average, <b>as it is stated: “Between the more and the fewer.” Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> The area of land whose yield is <b>a <i>se’a</i></b> of grain <b>in Judea</b> is so valuable that it is <b>equal</b> in value to the area necessary to produce <b>five <i>se’a</i></b> of grain <b>in the Galilee.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the land was <b>divided only by a lottery, as it is stated: “Only by lot</b> shall the land be divided” (Numbers 26:55). <b>And</b> the land was <b>divided only with</b> the <b><i>Urim VeTummim</i>, as it is stated: “By the pronouncement of the lot”</b> (Numbers 26:56).

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? One indicates that the land was divided by lottery and the other indicates that the land was divided with the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>. The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>Elazar</b> the High Priest was <b>dressed</b> with the <b><i>Urim VeTummim</i>, and Joshua and all the Jewish people</b> were <b>standing before him, and</b> a lottery <b>receptacle</b> containing the names <b>of</b> the <b>tribes and</b> another lottery <b>receptacle</b> containing the names <b>of</b> the <b>boundaries</b> of the twelve different regions of Eretz Yisrael were <b>placed before him.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> Elazar <b>would ascertain</b> the assignments of land <b>with the Divine Spirit and say,</b> in accordance with the notification of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>: The name of the tribe <b>Zebulun</b> now <b>emerges</b> from the receptacle in the lottery, and the region whose <b>boundary</b> is <b>Akko emerges with it</b> from the other receptacle. After stating this, he would <b>mix</b> the lots <b>in the receptacle of the tribes and</b> the lot of <b>Zebulun</b> would <b>emerge in his hand.</b> He would then <b>mix</b> the lots <b>in the receptacle of the boundaries, and</b> the <b>boundary</b> of <b>Akko</b> would <b>emerge in his hand.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> Elazar <b>would repeat</b> the process <b>and ascertain</b> the assignments <b>with the Divine Spirit and say:</b> The name of the tribe <b>Naftali</b> now <b>emerges, and</b> the region whose <b>boundary</b> is <b>Ginnosar emerges with it</b> from the other receptacle. After stating this, he would <b>mix</b> the lots <b>in the receptacle of the tribes and</b> the lot of <b>Naftali</b> would <b>emerge in his hand.</b> He would then <b>mix</b> the lots <b>in the receptacle of the boundaries, and</b> the <b>boundary</b> of <b>Ginnosar</b> would <b>emerge in his hand. And so</b> he would proceed for <b>each and every tribe.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And unlike the division in this world,</b> i.e., in the time of Joshua, will be the <b>division</b> of portions <b>in the World-to-Come,</b> i.e., in the messianic era. In <b>this world,</b> if <b>a person has a field of grain, he does not have a field</b> for <b>an orchard;</b> if he has <b>a field</b> for <b>an orchard, he does not have a field of grain.</b> This is so because each climate and variety of soil is suitable for a different type of produce. But <b>in the World-to-Come, you do not have any person who does not have</b> a portion in Eretz Yisrael <b>in the mountain, and in the lowland, and in the valley, as it is stated: “The gate of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of Levi, one”</b> (Ezekiel 48:31), which is to say that everyone’s portion will be the same. And <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, will distribute it to them personally, as it is stated: “And these are their portions, says the Lord”</b> (Ezekiel 48:29). This is the conclusion of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara states its proof: <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: As initially,</b> the land was <b>divided only among</b> the <b>twelve tribes. Conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that the land <b>was divided according to</b> the <b>tribes,</b> and not apportioned directly to each person. The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that this is the case.

### Part 9
§ The Gemara returns to analyze the <i>baraita</i> just cited. <b>The Master says</b> above: <b>Eretz Yisrael is destined to be divided among thirteen tribes.</b> The Gemara asks: As to <b>the other,</b> thirteenth portion, <b>for whom</b> is it? <b>Rav Ḥisda said: For the king, as it is written: “And they that serve the city, out of all the tribes of Israel, shall till it”</b> (Ezekiel 48:19). The verse is understood as meaning that the nation will collectively allot a portion to the king, who serves the needs of the nation. <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye:</b> Why is the verse interpreted in this way? <b>Say</b> that the verse speaks of <b>mere wages [<i>rongar</i>],</b> so that the king has rights to collect taxes, but not an actual portion of land. The Gemara answers: That possibility should <b>not enter your mind, as it is written: “And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the sacred offering and of the possession of the city”</b> (Ezekiel 48:21). Based on this latter verse, the former verse speaks of a specific tract of land.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> also states: <b>And</b> the land was <b>divided only with money, as it is stated: “Between the more and the fewer.” With regard to what</b> is this said? <b>If we say</b> it is with regard <b>to beauty and ugliness,</b> i.e., that those who receive inferior-quality land received monetary compensation from the others, <b>is that to say we are dealing with fools [<i>beshufetanei</i>]</b> who would agree to take inferior-quality land in exchange for more money? <b>Rather,</b> it is said <b>with regard to</b> the difference between land that is <b>close</b> to Jerusalem <b>and</b> land that is <b>far</b> from Jerusalem. Those whose property was close to Jerusalem compensated those whose property was farther away.

### Part 11
The Gemara notes: There <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> with regard to the manner by which this compensation was given: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The tribes <b>compensated</b> each other <b>with money. Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> The tribes <b>compensated</b> each other <b>with land</b> by giving extra land to those whose portions were in less advantageous locations.

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> also states: <b>And</b> the land was <b>divided only by a lottery, as it is stated: “Only by lot</b> shall the land be divided” (Numbers 26:55). The Sages <b>taught:</b> In the phrase <b>“only by lot,”</b> the term “only” indicates that <b>Joshua and Caleb</b> are <b>excluded</b> from this proviso. The Gemara asks: With regard <b>to what</b> were they excluded? <b>If we say that</b> they did <b>not take</b> portions <b>at all, now</b> that it has already been taught that they <b>took</b> the portions of the spies (118b) <b>that</b> were <b>not their</b> own, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to teach that they took <b>their own</b> portions? It goes without saying that they did collect their portions. <b>Rather,</b> the exclusion teaches <b>that</b> they <b>did not take</b> portions <b>by a lottery but according to</b> explicit designation by <b>the Lord.</b> With regard to <b>Joshua,</b> this is <b>as it is written: “According to the commandment of the Lord they gave him the city that he asked, even Timnath Serah in the hill-country of Ephraim”</b> (Joshua 19:50).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC