
### Part 1
<b>salt, and lime, and rocks three handbreadths from the wall of another, or he</b> can <b>plaster</b> the wall <b>with lime.</b> The Gemara analyzes this statement: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a wall</b> there belonging to his neighbor, from which it may be inferred that if <b>there is no wall</b> there, <b>one may place</b> these substances <b>close</b> to the boundary of his neighbor’s courtyard. This presents a difficulty for the opinion of Rava according to the first version of the dispute, which states that one may not place these substances close to a boundary even in the case of a field that is not designated for pits.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No,</b> even <b>if there is no wall one may also not place</b> these substances <b>close</b> to the boundary. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what does</b> mentioning a wall here <b>teach us?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us that</b> all <b>these</b> substances <b>are damaging to a wall.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from the mishna: <b>One must distance seeds, and the plow, and urine three handbreadths from the wall</b> of another. The Gemara analyzes this ruling: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a wall,</b> from which it may be inferred that if <b>there is no wall, one may place</b> these substances <b>close</b> to the boundary of the field. The Gemara rejects this proof as well: <b>No,</b> even <b>if there is no wall, one may also not place</b> these substances <b>close</b> by the boundary. The Gemara asks: <b>But rather, what does</b> this <b>teach us?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us that dampness [<i>dimtunta</i>] is damaging to a wall.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from the mishna: <b>And</b> one must distance <b>a mill</b> from a wall by <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>from the lower stone</b> of the mill, <b>which is four</b> handbreadths <b>from the upper stone.</b> The Gemara analyzes this statement: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a wall,</b> from which it may be inferred that if <b>there is no wall, one may place</b> a mill <b>close</b> by the boundary. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No,</b> even <b>if there is no wall, one may also not place</b> his mill <b>close</b> by the boundary. The Gemara asks: <b>But rather, what does</b> this <b>teach us?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us that vibrations are damaging to a wall.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from the mishna: <b>And the oven</b> must be distanced <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>from the base, which is four</b> handbreadths <b>from the upper rim</b> of the oven. The Gemara analyzes this statement: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a wall,</b> from which it may be inferred that if <b>there is no wall, one may place</b> an oven <b>close</b> by the boundary. The Gemara rejects this proof as well: <b>No,</b> even <b>if there is no wall, one may also not place</b> his oven <b>close</b> by the boundary. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what does</b> this <b>teach us?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us that heat is damaging to a wall.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna (20b): <b>A person may not open a bakery or a dye shop beneath</b> the wine <b>storeroom of another, nor may one</b> open <b>a cattle barn</b> there. The Gemara analyzes this mishna: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a storeroom</b> already in place, from which it may be inferred that <b>if there is no storeroom one may do</b> so. If this is the case, then with regard to a pit as well, one may dig next to a boundary if there is as yet no pit.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: The case of <b>a residence is different,</b> as in general one can use his domicile in any manner of his choosing unless he directly causes damage to another or his property. The Gemara adds: The language of the mishna <b>is also precise, as</b> an explicit <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught with regard to that</b> mishna: <b>If</b> the construction of <b>the cattle barn preceded the storeroom,</b> it is <b>permitted.</b> Nothing can be inferred from the case of the <i>baraita</i> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of the mishna, which does not concern living quarters.

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (26a): <b>A person may not plant a tree close to</b> another’s <b>field unless he distances it four cubits from</b> his neighbor. <b>And it is taught with regard to this</b> mishna: The <b>four cubits of</b> which the Sages <b>spoke</b> are <b>to</b> enable <b>the work of the vineyard,</b> i.e., a small space next to the trees is necessary to enable animals to plow between them.

### Part 9
The Gemara analyzes this ruling: The <b>reason</b> this distance is required <b>is due to the work of the vineyard,</b> from which it may be inferred that if <b>not</b> for the problem <b>due to the work of the vineyard,</b> it would be permitted for one to plant his tree <b>close</b> to the boundary, <b>and</b> apparently, this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though there are roots</b> of the tree <b>that damage</b> his neighbor’s field. The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where</b> a hard <b>rock [<i>tzunema</i>] interrupts</b> between the two fields, preventing the roots from passing through to the other field.

### Part 10
The Gemara continues: The language of the mishna <b>is also precise</b> with regard to this point, <b>as it teaches</b> further on: If there <b>was a fence between them, this one places,</b> i.e., plants a tree, <b>close</b> to <b>the fence from here, and that one places,</b> i.e., plants a tree, <b>close</b> to <b>the fence from here.</b> If the <i>baraita</i> were referring to a case where the roots could travel across, how could it be permitted for both neighbors to plant their trees alongside each other? Consequently, it must be referring to a situation where a rock separates between the two fields below, and therefore the neighbors may plant their trees near the fence.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds: <b>If so, say the last clause</b> of that mishna: If <b>the roots</b> of the tree <b>extended into</b> the field <b>of another,</b> the neighbor <b>may cut them off to a depth of three handbreadths, so that they do not impede the plow.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But if a rock interrupts</b> between the two fields and forms a barrier, <b>what are</b> these roots <b>doing there,</b> i.e., how did they get there? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>is saying: And if</b> there is <b>no rock, and the roots</b> of the tree <b>extended into</b> the field <b>of another,</b> the neighbor <b>may cut them off to a depth of three handbreadths so that they do not impede the plow.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (25b): <b>One must distance a tree twenty-five cubits from a cistern.</b> The Gemara analyzes this <i>halakha</i>: The <b>reason</b> for this ruling <b>is that there is a cistern,</b> from which it may be inferred that <b>if there is no cistern, one may place,</b> i.e., plant, his tree <b>close</b> to the neighbor’s field. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> even <b>when there is no cistern one may also not place</b> it <b>close</b> to the neighbor’s field. <b>And</b> by mentioning a cistern, the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>teaches us this: That the roots</b> of a tree <b>extend and damage the cistern up to</b> a distance of <b>twenty-five cubits</b> away.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, say the last clause</b> of that mishna: <b>And if the tree preceded</b> the cistern, <b>one is not</b> required to <b>cut down</b> the tree. <b>But if</b> one <b>may not place</b> the tree <b>close</b> to the boundary even if there is no cistern, <b>how can you find</b> a case where the tree preceded the cistern? Why would its owner not be required to cut it down? The Gemara answers: This is <b>as Rav Pappa says</b> with regard to a similar matter, that it is referring <b>to a buyer</b> who purchases part of a field. <b>So too</b> here, it is referring <b>to a buyer.</b> In other words, a field contained a cistern and tree alongside each other, and the owner sold the part of the field containing the cistern.

### Part 14
The Gemara cites yet another source: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (25a): <b>One must distance the water in which flax is steeped from vegetables</b> growing in a neighbor’s field, <b>and</b> one must distance <b>leeks from onions</b> growing in a neighbor’s field, <b>and</b> one must likewise distance <b>mustard from bees</b> that are in a neighbor’s field. The Gemara analyzes this statement: The <b>reason is that there are vegetables</b> present, from which it may be inferred that <b>if there are no vegetables, one may place</b> the water <b>close</b> to the neighbor’s field. The Gemara rejects this opinion: <b>No,</b> even <b>if there are no vegetables one may also not place</b> the water <b>close</b> to the neighbor’s field. <b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us that these</b> items mentioned in that mishna <b>are harmful to each other.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara responds: <b>If so, say the last clause</b> of that mishna: <b>Rabbi Yosei renders it permitted</b> to plant near the neighbor’s bees <b>in the</b> case of <b>mustard.</b> As explained in a <i>baraita</i>, this is <b>because he can say to</b> the owner of the bees: <b>Just as you say to me: Keep your mustard away from my bees,</b> I can say to you: <b>Keep your bees away from my mustard, as they come and eat my mustard plants.</b> In other words, you are damaging my property as well.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC