
### Part 1
Herod <b>placed a garland</b> made <b>of porcupine</b> hide <b>on</b> Bava ben Buta’s head, which <b>pricked his eyes out. One day</b> Herod <b>came and sat before him</b> without identifying himself in order to test him. <b>He,</b> Herod, <b>said: See, Master, what this evil slave</b> Herod <b>is doing.</b> Bava ben Buta <b>said to him: What should I do to him?</b> Herod <b>said to him:</b> The <b>Master should curse him.</b> Bava ben Buta <b>said to him:</b> But <b>it is written: “Do not curse the king, not even in your thoughts”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:20). Herod <b>said to him: He is not a king,</b> since he rules illegally. Bava ben Buta <b>said to him: And</b> even if <b>he were merely a rich man</b> I would not curse him, as <b>it is written: “And do not curse a rich person in your bedchamber”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:20). <b>And</b> even <b>were he only a leader</b> I would not curse him, as <b>it is written: “And you shall not curse a leader among your people”</b> (Exodus 22:27).

### Part 2
Herod <b>said to him:</b> That <i>halakha</i> stated <b>with regard to</b> “a leader among your people,” that is, to a fit Jew who <b>acts as</b> a member of <b>your people,</b> i.e., in accordance with Torah law, <b>and this one does not do the deeds of your people.</b> Bava ben Buta <b>said to him:</b> Nevertheless, <b>I am afraid of him.</b> Herod <b>said to him: There is nobody who will go and tell him, since you and I are sitting</b> here alone. Bava ben Buta <b>said to him:</b> Nevertheless, <b>it is written: “For a bird of the sky shall carry the sound, and that which has wings shall tell the matter”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:20).

### Part 3
Herod <b>said to him: I am he. Had I known that the Sages were so cautious I would not have killed them. Now, what is that man’s remedy,</b> i.e., what can I do to repent for my sinful actions? Bava ben Buta <b>said to him: He</b> who <b>extinguished the light of the world</b> by killing the Torah Sages, <b>as it is written: “For the mitzva is a lamp, and the Torah is light”</b> (Proverbs 6:23), <b>should go and occupy himself with the light of the world,</b> the Temple, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the Temple: <b>“And all the nations shall flow [<i>venaharu</i>] unto it”</b> (Isaiah 2:2), the word <i>venaharu</i> alluding to light [<i>nehora</i>]. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>he said to him: He</b> who <b>blinded the eye of the world, as it is written</b> in reference to the Sages: <b>“And if</b> it be committed through ignorance <b>by the eyes of the congregation”</b> (Numbers 15:24), <b>should go and occupy himself with the eye of the world,</b> the Temple, <b>as it is written: “I will desecrate my Temple, the pride of your strength, the delight of your eyes”</b> (Ezekiel 24:21).

### Part 4
Herod <b>said to him: I am afraid of the</b> Roman <b>government,</b> that they will not permit me to make changes in the Temple. Bava ben Buta <b>said to him: Send a messenger</b> who will <b>travel</b> there for <b>a year, and remain</b> there for another <b>year, and</b> take yet another <b>year</b> to <b>return. In the meantime, you can demolish</b> the Temple <b>and rebuild it. He did so.</b> Eventually, <b>they sent</b> a message <b>to</b> Herod from Rome: <b>If you have not</b> yet <b>demolished it, do not demolish it; and if you have</b> already <b>demolished it, do not rebuild it; and if you have demolished it and</b> already <b>rebuilt it,</b> you shall be counted among <b>those who act wickedly, seeking counsel</b> only <b>after they have</b> already <b>acted.</b> Even <b>if you are armed</b> and in command of a military force, <b>your book,</b> i.e., your genealogical record, <b>is here.</b> You are <b>neither a king [<i>reikha</i>] nor the son of a king,</b> but rather <b>Herod the slave who has made himself a freeman [<i>kelonya</i>].</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the word <b><i>reikha</i>?</b> It denotes <b>royalty, as it is written: “I am today a tender [<i>rakh</i>] and anointed king”</b> (II Samuel 3:39). <b>And if you wish, say</b> that the meaning of the word is learned <b>from here,</b> from the term describing Joseph after he was appointed viceroy to the king: <b>“And they cried before him, <i>Avrekh</i>”</b> (Genesis 41:43).

### Part 6
The Sages <b>say: One who has not seen Herod’s building has never seen a beautiful building in his life.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With what did he build it? Rabba said: With stones of white and green marble [<i>umarmara</i>]. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that he built it <b>with stones of blue, white, and green marble.</b> Alternate rows of stones <b>sent out an edge</b> a bit <b>and drew in an edge</b> a bit, <b>so that they would</b> better <b>receive</b> and hold <b>the plaster. He considered covering it with gold,</b> but <b>the Rabbis said to him: Leave it,</b> and do not cover it, <b>since it is more beautiful this</b> way, <b>as it looks like the waves of the sea.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And how did Bava ben Buta do this,</b> i.e., give advice to Herod the wicked? <b>But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say</b> that <b>Rav says, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who says: <b>For what</b> reason <b>was Daniel punished? Because he offered advice to Nebuchadnezzar, as</b> after sharing a harsh prophecy with him, <b>it is stated: “Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to you, redeem your sins with charity and your iniquities with graciousness to the poor, that there may be a lengthening of your prosperity”</b> (Daniel 4:24). <b>And it is written: “All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar”</b> (Daniel 4:25). <b>And it is written: “And at the end of twelve months”</b> (Daniel 4:26). Only after a year was the prophecy fulfilled but not before that, apparently because Nebuchadnezzar heeded Daniel’s advice.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>a slave</b> like Herod <b>is different since he is obligated in the mitzvot,</b> and therefore Bava ben Buta had to help him repent. <b>And if you wish, say the Temple is different, as without</b> the help of <b>the government it would not have been built.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that Daniel was punished? If we say</b> we know this <b>because it is written: “And Esther called for Hatach,</b> one of the king’s chamberlains, whom he had appointed to attend upon her” (Esther 4:5), <b>and Rav said: Hatach is Daniel. This works out well according to the one who says</b> Daniel was called Hatach because <b>they cut him down [<i>ḥatakh</i>] from his greatness</b> and turned him into a minor attendant. <b>But according to the one who says</b> he was called Hatach <b>because all governmental matters were determined [<i>ḥatakh</i>] according to his word, what is there to say?</b> What punishment did he receive? The Gemara answers: His punishment was <b>that they threw him into the den of lions.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: In a place where it is customary to build a wall of non-chiseled stone, or chiseled stone, or small bricks, or large bricks, they must build the partition with that material. <b>Everything is in accordance with the regional custom.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the word <b>everything</b> serve <b>to add?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to add a place where it is customary</b> to build a partition <b>out of palm and laurel branches.</b> In such a place, the partition is built from those materials.

### Part 11
The mishna teaches: <b>Therefore, if the wall</b> later <b>falls,</b> the assumption is that <b>the space</b> where the wall stood <b>and the stones belong to both of them,</b> to be divided equally. The Gemara questions the need for this ruling: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that this is the case, since both neighbors participated in the construction of the wall? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to teach this <i>halakha</i> for a case <b>where</b> the entire wall <b>fell into the domain of one of them. Alternatively,</b> it is necessary in a case <b>where one of them</b> already <b>cleared</b> all the stones <b>into his</b> own <b>domain. Lest you say</b> that <b>the other</b> party <b>should be</b> governed by the principle that <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant,</b> that is, if the other party should have to prove that he had been a partner in the construction of the wall, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that they are presumed to have been partners in the building of the wall, and neither requires further proof.

### Part 12
§ The mishna continues: <b>And similarly with regard to a garden,</b> in <b>a place where it is customary to build a partition</b> in the middle of a garden jointly owned by two people, and one of them wishes to build such a partition, the court <b>obligates</b> his neighbor to join in building the partition. The Gemara comments: <b>This</b> matter <b>itself</b> is <b>difficult.</b> On the one hand, <b>you said: And similarly with regard to a garden,</b> in <b>a place where it is customary to build a partition</b> in the middle of a garden jointly owned by two people, and one of them wishes to build such a partition, the court <b>obligates</b> his neighbor to join in building the partition. One can infer <b>that ordinarily,</b> where there is no custom, the court <b>does not obligate him</b> to build a partition.

### Part 13
But <b>say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>But</b> with regard to an expanse of <b>fields,</b> in <b>a place where it is customary not to build a partition</b> between two people’s fields, and one person wishes to build a partition between his field and that of his neighbor, the court <b>does not obligate</b> his neighbor to build such a partition. One can infer <b>that ordinarily,</b> where there is no custom, the court <b>obligates him</b> to build a partition. The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>Now</b> that <b>you said</b> by inference that in <b>an ordinary garden</b> the court <b>does not</b> obligate him to build a partition, <b>is it necessary</b> to say that the court does not obligate him to build a partition in <b>an ordinary field?</b> Clearly in a field there is less of a need for a partition, as there is less damage caused by exposure to the gaze of others.

### Part 14
<b>Abaye said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: And similarly</b> with regard to <b>an ordinary garden, and</b> also <b>in a place where it is customary to build a partition in</b> an expanse of <b>fields,</b> the court <b>obligates him</b> to build a partition. <b>Rava said to him: If so, what</b> is the point of the word: <b>But,</b> mentioned afterward in connection with an expanse of fields, which seems to indicate that the issue of fields had not yet been addressed? <b>Rather, Rava said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is teaching: And similarly an ordinary garden is</b> treated <b>like a place where it is customary to build a partition, and</b> therefore the court <b>obligates him</b> to build a partition. <b>But an ordinary</b> expanse of <b>fields is</b> treated <b>like a place where it is customary not</b> to build a partition, <b>and</b> therefore the court <b>does not obligate him</b> to build one.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rather, if</b> one person <b>wishes</b> to erect a partition, <b>he must withdraw into his own</b> field <b>and build</b> the partition there. <b>And he makes</b> a border <b>mark on the outer side</b> of the barrier facing his neighbor’s property, indicating that he built the entire structure of his own materials and on his own land. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of a border <b>mark? Rav Huna said: He bends the edge</b> of the wall <b>toward the outside.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let him make it on the inside.</b> The Gemara explains: In that case, <b>his neighbor might also make</b> a mark <b>on the outside,</b> that is, on the side facing his own property, <b>and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>If so,</b> that is, there is a concern about such deception, <b>now also</b> when the person who builds the wall makes a border mark on the outer side of the wall, <b>his neighbor might cut it off and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara answers: Such <b>a cut is noticeable</b> and the deception will not work.

### Part 16
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that in answer to the question: What is the meaning of a border mark, <b>Rav Huna said: He bends the edge</b> of the wall <b>toward the inside.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let him make it on the outside.</b> The Gemara explains: In that case, <b>his neighbor might cut it off and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that is, there is a concern for such deception, <b>now also</b> when the person who builds the wall makes a border mark toward the inside, <b>his neighbor might add</b> a border mark on his own side <b>and say:</b> The wall <b>is</b> both <b>mine and his.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>An addition is noticeable</b> and the deception will not work. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> that he makes the border mark <b>on the outside</b> and not on the inside? The Gemara comments: This is <b>a difficulty.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC