
### Part 1
<b>a taste of the World-to-Come. They are: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Abraham, as it is written with regard to him:</b> “And the Lord blessed Abraham <b>with everything”</b> (Genesis 24:1). <b>Isaac, as it is written with regard to him:</b> “And I have eaten <b>from everything”</b> (Genesis 27:33). <b>Jacob, as it is written with regard to him:</b> “Because I have <b>everything”</b> (Genesis 33:11). This teaches that already in their lifetimes they merited everything, i.e., perfection.

### Part 2
There were <b>three</b> people <b>over whom the evil inclination had no sway. They are: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as it is written</b> with regard <b>to them,</b> respectively: <b>“With everything,” “from everything,” “everything.”</b> The completeness of their blessings means that they did not have to contend with their evil inclinations. <b>And some say</b> that <b>even David</b> was not subject to his evil inclination, <b>as it is written: “And my heart has died within me”</b> (Psalms 109:22), meaning that the evil inclination in his heart was nullified as if his heart had died. <b>And</b> how does <b>the other</b> authority, who does not include David in his list, explain this verse? <b>He is mentioning his travails.</b> David means to say that his heart died within him owing to all the suffering that he endured, but he says nothing about his evil inclination.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught:</b> There were <b>six</b> people <b>over whom the Angel of Death had no sway</b> in their demise, <b>and they are: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as it is written</b> with regard <b>to them,</b> respectively: <b>“With everything,” “from everything,” “everything”;</b> since they were blessed with everything they were certainly spared the anguish of the Angel of Death. <b>Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as it is written</b> with regard <b>to them</b> that they died <b>“by the mouth of the Lord”</b> (Numbers 33:38; Deuteronomy 34:5), which indicates that they died with a kiss, and not at the hand of the Angel of Death.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But with regard to Miriam it is not written: “By the mouth of the Lord.” Rabbi Elazar says: Miriam also died with a kiss, as this is learned</b> through a verbal analogy between the word <b>“there”</b> mentioned in regard to Miriam: “And Miriam died there” (Numbers 20:1), and the word <b>“there”</b> mentioned in regard <b>to Moses:</b> “And Moses died there” (Deuteronomy 34:5). <b>And for what</b> reason <b>is “by the mouth of the Lord” not stated with</b> regard to <b>her? It is unseemly to mention</b> death by a kiss with regard to a woman.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught:</b> There were <b>seven</b> people <b>over whom the worm and the maggot had no sway, and they are: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Aaron and Miriam, and Benjamin, son of Jacob. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as it is written with regard to them,</b> respectively: <b>“With everything,” “from everything,” “everything.” Moses, Aaron, and Miriam, as it is written with regard to them: “By the mouth of the Lord”; Benjamin, son of Jacob, as it is written: “And to Benjamin he said: The beloved of the Lord, he shall dwell in safety by Him”</b> (Deuteronomy 33:12). Even in death, he rests securely, unbothered by worms. <b>And some say</b> that <b>even David</b> is included, <b>as it is written: “My flesh also dwells secure”</b> (Psalms 16:9). The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>the other</b> authority, who does not include David, explain this? The Gemara answers: <b>He is asking for mercy,</b> that his flesh should dwell secure and not be subject to worms and maggots, but his request was denied.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There were <b>four</b> people <b>who died</b> only <b>because of the counsel of the</b> primordial <b>snake,</b> in the wake of which all of humanity became mortal, and not on account of any personal sin. <b>And they are: Benjamin, son of Jacob; Amram, father of Moses; Yishai, father of David; and Chileab, son of David. And all of these are known through tradition except for Yishai, father of David, with regard to</b> whom <b>it is written explicitly: “And Absalom placed Amasa over the army instead of Joab, and Amasa was the son of a man whose name was Ithra the Israelite, who engaged in intercourse with Abigail, daughter of Nahash, the sister of Zeruiah, mother of Joab”</b> (II Samuel 17:25). <b>But was</b> Abigail <b>the daughter of Nahash? Was she not the daughter of Yishai, as it is written: “And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail”</b> (I Chronicles 2:16)? <b>Rather,</b> she was called “daughter of Nahash” to indicate that <b>she was the daughter of one who died</b> only <b>because of the counsel of the snake.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC