
### Part 1
If the rocks are scattered throughout the greater part of the field but are arranged <b>like a ring, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If the rocks stand <b>in a row, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If the rocks form <b>an angle, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If they are arranged in the shape of <b>a crooked path, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara states: All these dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If there is a solitary rock</b> on the outskirts of the field, <b>even</b> if it is of <b>a minimal</b> size, <b>it is not measured</b> together <b>with</b> the rest of the field. <b>And</b> further, <b>if</b> that rock <b>is adjacent to the</b> field’s <b>border, even</b> if it is of <b>a minimal</b> size, <b>it is not measured</b> together <b>with</b> the rest of the field.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>earth intervenes between</b> the rock and the border of the field, so that the rock does not actually touch the border, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara states: This dilemma as well <b>shall stand</b> unresolved. <b>Rav Ashi raises</b> another <b>dilemma:</b> If there was a layer of <b>earth below and rock above, or earth above and rock below, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara states: This dilemma as well <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says to another: <b>I am selling you</b> a plot of <b>earth</b> the size of <b>a <i>beit kor</i>, measured</b> precisely <b>with a rope,</b> and <b>he gave</b> him even <b>the slightest amount less</b> than what was stipulated, the seller <b>must deduct</b> the difference from the purchase price of the field and return money to the buyer. If <b>he gave</b> him even <b>the slightest amount more</b> than what was stipulated, the buyer <b>must return</b> the difference to the seller. <b>And if</b> the seller <b>said</b> to the buyer that he is selling him a <i>beit kor</i> of land <b>more or less,</b> then <b>even if he gave</b> him <b>a quarter</b><i>-kav</i> <b>per <i>se’a</i> less</b> than what was stipulated, <b>or he gave him a quarter</b><i>-kav</i> <b>per <i>se’a</i> more</b> that what was stipulated, i.e., he gave him one twenty-fourth more or less than what was required, <b>it is his.</b> The sale is valid, since the seller told the buyer in advance that he was not committing himself to precise measurements. If the difference is <b>greater than that</b> amount, <b>he must make a calculation,</b> and the party that suffered a loss must be compensated.

### Part 5
If the buyer received too much land, so that he must now compensate the seller, <b>what does he return to him?</b> He returns <b>money,</b> i.e., he pays the seller for the surplus land. <b>And if</b> the seller so <b>wishes,</b> the buyer <b>returns</b> the surplus <b>land to him. Why</b> then <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that <b>he returns money to him?</b> They said this <b>in order to enhance the power of the seller,</b> and enable him to demand payment for the surplus land, rather than accept its return. <b>As, if the surplus in the field was an area required for sowing nine <i>kav</i></b> of seed, <b>and in a garden an area required for sowing a half-<i>kav</i></b> of seed, <b>or, according to the statement of Rabbi Akiva, an area required for sowing a quarter</b>-<i>kav</i> of seed (see 11a), the buyer must <b>return the land</b> itself <b>to</b> the seller, and the seller cannot demand payment in money. <b>And</b> if the surplus is greater than a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>, <b>it is not only the quarter</b>-<i>kav</i> <b>that he returns; rather,</b> he returns <b>all of the surplus.</b> Since he is already required to make a refund, the refund must be made in the precise amount.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna considers two cases of selling a <i>beit kor</i> of land: First, where the seller said that he is selling a <i>beit kor</i> measured precisely with a rope, in which case a refund must be made no matter how small the deviation; and second, where the seller said that he selling a <i>beit kor</i> more or less, in which case the sale is valid as long as the deviation is no more than a quarter-<i>kav</i> per <i>se’a</i>. In connection with these cases, <b>a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If one says he is selling <b>a <i>beit kor</i></b> of land, and he said this <b>without</b> any further <b>specification, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution from what was taught in the mishna: If one says to another: <b>I am selling you</b> a plot of <b>earth</b> the size of <b>a <i>beit kor</i>, measured</b> precisely <b>with a rope,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC