### Part 1
<b>Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, said: Actually,</b> the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the corpses found were of <b>non-viable newborns</b> buried in a smaller chamber only six cubits long. Adding a courtyard of six cubits and another regular-sized chamber of eight cubits yields a total length of the catacomb of twenty cubits.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But since this</b> is dealing <b>with</b> a chamber that was created for burying <b>non-viable newborns,</b> there too, with regard to <b>that</b> chamber, on the other side of the courtyard, we are dealing <b>with</b> a chamber created for <b>non-viable newborns as well.</b> Therefore, the total length of the catacomb <b>would be eighteen</b> cubits. The Gemara answers: <b>We say</b> that perhaps <b>one</b> of the chambers is <b>for non-viable newborns,</b> but <b>we do not say</b> that <b>two</b> chambers might have been constructed <b>for non-viable newborns.</b>

### Part 3
§ Above, the Gemara cited a <i>baraita</i> that relates a dispute between Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis with regard to three corpses buried close together. The Rabbis hold that this is not considered a graveyard, whereas Rabbi Shimon maintains that it can be. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from another ruling <b>of the Rabbis against</b> this ruling <b>of the Rabbis, and it</b> also <b>raises a contradiction</b> from another ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon against</b> this ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 4
<b>As it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Kilayim</i> 5:2): With regard to <b>a vineyard that is planted on</b> an area where there is <b>less than four cubits</b> of open space between the vines, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: It is not</b> considered to be <b>a vineyard</b> with regard to the prohibition of diverse kinds and other <i>halakhot</i>, as it is overcrowded. <b>And the Rabbis say: This is</b> considered to be <b>a vineyard, and</b> the reason for this is that <b>the middle</b> vines are <b>viewed as if</b> they <b>are not</b> there, and the outer vines meet the requirements for a vineyard. Therefore, it is prohibited to plant other crops anywhere in that area.

### Part 5
The ruling <b>of the Rabbis</b> in this mishna is <b>difficult,</b> as it is contradicted <b>by</b> the ruling <b>of the Rabbis</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, as there the Rabbis did not say: The middle ones are viewed as if they are not there. <b>And</b> the ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon</b> in this mishna is <b>difficult,</b> as it is contradicted <b>by</b> the ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, as there he did say: The corpses in the middle are viewed as if they are not there.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: The fact that one ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon</b> is contradicted <b>by</b> the other ruling <b>of Rabbi Shimon</b> is <b>not difficult. There,</b> with regard to vineyards, Rabbi Shimon holds that middle vines cannot be disregarded, as <b>people do not plant</b> vines <b>with the intention of uprooting</b> them. But <b>here,</b> with regard to burial, <b>sometimes it happens</b> that one has to bury a corpse <b>at twilight</b> just before the onset of Shabbat, <b>and indiscriminately inters</b> the body between other corpses with the intention of reburying it at a later date.

### Part 7
Similarly, the fact that one ruling <b>of the Rabbis</b> is contradicted <b>by</b> the other ruling <b>of the Rabbis</b> is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> with regard to burial, <b>since it is a disgrace</b> to bury bodies so close together, <b>it is not called</b> an area of <b>graves.</b> But <b>there,</b> with regard to vineyards, the owner of the vineyard <b>says</b> to himself: <b>Whichever of</b> the vines <b>will flourish, will flourish</b> and I will leave them, <b>and</b> whichever ones <b>do not flourish,</b> I will uproot them and <b>they will be for firewood.</b>

### Part 8
end of chapter

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>If one says to another: I am selling you</b> a plot of <b>earth</b> of the size <b>required for sowing one <i>kor</i> of seed [<i>beit kor</i>],</b> and <b>there</b> on that plot <b>there were crevices</b> [<b><i>neka’im</i></b>] <b>ten handbreadths deep or rocks ten handbreadths high, they are not measured</b> together <b>with</b> the rest of the field. Rather, the buyer must be provided with land measuring a <i>beit kor</i> exclusive of those crevices or rocks. If the crevices or rocks measured <b>less than</b> ten handbreadths, <b>they are measured</b> together <b>with</b> the rest of the field. <b>But if</b> the seller <b>said to</b> the buyer: I am selling you a plot of <b>earth</b> that is <b>about</b> the size of <b>a <i>beit kor</i>,</b> then <b>even if there</b> on that plot <b>there were crevices deeper than ten handbreadths or rocks higher than ten handbreadths, they are measured</b> together <b>with</b> the rest of the field.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Arakhin</i> 25a): With regard to <b>one who consecrates his</b> ancestral <b>field during the time</b> that the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of the Jubilee</b> Year are practiced, if he wishes to redeem the field <b>he must give</b> the Temple treasurer <b>fifty silver shekels for</b> every <b>place that is fit for sowing a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley seed,</b> which is the biblical equivalent of a <i>kor</i>, for all the years of the Jubilee cycle, as this is the sum fixed by the Torah for this purpose (see Leviticus 27:16). But if <b>there were crevices ten handbreadths deep there,</b> in the field, <b>or rocks ten handbreadths high,</b>