
### Part 1
<b>and an <i>ukla</i>. And how much is an <i>ukla</i>?</b> It is <b>one-fifth of a quarter</b> of a <i>kav</i>. <b>And</b> in the case <b>of liquid measures, one</b> may <b>prepare a <i>hin</i>,</b> which is twelve <i>log</i>; <b>and a half-<i>hin</i>,</b> or six <i>log</i>; <b>and a third</b>-<b><i>hin</i>,</b> or four <i>log</i>; <b>and a quarter-<i>hin</i>,</b> three <i>log</i>; <b>and a <i>log</i>; and a half</b>-<b><i>log</i>; and a quarter</b>-<i>log</i>; <b>and an eighth-</b><i>log</i>; <b>and an eighth of an eighth-</b><i>log</i>, <b>and this,</b> the last mentioned, <b>is a <i>kortov</i>.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And let one also prepare</b> a measure equal to <b>two <i>kav</i>.</b> The Gemara answers that this measure is not used, lest people <b>come to mistake it for a <i>tarkav</i>,</b> which is three <i>kav</i>. The Gemara observes: <b>Apparently, people err</b> by <b>one-third</b> of a measure. <b>If that is so, one should also not prepare</b> a measure equal to <b>a <i>kav</i>, as</b> people may <b>come to mistake it for a half-<i>tarkav</i>,</b> which is equal to one and one-half <i>kav</i>. <b>Rather, this is the reason that one may not prepare a two-<i>kav</i></b> measure: <b>That</b> people might <b>come to mistake it for a half-<i>tarkav</i>,</b> which is equal to one and one-half <i>kav</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara again suggests: <b>Apparently, people err</b> by <b>one-quarter</b> of a measure. <b>If that is so, one should also not prepare</b> measures of <b>a half-<i>tomen</i>,</b> which is one-sixteenth of a <i>kav</i>, <b>and an <i>ukla</i>,</b> which is one-twentieth of a <i>kav</i>. Since they differ by only one-fifth, there is a concern that people might mistake one measure for the other. <b>Rav Pappa said: People are well-versed in small measures</b> and can distinguish between them.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues: If people err by one-quarter of a measure, then since one may prepare a measure equal to four <i>log</i>, <b>one-third of a <i>hin</i>, let one not prepare</b> a measure equal to three <i>log</i>, <b>one-quarter</b> of <b>a <i>hin</i>.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> these measures <b>were</b> used <b>in the Temple, the Sages did not decree</b> that they not be used. The Gemara asks: <b>In the Temple as well, let</b> the Sages <b>decree</b> that they should not be used, in case the two measures are mistaken for each other. The Gemara answers: The <b>priests</b> who serve in the Temple <b>are vigilant</b> and would not commit this error.

### Part 5
§ <b>Shmuel says:</b> If the residents of a certain place want to change the standard of their measures and augment them by a certain fraction, <b>they may not increase the measures</b> by <b>more than one-sixth, and</b> they may <b>not</b> increase the value of <b>a coin</b> by <b>more than one-sixth</b> of its previous value. <b>And one who profits</b> from his sales <b>may not profit</b> by <b>more than one-sixth.</b> The Gemara analyzes these statements. When Shmuel said: <b>They may not increase the measures</b> by <b>more than one-sixth, what is the reason</b> for this? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>because</b> doing so causes market <b>prices to rise,</b> the same concern should apply to raising the prices by <b>one-sixth,</b> and therefore this should <b>also not</b> be allowed.

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> you will say that the prohibition is <b>due to</b> concern for <b>exploitation;</b> and they may increase the measures only by up to one-sixth, so <b>that there will not be nullification of the transaction,</b> as the transaction is nullified only when the disparity is more than one-sixth of the value of the item. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But doesn’t Rava say:</b> With regard to <b>any item that</b> is otherwise subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation, and it is sold <b>by measure, or by weight, or by number, even</b> if the disparity was <b>less than the measure of exploitation</b> in the transaction, the transaction is <b>reversed.</b> A disparity of one-sixth between the value of an item and its price constitutes exploitation only in cases where there is room for error in assessing the value of an item. In a case where the details of the item are easily quantifiable, any deviation from the designated quantity results in a nullification of the transaction.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> the prohibition is <b>so that there will not be a loss</b> suffered <b>by the merchant,</b> who might not realize that a new standard was issued, and sell in accordance with the old standard. Since a merchant usually enjoys a profit of one-sixth of the value of an item, if the standard is not increased by more than this amount he will not suffer a loss, as at worst he will forfeit his profit margin.

### Part 8
This Gemara notes: This explanation is also difficult, since even if the aim is to ensure <b>that there will not be a loss</b> for the merchant, <b>does he not need</b> to earn <b>a profit?</b> There is a well-known adage in this regard: If you <b>buy and sell</b> without making any profit, <b>will</b> you <b>be called a merchant?</b> A merchant must profit from his sales; therefore, if this decree was instituted for the protection of merchants, the Sages should have ensured that they earn a profit.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The prohibition is not based on logical reasoning. Instead, <b>Shmuel found a verse and interpreted it homiletically: “And the shekel shall be twenty <i>gera</i>; twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, ten, and five shekels, shall be your <i>maneh</i>”</b> (Ezekiel 45:12). According to this verse, the combination of all of these numbers, sixty shekels, is equivalent to a <i>maneh</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC