
### Part 1
“He who pursues charity and mercy, <b>finds life”</b> (Proverbs 21:21), and with regard to wisdom it is written: “He who finds Me, finds life” (Proverbs 8:35). <b>Masters of wealth, as it is written:</b> “He who pursues charity and mercy finds <b>charity,”</b> meaning he will be able to give charity. <b>Masters of <i>aggada</i>, as it is written:</b> “He who pursues charity and mercy, finds <b>honor.”</b> And how do we know that this refers to masters of <i>aggada</i>? <b>It is written here “honor,” and it is written there: “The wise shall inherit honor”</b> (Proverbs 3:35).

### Part 2
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Meir would say: An opponent may bring an argument against you and say to you: If your God loves the poor, for what</b> reason <b>does He not support them</b> Himself? In such a case, <b>say to him:</b> He commands us to act as His agents in sustaining the poor, <b>so that through them we will be</b> credited with the performance of mitzvot and therefore be <b>saved from the judgment of Gehenna. And this is the question that Turnus Rufus the wicked asked Rabbi Akiva: If your God loves the poor, for what</b> reason <b>does He not support them</b> Himself? Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him:</b> He commands us to sustain the poor, <b>so that through them</b> and the charity we give them <b>we will be saved from the judgment of Gehenna.</b>

### Part 3
Turnus Rufus <b>said to</b> Rabbi Akiva: <b>On the contrary, it is this</b> charity <b>which condemns you,</b> the Jewish people, <b>to Gehenna</b> because you give it. <b>I will illustrate</b> this <b>to you with a parable. To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a king of flesh and blood who was angry with his slave and put him in prison and ordered that he should not be fed or given to drink. And one person went ahead and fed him and gave him to drink. If the king heard about this, would he not be angry with</b> that person? <b>And you,</b> after all, <b>are called slaves, as it is stated: “For the children of Israel are slaves to Me”</b> (Leviticus 25:55). If God decreed that a certain person should be impoverished, one who gives him charity defies the will of God.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Turnus Rufus: <b>I will illustrate</b> the opposite <b>to you with a</b> different <b>parable. To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a king of flesh and blood who was angry with his son and put him in prison and ordered that he should not be fed or given to drink. And one person went ahead and fed him and gave him to drink. If the king heard</b> about this once his anger abated, <b>would he not</b> react by <b>sending</b> that person <b>a gift? And we are called sons, as it is written: “You are sons of the Lord your God”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:1).

### Part 5
Turnus Rufus <b>said to him: You are called sons and you are called slaves. When you fulfill the will of the Omnipresent, you are called sons; when you do not fulfill the will of the Omnipresent, you are called slaves. And</b> since <b>now you do not fulfill the will of the Omnipresent,</b> the parable that I offered is more apt. Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him:</b> The verse <b>states: “Is it not to share your bread with the hungry, and</b> that <b>you shall bring the poor that are cast out to your house?”</b> (Isaiah 58:7). <b>When</b> do we <b>bring the poor that are cast out</b> into our <b>houses? Now,</b> when we have to billet the Roman soldiers in our homes; <b>and</b> about that very time, the verse <b>states: “Is it not to share your bread with the hungry?”</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shalom taught: Just as a person’s</b> entire <b>livelihood is allocated to him from Rosh HaShana,</b> when God issues His judgments for the entire year, <b>so too are a person’s</b> monetary <b>losses allocated to him from Rosh HaShana.</b> If <b>one merits,</b> the following verse is applied to him: <b>“You shall share your bread with the hungry,”</b> i.e., he will spend the sum allocated to him on gifts of charity; and if <b>he does not merit,</b> the following verse is applied to him: <b>“You shall bring the poor that are cast out to your house,</b> i.e., he will be compelled by the government to billet soldiers in his house and feed them against his will.

### Part 7
It is <b>like this</b> incident <b>involving the nephews of Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai,</b> who once <b>saw in a dream that</b> his nephews <b>were</b> destined <b>to lose seven hundred dinars</b> over the course of the year. <b>He encouraged them</b> and <b>took</b> money <b>from them for charity, and they were left with seventeen dinars</b> out of the seven hundred. <b>When Yom Kippur eve arrived, the government sent</b> messengers who came and <b>took</b> the remaining seventeen dinars.

### Part 8
<b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said to them: Do not fear</b> that they will take even more from you; <b>they took from you</b> the <b>seventeen dinars</b> that were still <b>with you.</b> The nephews <b>said to him: How did you know?</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>said to them: I saw a dream about you,</b> and he related his dream to them. <b>They said to him: And why did you not tell us</b> about the dream? Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai <b>said to them: I said,</b> It is better <b>that they perform a mitzva for its own sake.</b> Had you known from the start that you were fated to lose that amount of money, the mitzva would not have been performed purely for its own sake.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa was</b> once <b>climbing</b> up <b>a ladder</b> when <b>his foot slipped and he almost fell. He said: Now, is the one who hates us,</b> a euphemism for himself, <b>liable like Shabbat desecrators and idol worshippers,</b> who are subject to death by stoning, which is similar to death by falling, the punishment that Rav Pappa narrowly escaped? <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav of Difti said to Rav Pappa: Perhaps a poor person</b> once <b>approached you and you did not sustain him,</b> and therefore you were given a glimpse of the punishment that you actually deserve.

### Part 10
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: Anyone who turns his eyes away from</b> one seeking <b>charity is</b> considered <b>as if he worships idols.</b> From where is this derived? <b>It is written here: “Beware that there be not a base thought in your heart…</b>and your eye be evil against your poor brother, and you give him nothing” (Deuteronomy 15:9). <b>And it is written there: “Certain base men have gone out…</b>and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods” (Deuteronomy 13:14). <b>Just as there,</b> the base men sin with <b>idolatry, so too here,</b> the base thought is treated like <b>idolatry.</b>

### Part 11
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, said: All</b> acts of <b>charity and kindness that Jews perform in this world</b> make <b>great peace and</b> are <b>great intercessors between the Jewish people and their Father in Heaven, as it is stated: “So said the Lord, enter not into a house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them, for I have taken away My peace from this people,</b> says the Lord, <b>both kindness and mercy”</b> (Jeremiah 16:5). <b>“Kindness”; this</b> is referring to <b>acts of kindness. “Mercy”; this</b> is referring to acts of <b>charity.</b> This indicates that when there is kindness and mercy, God is at peace with His people.

### Part 12
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Great is charity in that it advances the redemption, as it is stated: “So said the Lord, uphold justice and do charity, for My salvation is near to come, and My righteousness to be revealed”</b> (Isaiah 56:1). <b>He would say: Ten strong entities were created in the world,</b> one stronger than the other. <b>A mountain is strong,</b> but <b>iron,</b> which is stronger, <b>cleaves it. Iron is strong,</b> but <b>fire melts it. Fire is strong,</b> but <b>water extinguishes it. Water is strong,</b> but <b>clouds bear it. Clouds are strong,</b> but <b>wind disperses them. Wind is strong,</b> but the human <b>body withstands it.</b> The human <b>body is strong,</b> but <b>fear breaks it. Fear is strong,</b> but <b>wine dispels it. Wine is strong,</b> but <b>sleep drives it off. And death is stronger than them all, but charity saves</b> a person <b>from death, as it is written: “And charity delivers from death”</b> (Proverbs 10:2, 11:4).

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Dostai, son of Rabbi Yannai, taught: Come and see that the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He, is not like the attribute of flesh and blood.</b> An illustration of <b>the attribute of flesh and blood</b> is that when <b>a person brings a great gift to the king, it is uncertain whether</b> the king <b>will accept it from him or will not accept it from him. And if you say that</b> the king <b>will accept it from him, it is uncertain whether</b> the person who brought the gift <b>will</b> eventually <b>see the face of the king, or will not see the face of the king. But the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not</b> act in <b>this way.</b> Even when <b>a person gives a</b> mere <b><i>peruta</i> to a poor person, he merits to receive the Divine Presence, as it is stated: “As for me, I will behold Your face through charity; I will be satisfied, when I awake, with Your likeness”</b> (Psalms 17:15).

### Part 14
It is related that <b>Rabbi Elazar would</b> first <b>give a <i>peruta</i> to a poor person and</b> only <b>then</b> would he <b>pray. He said: As it is written</b> in the same verse: <b>“I will behold Your face through charity.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of that which is written: <b>“I will be satisfied, when I awake, with your likeness”? Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: These are Torah scholars,</b> who in pursuit of their studies <b>banish sleep from their eyes in this world, and the Holy One, Blessed be He, satiates them with the radiance of the Divine Presence in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He that graciously gives to the poor makes a loan to the Lord,</b> and that which he has given, He will pay him back” (Proverbs 19:17)? How can it be that one is considered to have granted a loan to God? <b>Were it not</b> explicitly <b>written in the verse, it would be impossible to say this,</b> that somebody who is gracious to a poor person is seen as lending to God. It would be impertinent, since <b>“the borrower is servant to the lender”</b> (Proverbs 22:7), <b>as it were.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says: Rabbi Yoḥanan raises a contradiction</b> between two texts. In one place <b>it is written: “Riches profit not on the day of wrath, but charity delivers from death”</b> (Proverbs 11:4), <b>and</b> elsewhere <b>it is written: “Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but charity delivers from death”</b> (Proverbs 10:2). <b>Why</b> is it necessary to have <b>these two</b> verses about <b>charity,</b> that it delivers from death? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba continues: <b>One</b> verse serves to teach <b>that</b> charity <b>delivers from an unnatural death</b> in this world, <b>and one</b> verse serves to teach <b>that</b> charity <b>delivers from the judgment of Gehenna</b> in the World-to-Come. <b>And</b> in <b>which</b> of the verses <b>is that</b> charity <b>which delivers from the judgment of Gehenna</b> mentioned? It is in <b>that</b> verse <b>in which “wrath” is written, as</b> with regard to the day of judgment <b>it is written: “That day is a day of wrath”</b> (Zephaniah 1:15). <b>And which</b> type of charity <b>is that which delivers from an unnatural death?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC