
### Part 1
<b>and the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>does not abrogate them; and the firstborn does not take a double</b> portion <b>of them.</b>

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> states that gifts of groomsmen <b>are collectible in court. What is the reason</b> for this? It is that they are considered <b>similar to a loan.</b> The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>And they are not subject to</b> the prohibition of <b>interest.</b> The reason is <b>that</b> it was <b>not</b> with <b>that in mind</b> that he gave him a larger gift. Rather, he did so on account of his joy at his friend’s wedding. The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>And the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>does not abrogate them.</b> The reason is <b>that one cannot read</b> the verse concerning the abrogation of debts during the occurrence of the Sabbatical Year: <b>“He shall not exact</b> it of his neighbor and his brother, because the Lord’s release has been proclaimed” (Deuteronomy 15:2), <b>with regard to</b> gifts of groomsmen. Since one cannot choose to exact the gifts until the time of one’s own wedding, they are not addressed by this verse.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>And the firstborn does not take a double</b> portion from them. The reason is <b>that they constitute potential</b> inheritance, <b>and the firstborn does not take</b> in inheritance the property <b>due</b> the deceased <b>as</b> he does the property the deceased <b>possessed.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Kahana said: The principle with regard to</b> the reciprocation of <b>gifts of groomsmen</b> is: If the recipient <b>was in town</b> when his groomsman wed, <b>he should have come</b> to the wedding, and even if he did not come, he is obligated to send the gifts of groomsmen. If he was not in town, but <b>he</b> was nearby and he <b>heard the sound of the drum</b> announcing the wedding, <b>he should have come.</b> If <b>he</b> was far away and <b>did not hear the sound of the drum,</b> the betrothed man <b>should have informed him.</b> If he did not inform him, the recipient <b>has a grievance</b> against the betrothed man because he did not inform him about the wedding, but <b>he</b> still <b>repays</b> the gifts of groomsmen.

### Part 5
In this case, since he did not partake of the wedding feast, he is entitled to deduct a sum from the reciprocal gift. The Gemara asks: <b>And up to how much</b> can he deduct? <b>Abaye said:</b> The <b>members of a wedding</b> feast <b>were accustomed</b> to deduct according to the following principle: If the gift of groomsmen that the reciprocal giver received was <b>up to a dinar,</b> he now pays nothing, because what a person <b>brings in his hand he consumes in his stomach.</b> If the gift of groomsmen was <b>up to four</b> dinars, he now <b>pays half. From that</b> sum <b>onward, each person</b> deducts <b>according to his prominence,</b> i.e., in accordance with the outlay that would have been required to honor the reciprocal giver properly, had he participated in the wedding feast.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:9): If one <b>served</b> as groomsman <b>for</b> his friend <b>at a public [<i>pumbei</i>]</b> wedding, <b>and</b> when the groomsman himself wed, he <b>requested</b> that his friend reciprocate <b>by serving</b> as a groomsman <b>for him at a private</b> wedding, the friend <b>can say to him: I</b> am willing to reciprocate and <b>serve</b> as groomsman <b>for you</b> only <b>at a public</b> wedding, where the rejoicing is greater, <b>in the manner you served</b> as a groomsman <b>for me.</b> If one <b>served</b> as a groomsman <b>for</b> his friend <b>when</b> he married <b>a virgin, and</b> he <b>requested</b> that his friend reciprocate <b>by serving</b> as a groomsman <b>for him when</b> he marries <b>a widow,</b> the friend <b>can say to him: I shall serve</b> as a groomsman <b>for you</b> only <b>when</b> you marry <b>a virgin, in the manner you served</b> as a groomsman <b>for me.</b>

### Part 7
If one <b>served</b> as a groomsman <b>for</b> his friend <b>when</b> he married <b>a second</b> wife, <b>and</b> he <b>requested</b> that his friend reciprocate <b>by serving</b> as a groomsman <b>for him when</b> he marries <b>a first</b> wife, the friend <b>can say to him: When you marry another woman I will serve</b> as a groomsman <b>for you.</b> If one <b>served</b> as a groomsman <b>for</b> his friend <b>when</b> he married <b>one</b> woman, <b>and</b> he <b>requested</b> that his friend reciprocate <b>by serving</b> as a groomsman <b>for him when</b> he marries <b>two</b> women, the friend <b>can say to him: I will serve</b> as a groomsman <b>for you when</b> you marry <b>one</b> woman, <b>in the manner you served</b> as a groomsman <b>for me.</b>

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There are different types of Torah scholars. There is a scholar who is <b>wealthy</b> in figurative <b>property</b> and <b>wealthy</b> in <b>public</b> renown; <b>this is the master of homiletics.</b> There is a scholar who is <b>wealthy</b> in <b>coins</b> and <b>wealthy</b> in <b>houses; this is the master of dialectics.</b> There is one who is <b>wealthy</b> in <b>oil</b> and <b>wealthy</b> in <b>hidden</b> stores; <b>this is the master of</b> halakhic <b>traditions. Everyone is dependent on the owner of wheat;</b> this is the master of <b>Talmud,</b> who understands the reasons behind the rulings and traditions.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Zeira says</b> that <b>Rav says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “All the days of the poor are terrible;</b> and for the good-hearted it is always a feast” (Proverbs 15:15)? “All the days of the poor are terrible”; <b>this</b> is referring to the <b>master of Talmud,</b> who is wearied by the difficulty of his Talmud study. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to the <b>master of Mishna,</b> who recites the <i>mishnayot</i> by rote and is not wearied thereby.

### Part 10
<b>Rava says: The opposite</b> is true. <b>And this is</b> consistent with that <b>which Rav Mesharshiyya says in the name of Rava: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He who quarries stones shall be hurt by them; and he that chops wood shall be warmed thereby”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:9). <b>“He who quarries stones shall be hurt by them”; these are the masters of Mishna.</b> They exert themselves to memorize the <i>mishnayot</i>, but since one cannot reach practical conclusions from the mishna, they are comparable to one who carries a heavy load without benefiting from it. <b>“He that chops wood shall be warmed thereby”; these are the masters of Talmud,</b> who attain the benefit of their exertions in the form of practical conclusions.

### Part 11
The Gemara cites other interpretations of this verse. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who has a wicked wife. “And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who has a good wife. Rabbi Yannai says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who is delicate [<i>istenis</i>]</b> and overly sensitive, because he constantly encounters unpleasant situations. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who is relaxed</b> and not particular with regard to his food or his surroundings.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to <b>an empathetic person,</b> because he is constantly affected by the suffering in the world. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to <b>a cruel person,</b> who is not pained by the suffering of others. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to a person <b>of impatient disposition. “And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to a person <b>of patient disposition.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC