
### Part 1
<b>And to seal,</b> i.e., if one sealed another’s window in his presence, <b>there is an acquired privilege</b> established <b>immediately</b> to keep the window sealed, <b>as it is not common</b> behavior for <b>a person to have his</b> source of <b>light sealed in his presence and</b> remain <b>silent.</b> The fact that he did not immediately protest indicates that the one who sealed the window had the legal right to do so unilaterally, or that the owner of the window agreed.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that if one <b>purchased a house in another,</b> adjacent <b>courtyard,</b> he <b>may not open</b> the house <b>into a courtyard belonging to partners.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Because</b> by adding residents to the courtyard <b>it increases their traffic,</b> and the residents of the courtyard do not wish to be disturbed by additional people passing through.

### Part 3
The Gemara questions this. But <b>say the last clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Rather, if he desired</b> to build a loft, he may <b>build a room within his house, or</b> he may <b>build a loft above his house,</b> and have it open into his house, not directly into the courtyard. <b>But</b> if he does so, <b>isn’t</b> there still a concern that <b>it increases the traffic? Rav Huna said</b> as an explanation: <b>What</b> does the mishna mean when it says that he may build <b>a room?</b> It means <b>that</b> he may <b>divide</b> an existing room <b>in two. And what is</b> the <b>loft</b> to which the mishna is referring? It is <b>an internal story</b> created by dividing an existing space into two stories.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may not open an entrance opposite</b> another <b>entrance or a window opposite</b> another <b>window toward a courtyard belonging to partners,</b> so as to ensure that the residents will enjoy a measure of privacy. If there <b>was a small</b> entrance <b>he may not enlarge it.</b> If there was <b>one</b> entrance <b>he may not fashion it</b> into <b>two. But</b> one <b>may open an entrance opposite</b> another <b>entrance or a window opposite</b> another <b>window toward the public domain.</b> Similarly, if there <b>was a small</b> entrance <b>he may enlarge it,</b> and if there was <b>one</b> entrance <b>he may fashion it</b> into <b>two.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters,</b> i.e., that one may not open an en-trance opposite another entrance, or a window opposite another window, derived? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says that</b> the <b>verse states: “And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel dwelling tribe by tribe;</b> and the spirit of God came upon him” (Numbers 24:2). The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> was it that Balaam <b>saw</b> that so inspired him? He <b>saw that the entrances of their tents were not aligned with each other,</b> ensuring that each family enjoyed a measure of privacy. And he <b>said:</b> If this is the case, <b>these</b> people <b>are worthy of having the Divine Presence rest on them.</b>

### Part 6
The mishna teaches that if there <b>was a small</b> entrance <b>he may not enlarge it. Rami bar Ḥama thought to say</b> this means that if the entrance was the width <b>of four</b> cubits, one <b>may not fashion it</b> to the width <b>of eight</b> cubits, <b>as</b> he would then be allowed to <b>take eight</b> corresponding cubits <b>in</b> the <b>courtyard.</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that one is entitled to utilize the area of the courtyard up to a depth of four cubits along the width of the opening. <b>But</b> if the entrance was the width <b>of two</b> cubits and one wishes <b>to fashion it</b> to the width <b>of four</b> cubits, one may <b>well</b> do so, as in any event he already had the right to use an area of four cubits by four cubits in front of the entrance. <b>Rava said to him:</b> This is not so, as his neighbor <b>can say to him: I can conceal</b> myself <b>from you with</b> there being <b>a small entrance,</b> but <b>I cannot conceal</b> myself <b>from you with</b> there being <b>a large entrance.</b>

### Part 7
The mishna teaches that if there <b>was one</b> entrance <b>he may not fashion it into two.</b> In this case as well, <b>Rami bar Ḥama thought to say</b> that this means if the entrance was the width <b>of four</b> cubits he <b>may not make it into two</b> openings, <b>each</b> the width <b>of two</b> cubits, <b>as</b> he would then be allowed to <b>take eight</b> corresponding cubits <b>in</b> the <b>courtyard,</b> four for each entrance. <b>But</b> if it was the width <b>of eight</b> cubits and he wishes <b>to make it into</b> two openings, <b>each</b> the width <b>of four</b> cubits, he may <b>well</b> do so, as in any event he already had the right to use an area of eight cubits by four cubits in front of his entrance. <b>Rava said to him:</b> This is not so, as his neighbor <b>can say to him: I can conceal</b> myself <b>from you with</b> there being <b>one entrance,</b> but <b>I cannot conceal</b> myself <b>from you with</b> there being <b>two entrances.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna teaches: <b>But</b> one <b>may open an entrance opposite</b> another <b>entrance</b> or a window opposite another window <b>toward the public domain.</b> Why is this so? <b>Because</b> he can <b>say to</b> the one who wishes to protest: <b>Ultimately, you must conceal yourself from</b> the <b>people of the public domain.</b> Since you cannot stop them from passing by and therefore cannot engage in behavior that requires privacy with your entrance open, it is of no consequence to you if I open an entrance as well.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>may not form an</b> empty <b>space be-neath the public domain</b> by digging <b>pits, ditches, or caves. Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> it <b>permitted</b> for one to do so, provided that he places a covering strong enough that <b>a wagon laden with stones would</b> be able to <b>tread</b> on it without breaking it, therefore ensuring that the empty space will not cause any damage to those in the public domain. One <b>may not extend projections or balconies [<i>ugzuztraot</i>] into the public domain. Rather, if he desired</b> to build one he may <b>draw back into his</b> property by moving his wall, <b>and extend</b> the projection to the end of his property line. If one <b>purchased a courtyard in which there are projections and balconies</b> extending into the public domain, this courtyard <b>retains its presumptive status,</b> i.e., the owner has the acquired privilege of their use, and the court does not demand their removal.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion that if the covering of the space is strong enough to support a wagon laden with stones then it is permitted to dig out the empty space, is eminently reasonable; <b>but</b> what do <b>the Rabbis</b> hold? The Gemara answers: There are <b>times when</b> the cover <b>erodes</b> over time, <b>and he is not aware,</b> thereby potentially causing damage to those in the public domain.

### Part 11
The mishna teaches that <b>one may not extend projections or balconies</b> into the public domain. The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ami had a projection that protruded into an alleyway, and a certain man also had a projection that protruded into the public domain,</b> and the <b>general public was preventing</b> the man from leaving it there, as it interfered with traffic. He <b>came before Rabbi Ami,</b> who <b>said to him: Go sever</b> your projection.

### Part 12
The man <b>said to him: But</b> the <b>Master also has</b> a similar projection. Rabbi Ami said to him: It is different, as <b>mine protrudes into an alleyway,</b> where a limited number of people live, and the <b>residents of the alleyway waive</b> their right to protest <b>to me. Yours protrudes into the public domain,</b> which does not belong to any specific individuals. <b>Who</b> can <b>waive</b> their right to protest <b>to you?</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yannai had a tree that was leaning into the public domain.</b> There <b>was a certain man who also had a tree that was leaning into the public domain,</b> and the <b>general public was preventing him</b> from leaving it there, insisting he cut it down, as required by the mishna (27b). He <b>came before Rabbi Yannai,</b> who <b>said to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC