
### Part 1
<b>the broken pieces of the</b> first set of <b>tablets, which were placed in the Ark.</b> Having cited the <i>baraita</i>, the Gemara now presents its objection to what was taught earlier with regard to the dimensions of a Torah scroll: <b>And if it should enter your mind</b> to say, as Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi held, that <b>the circumference of a Torah scroll is six handbreadths, now since any</b> cylindrical object <b>having a circumference of three handbreadths has a diameter of one handbreadth,</b> a Torah scroll with a circumference of six handbreadths has a diameter of two handbreadths. <b>And since</b> a Torah scroll <b>is wound to the middle,</b> since it is rolled from both sides, <b>it</b> must take up <b>more than two handbreadths</b> due to <b>the space between</b> the sheets of parchment and the double rolling. According to Rabbi Meir, who says that the Torah scroll was placed inside the ark, <b>how did</b> the scroll <b>fit in</b> the remaining <b>two handbreadths [<i>pushkei</i>]</b> of space in the Ark?

### Part 2
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: The scroll of the</b> Temple <b>courtyard,</b> which was kept in the Ark, <b>was wound to its beginning,</b> i.e., it had only a single pole, so that its circumference was only two handbreadths. The Gemara asks: <b>But still, how does</b> an item <b>that is two</b> handbreadths wide <b>fit into</b> a space that is precisely <b>two</b> handbreadths? It would be impossible to fit it in. <b>Rav Ashi said: A small section</b> of the scroll <b>was wound</b> separately <b>and</b> then <b>placed on top</b> of the scroll.

### Part 3
Having concluded its current discussion, the Gemara now addresses the details of the aforementioned <i>baraita</i> and asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who says that the Torah scroll rested on the chest that came from the Philistines, <b>where was the Torah scroll placed before the chest arrived?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>A shelf protruded from</b> the Ark <b>and the Torah scroll rested on it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who says that the Torah scroll rested inside the Ark, <b>what does he do with this</b> verse: “Take this Torah scroll and put it <b>at the side of the Ark”</b> (Deuteronomy 31:26)? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires</b> that verse to teach <b>that</b> the Torah scroll <b>was placed at the side</b> of the tablets, <b>and that it was not placed between</b> the two <b>tablets, but</b> it was <b>actually</b> placed <b>inside</b> the Ark <b>at the side</b> of the tablets.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Meir, where were the</b> silver <b>columns placed?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Outside</b> the Ark. The Gemara further asks: <b>And from where does Rabbi Meir</b> derive that <b>the broken pieces of the</b> first set of <b>tablets were placed in the Ark,</b> as the verse from which Rabbi Yehuda learns this: “There was nothing in the Ark except” (I Kings 8:9), is needed by Rabbi Meir to teach that the Torah scroll was placed there? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives</b> this point <b>from what Rav Huna</b> expounded, <b>as Rav Huna says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written:</b> “The Ark of God, <b>whereupon is called the Name, the name of the Lord of hosts that sits upon the cherubs”</b> (II Samuel 6:2)? The phrase “the name, the name of the Lord” <b>teaches that</b> both <b>the</b> second <b>tablets and the broken pieces of the</b> first set of <b>tablets were placed in the Ark.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>the other</b> Sage, i.e., Rabbi Yehuda, derive from this verse? The Gemara responds: <b>He requires</b> that text <b>for</b> that <b>which Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says:</b> This <b>teaches that the</b> ineffable <b>name</b> of God <b>and all of His appellations were placed in the Ark.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara inquires: <b>And</b> doesn’t <b>the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Meir, <b>also require it for that?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> it <b>is indeed so. Rather, from where does he</b> derive that <b>the broken pieces of the</b> first set of <b>tablets were placed in the Ark?</b> The Gemara expounds: <b>He derives</b> this <b>from</b> that <b>which Rav Yosef taught, as Rav Yosef taught</b> a <i>baraita</i>: The verses state: “At that time the Lord said to me: Hew for yourself two tablets of stone like the first…and I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, <b>which you broke, and you shall put them</b> in the Ark” (Deuteronomy 10:1–2). <b>This teaches that</b> both <b>the</b> second set of <b>tablets and the broken pieces of the</b> first set of <b>tablets were placed in the Ark.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>the other</b> one, Rabbi Yehuda, learn from this verse? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires it for</b> that <b>which Reish Lakish</b> teaches, <b>as Reish Lakish says:</b> What is the meaning of that which is stated: “The first tablets, <b>which you broke [<i>asher shibbarta</i>]”?</b> These words allude to the fact that God approved of Moses’ action, as if <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: May your strength be straight [<i>yishar koḥakha</i>] because you broke</b> them.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught: The order of the</b> books of the <b>Prophets</b> when they are attached together is as follows: <b>Joshua and Judges, Samuel and Kings, Jeremiah and Ezekiel,</b> and <b>Isaiah and the Twelve</b> Prophets. The Gemara asks: <b>Consider: Hosea preceded</b> some of the other prophets whose books are included in the Bible, <b>as it is written: “The Lord spoke first to Hosea”</b> (Hosea 1:2). At first glance this verse is difficult: <b>But did God speak first with Hosea,</b> and not with any other prophet before him? <b>Weren’t there many prophets between Moses and Hosea? And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He was the first of four prophets who prophesied in that period, and they were: Hosea and Isaiah, Amos and Micah.</b> Accordingly, Hosea preceded those three prophets; <b>and</b> the book of <b>Hosea</b> as well <b>should precede</b> the books of those prophets.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Since his prophecy is written together with</b> those of <b>Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi</b> in one book of the Twelve Prophets, <b>and Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi were the last of the prophets, he is counted with them.</b> The Gemara inquires: <b>But let</b> the book of Hosea <b>be written separately and let it precede</b> the others. The Gemara answers: Were it written separately, <b>since it is small it would be lost.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara further asks: <b>Consider: Isaiah preceded Jeremiah and Ezekiel; let</b> the book of <b>Isaiah precede</b> the books of those other prophets. The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the book of <b>Kings ends with the destruction</b> of the Temple, <b>and</b> the book of <b>Jeremiah</b> deals <b>entirely with</b> prophecies of <b>the destruction, and</b> the book of <b>Ezekiel begins with the destruction</b> of the Temple <b>but ends with consolation</b> and the rebuilding of the Temple, <b>and Isaiah</b> deals <b>entirely with consolation,</b> as most of his prophecies refer to the redemption, <b>we juxtapose destruction to destruction and consolation to consolation.</b> This accounts for the order: Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Isaiah.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>The order of the Writings</b> is: <b>Ruth and the book of Psalms, and Job and Proverbs; Ecclesiastes, Song of Songs, and Lamentations; Daniel and the Scroll of Esther;</b> and <b>Ezra and Chronicles.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that <b>Job</b> lived <b>in the time of Moses, let</b> the book of <b>Job precede</b> the others. The Gemara answers: <b>We do not begin with suffering,</b> i.e., it is inappropriate to start the Writings with a book that deals so extensively with suffering. The Gemara asks: But the book of <b>Ruth,</b> with which the Writings opens, <b>is also</b> about <b>suffering,</b> since it describes the tragedies that befell the family of Elimelech. The Gemara answers: This is <b>suffering which has a future</b> of hope and redemption. <b>As Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Why was she named Ruth,</b> spelled <i>reish</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>tav</i>? Because there <b>descended from her David who sated,</b> a word with the root <i>reish</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>heh</i>, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, with songs and praises.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> now considers the authors of the biblical books: <b>And who wrote</b> the books of the Bible? <b>Moses wrote his own book,</b> i.e., the Torah, <b>and the portion of Balaam</b> in the Torah, <b>and</b> the book of <b>Job. Joshua wrote his own book and eight verses in the Torah,</b> which describe the death of Moses. <b>Samuel wrote his own book,</b> the book of <b>Judges, and</b> the book of <b>Ruth. David wrote the book of Psalms by means of ten elders</b> of previous generations, assembling a collection that included compositions of others along with his own. He included psalms authored <b>by Adam the first</b> man, <b>by Melchizedek</b> king of Salem, <b>and by Abraham, and by Moses, and by Heman, and by Jeduthun, and by Asaph,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC