
### Part 1
<b>says: With regard to weekdays</b> the Sages <b>stated</b> that the verbal instruction of person on his deathbed is valid, even though it is permitted to write. <b>And</b> one may infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that the same applies <b>with regard to Shabbat,</b> when writing is prohibited. <b>Similarly, one can acquire</b> property <b>on behalf of an adult,</b> as he is able to effect acquisition himself, <b>but one cannot acquire</b> property <b>on behalf of a minor;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> The Sages <b>stated</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to an adult,</b> even though he can effect acquisition himself. One may infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that this also applies <b>with regard to a minor,</b> who cannot effect acquisition himself.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says that Rabbi Eliezer says: On Shabbat,</b> the verbal <b>statement of</b> a person on his deathbed <b>stands due to</b> the fact <b>that he cannot write. But</b> a verbal instruction does <b>not stand on a weekday. Rabbi Yehoshua says: With regard to Shabbat</b> the Sages <b>stated</b> that his verbal instruction stands, even though writing is prohibited. One may infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that the same applies <b>with regard to a weekday,</b> when writing is permitted. <b>Similarly, one can acquire</b> property <b>on behalf of a minor, but one cannot acquire</b> property <b>on behalf of an adult,</b> since he can effect the acquisition himself; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> The Sages <b>stated</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a minor,</b> and one may infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that this also applies <b>with regard to an adult.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A house collapsed on</b> a son <b>and upon his father, or upon</b> a certain person <b>and upon those</b> from <b>whom he stands to inherit,</b> and it is unknown who died first. If the son <b>bore</b> the responsibility to pay the <b>marriage contract of</b> his <b>wife and</b> to pay <b>a creditor,</b> and the son had no money with which to pay them except that which he might inherit from his father, and <b>the father’s heirs say: The son died first and afterward the father died,</b> and therefore the son did not inherit property from his father, <b>and the creditors say: The father died first and afterward the son died,</b> resulting in the son’s inheriting his father’s property, enabling the creditors to collect payment from the property even after the son’s death, there is a dispute with regard to how to rule.

### Part 4
Since it cannot be determined who died first, <b>Beit Shammai say: They divide</b> the property between them so that the father’s heirs receive half of his property and the son’s creditors receive the other half. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> The <b>property</b> retains <b>its</b> previous ownership <b>status.</b> Since the last known owner of the property was the father, the property is given to the father’s heirs.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (175a): <b>One who lends</b> money <b>to another with</b> a promissory <b>note can collect</b> the debt even <b>from liened property</b> that has been sold. If one lends money only <b>with witnesses, he can collect</b> the debt only <b>from unsold property.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Shmuel raises a dilemma:</b> If the borrower wrote in the promissory note: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> in the future shall be liened to this debt, <b>and he</b> subsequently <b>acquired</b> property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is the property liened or not? The Gemara clarifies the dilemma: <b>According to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir, who says: A person can transfer</b> ownership of <b>an entity that has not</b> yet <b>come into the world, you should not raise the dilemma, as</b> the lender <b>certainly acquires,</b> i.e., places a lien, on the property. <b>Rather, when should you raise the dilemma?</b> Raise it <b>according to</b> the opinion <b>of the Rabbis, who say: A person cannot transfer</b> ownership of <b>an entity that has not</b> yet <b>come into the world.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yosef said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 110a): If one produces a promissory note against another, and the borrower produced a bill of sale dated after the promissory note that states that the lender sold him a field of his, Admon says that the borrower can say: Were I really indebted to you, you should have collected the loan when you sold me the field. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> This does not prove anything. It is possible that <b>this</b> lender <b>was perspicacious, as he sold</b> the borrower <b>the land</b> for a good reason, <b>because</b> now <b>he can take</b> the field <b>as collateral from him</b> in lieu of the outstanding loan. This mishna indicates that even property acquired by the borrower after the promissory note is written is liened.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>Do</b> you <b>speak</b> of a case where the debt is collected <b>from</b> the debtor? With regard to collecting the debt <b>from him,</b> the debt is collected from any property currently in his possession, <b>even from</b> the <b>cloak that is upon his shoulders. When the dilemma was raised to us,</b> it was with regard to a case where the borrower wrote: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> shall be liened, and he subsequently <b>acquired</b> property <b>and sold</b> it to others. The dilemma also pertains to a case where the borrower wrote: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> shall be liened, and he subsequently <b>acquired</b> property <b>and bequeathed</b> it to his heirs. In these cases, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Can the lender repossess the property from the buyer or heir?

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥana said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna: In a case where <b>the house collapsed on</b> a son <b>and upon his father, or upon</b> a certain person <b>and upon those</b> from <b>whom he stands to inherit,</b> and it is unknown who died first, the <i>halakha</i> depends on the circumstances. If the son <b>bore</b> the responsibility to pay the <b>marriage contract of</b> his <b>wife and</b> to pay <b>a creditor,</b> and the son had no money with which to pay them except that which he might inherit from his father, and <b>the father’s heirs say: The son died first and afterward the father died,</b> and therefore the son did not inherit property from his father, <b>and the creditors say: The father died first</b> and afterward the son died, there is a dispute with regard to how to rule. In this case, the creditors claim that the son inherited his father’s property, and therefore they have a lien upon the property.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: <b>And if it enters your mind</b> to say that when the borrower writes: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> shall be liened, and he <b>acquires</b> property <b>and sells</b> it to others, it is not liened, and that when he writes: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> shall be liened, and he <b>acquires</b> property <b>and bequeaths</b> it to his heirs, <b>it is not liened,</b> then the mishna is difficult. <b>Although the father indeed died first,</b> this case <b>is</b> comparable to one where the borrower writes: The property <b>that I will acquire</b> shall be liened, as the son acquired the property after receiving the loan. This indicates that a lien can be placed upon property that one will acquire in the future.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Naḥman said to</b> the Sages: Rabbi <b>Zeira, our colleague, interpreted</b> the mishna as follows: In this case, the creditors do not claim the property because it is liened. Rather, they claim it because it is <b>a mitzva</b> incumbent <b>upon the orphans to repay their father’s debt. Rav Ashi objects to this:</b> If the promissory note does not place a lien on the property, <b>this is</b> considered <b>a loan by oral</b> agreement, <b>and Rav and Shmuel both say: A loan by oral</b> agreement <b>cannot be collected, neither from the heirs nor from the buyers.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC