
### Part 1
The verse states: <b>“And every daughter who possesses an inheritance from the tribes of the children of Israel”</b> (Numbers 36:8). Noting the plural in the phrase “from the tribes of the children of Israel,” the <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>How</b> can <b>a daughter inherit</b> land from <b>two tribes? Rather, this</b> is referring to a daughter <b>whose father</b> is <b>from one tribe but her mother</b> is <b>from another tribe, and they</b> both <b>died, and she inherited</b> from both of <b>them.</b> Therefore, it can be seen in this verse that a daughter inherits from her mother.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>a daughter</b> inherits from her mother; <b>from where</b> do I derive that <b>a son</b> inherits from his mother as well? <b>You</b> can <b>say an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And just as a daughter, whose power is diminished with regard to</b> her <b>father’s property</b> in that she does not inherit it when there is a son, yet her power <b>is enhanced with regard to</b> her <b>mother’s property</b> in that she inherits it; with regard to <b>a son, whose power is enhanced with regard to</b> his <b>father’s property</b> in that he is first in the order of inheritance, <b>is it not logical that his power is enhanced with regard to</b> his <b>mother’s property?</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And from the place that you came,</b> i.e., from the inference that was just stated, one can say the following: <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to a father’s property, <b>a son precedes a daughter, so too here,</b> with regard to a mother’s property, <b>a son precedes a daughter.</b> This is the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i>.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, said in the name of Rabbi Zekharya ben Hakatzav: Both the son and the daughter are equal with regard to the mother’s property. What is the reason</b> for his ruling? <b>It is sufficient for the</b> conclusion that <b>emerges from</b> an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference to be like</b> its <b>source.</b> According to this principle, a <i>halakha</i> derived by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference cannot go beyond the <i>halakhot</i> of the source from which it is derived. Since the <i>halakha</i> that a son inherits from his mother was derived via an <i>a fortiori</i> inference from the <i>halakha</i> that a daughter inherits from her mother, it cannot be that this inference should lead to the conclusion that a son precedes a daughter in inheriting from their mother.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And doesn’t the first <i>tanna</i></b> also <b>interpret</b> verses employing the principle of: <b>It is sufficient</b> for the conclusion that emerges from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference to be like its source? <b>But</b> the principle of: <b>It is sufficient,</b> which limits the extent of <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>is</b> found <b>in the Torah,</b> so how could he disagree with it?

### Part 5
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that explains the hermeneutical principles: <b>How</b> does <b>an <i>a fortiori</i> inference</b> work? The verse states with regard to Miriam, after she spoke ill of her brother Moses: <b>“And the Lord said to Moses: If her father had but spit in her face, should she not hide in shame seven days?”</b> (Numbers 12:14). The verse is saying that if a father spits in the face of his daughter and reprimands her, she would feel shame for seven days. By <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference it is derived that Miriam, who suffered the more severe reprimand <b>of the Divine Presence,</b> should be ostracized for <b>fourteen</b> days. Why then, was Miriam ostracized for only seven days?

### Part 6
<b>Rather, it is sufficient for the</b> conclusion that <b>emerges from</b> an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference to be like</b> its <b>source,</b> so her punishment cannot be for longer than the punishment of one who is reprimanded by a father. In any event, the principle the begins with: It is sufficient, can be seen in this verse, so how does the first <i>tanna</i> rule that a son precedes a daughter with regard to a mother’s property?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Generally,</b> the first <i>tanna</i> also <b>interprets</b> verses employing the principle that begins with: <b>It is sufficient, but it is different here</b> with regard to inheritance, <b>as the verse states:</b> “And every daughter who possesses an inheritance <b>from the tribes</b> of the children of Israel” (Numbers 36:8). The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the <b>tribe of the mother to</b> the <b>tribe of the father.</b> Therefore, the first <i>tanna</i> holds that <b>just as</b> with regard to the <b>tribe of the father,</b> i.e., inheriting from one’s father, <b>a son precedes a daughter, so too,</b> with regard to the <b>tribe of the mother,</b> i.e., inheriting from one’s mother, <b>a son precedes a daughter.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Nittai thought to perform an action,</b> i.e., issue a ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav,</b> who taught that a son and daughter are equal with regard to inheriting from their mother. <b>Shmuel said to him: In accordance with whose</b> opinion do you wish to issue this ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Zekharya? Zekharya is nil [<i>afes</i>],</b> i.e., his statement was not accepted as <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rabbi Tavla performed an action,</b> i.e., issued a ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav. Rav Naḥman said to him: What is this?</b> Rabbi Tavla <b>said to him: As Rav Ḥinnana bar Shelamya says in the name of Rav:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Go retract your</b> ruling, <b>and if</b> you do <b>not, I will take Rav Ḥinnana bar Shelamya out of your ear,</b> i.e., I will punish you severely for ruling against the accepted <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates further: <b>Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya thought to perform an action,</b> i.e., issue a ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav. Rav Naḥman said to him: What is this?</b> Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya <b>said to him: As Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Shall I send</b> a messenger <b>to</b> Rav Huna to ask him if that is indeed what he said? Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya <b>was embarrassed,</b> as he was not certain that Rav Huna actually said this ruling. Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Now, if Rav Huna were</b> to have <b>died, you would have been brazen</b> enough to say <b>before me</b> that this is what he said, but since he is still alive, you cannot be so brazen.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And he,</b> Rav Naḥman, <b>in accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>does he hold?</b> As there were various sages who ruled in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav, why did Rav Naḥman not agree? The Gemara answers: He holds <b>in accordance with this</b> statement <b>of Rav and Shmuel, who both say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Zekharya ben HaKatzav.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yannai,</b> who had already grown old and whose eyes were dim, <b>would walk leaning on the shoulder of Rabbi Simlai, his attendant, and Rabbi Yehuda Nesia came toward them.</b> Rabbi Simlai <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yannai: The <b>person who is coming toward us is handsome and his cloak</b> is <b>handsome. When</b> Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>reached him,</b> Rabbi Yannai <b>felt</b> his cloak and <b>said to</b> Rabbi Simlai: Concerning <b>this</b> cloak, <b>its measurement</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity <b>is like the</b> measurement of <b>sackcloth,</b> meaning it was a cloak of inferior quality, as it was thick and rough.

### Part 12
When Rabbi Yehuda Nesia met Rabbi Yannai he <b>asked him: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a son precedes a daughter with regard to the mother’s property?</b> Rabbi Yannai <b>said to him: As it is written:</b> “And every daughter who possesses an inheritance from <b>the tribes</b> of the children of Israel” (Numbers 36:8). The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the <b>tribe of the mother to</b> the <b>tribe of the father.</b> This teaches that <b>just as</b> with regard to the <b>tribe of the father a son precedes a daughter, so too,</b> with regard to the <b>tribe of the mother, a son precedes a daughter.</b> Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>said to him: If</b> so, if these two <i>halakhot</i> are in fact juxtaposed, the following should also be derived: <b>Just as</b> with regard to the inheritance of <b>the father’s tribe a firstborn takes a double</b> portion, <b>so too,</b> with regard to inheritance from <b>the mother’s tribe,</b> when he inherits from his mother <b>a firstborn takes a double</b> portion.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC