
### Part 1
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Terumot</i> 2:8): With regard to <b>one who inspects a barrel</b> to see if it still contains enough wine <b>to continually</b> mentally <b>separate <i>teruma</i> from it</b> to exempt other untithed wine he has, until all the wine in that barrel would be <i>teruma</i> and would be given to a priest, <b>and afterward</b> the contents of the barrel <b>were found</b> to have turned to <b>vinegar,</b> which cannot be set aside as <i>teruma</i> for untithed wine, then <b>all three days</b> after he had last inspected it, it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been wine, and any wine for which <i>teruma</i> was separated during those days is tithed. <b>From that</b> point <b>onward,</b> more than three days after the previous inspection, it is <b>uncertain</b> as to whether it had already turned to vinegar, and any wine for which <i>teruma</i> was separated during those days is not tithed.

### Part 2
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>saying? Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>this</b> is what it <b>is saying:</b> For <b>all</b> of <b>the first three days</b> following the inspection, it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>wine</b> that had not yet turned to vinegar. <b>From that</b> point <b>onward,</b> it is <b>uncertain</b> as to whether it had already turned to vinegar. Accordingly, any wine for which <i>teruma</i> was separated after those three days by means of designating the contents of that barrel as <i>teruma</i> has an uncertain status.

### Part 3
<b>What is the reason?</b> The process in which <b>wine turns sour</b> and becomes vinegar starts <b>with</b> the wine at the <b>top</b> of the barrel; <b>and</b> it is <b>that</b> wine which <b>he tasted</b> when he inspected it, <b>and</b> at that time <b>it had not</b> yet <b>soured.</b> And even <b>if you say</b> that immediately <b>after he tasted it</b> the wine began to <b>sour,</b> during the following three days <b>it</b> would <b>have the odor of vinegar and its taste</b> would be <b>of wine, and anything</b> that <b>has an odor of vinegar but its taste is of wine</b> is regarded as <b>wine.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says</b> that there is a different interpretation of the <i>baraita</i>: For <b>all</b> of <b>the last three days</b> preceding the discovery that the wine had turned into vinegar, it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>vinegar. From that</b> point and <b>earlier,</b> until the time it had been inspected, it is <b>uncertain</b> whether or not it was wine or vinegar.

### Part 5
<b>What is the reason?</b> The process in which <b>wine turns sour</b> and becomes vinegar starts <b>with</b> the wine at the <b>bottom</b> of the barrel, <b>and</b> therefore, since the inspection was limited to the wine at the top of the barrel, it is possible to <b>say</b> that wine at the bottom <b>had</b> already started to <b>sour and one was unaware of it.</b> Consequently, it is possible that on the day he tasted it the wine turned entirely into vinegar. <b>And</b> even <b>if you say</b> that the process in which <b>wine turns sour</b> and becomes vinegar starts <b>with</b> the wine at the <b>top</b> of the barrel, <b>and</b> it is <b>that</b> wine that <b>he tasted</b> when he inspected it <b>and</b> at that time <b>it had not</b> yet <b>soured, perhaps</b> immediately <b>after he tasted it</b> the wine began to <b>sour,</b> in which case <b>its odor</b> would be <b>of vinegar and its taste of wine, and</b> anything that <b>has an odor of vinegar but its taste is of wine</b> is regarded as <b>vinegar.</b>

### Part 6
The Sages <b>of the South taught</b> another interpretation of the <i>baraita</i> <b>in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi:</b> For the <b>first</b> three days it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>wine.</b> For the <b>last</b> three days it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>vinegar.</b> The status of the wine during the <b>intervening</b> period is <b>uncertain.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>This matter itself</b> is <b>difficult,</b> as, since <b>you said</b> that for the <b>first</b> three days it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>wine; apparently,</b> if <b>it has the odor of vinegar but its taste is of wine</b> it is regarded as <b>wine. But then you said</b> that for the <b>last</b> three days it is <b>definitely</b> viewed as having been <b>vinegar; apparently,</b> if <b>it has the odor of vinegar but its taste is of wine</b> it is regarded as <b>vinegar,</b> as it can be established only that the odor had changed three days ago.

### Part 8
The Gemara resolves the difficulty: The Sages of the South hold that as long as the wine still tastes like wine, it is regarded as wine. When they said that when a barrel is found to contain vinegar it is certain that the wine had already turned into vinegar three days previously, they were referring to a case <b>where</b> the barrel <b>was found</b> to contain <b>strong vinegar, as, had it not</b> already <b>soured three days</b> previously, the barrel <b>would not have been found</b> to contain <b>strong vinegar;</b> rather, it would contain only mild vinegar.

### Part 9
Rav Yosef claimed that this <i>baraita</i> can serve as proof with regard to which blessing is recited over wine that has the odor of vinegar but tastes like wine. Having cited three different interpretations of the <i>baraita</i>, the Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with</b> whose interpretation did Rav Yosef <b>resolve</b> the question of which blessing to recite? <b>Rav Mari and Rav Zevid disagree about it. One said</b> that Rav Yosef resolved it <b>in accordance with</b> the interpretation of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> that this liquid is regarded as wine and the blessing for wine should be recited over it. <b>And one said</b> that Rav Yosef resolved it <b>in accordance with</b> the interpretation of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi,</b> that the liquid is regarded as vinegar and the generic blessing: By Whose word all things came to be, should be recited over it. There is no definitive resolution of the dispute.

### Part 10
§ An amoraic dispute <b>was stated</b> with regard to <b>one who sells a barrel of wine to another, and</b> following the sale <b>it turned to vinegar. Rav said:</b> If it soured during <b>any of the first three days</b> following the sale, it is presumed that it had already began to sour <b>in the domain of</b> the <b>seller,</b> and he bears financial responsibility for it; <b>from that</b> point <b>onward,</b> it is presumed that the wine soured <b>in the domain of</b> the <b>buyer,</b> and it is his loss.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC