
### Part 1
<b>who perverted the ways of his mother.</b> He said <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And He donned charity like a coat of mail”</b> (Isaiah 59:17)? This verse serves <b>to tell you</b> that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>this coat of mail, each and every scale</b> of which it is fashioned <b>combines to</b> form <b>one large coat of mail, so too</b> with regard to <b>charity, each and every <i>peruta</i></b> that one gives <b>combines to</b> form <b>a great sum. Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> The same idea is derived <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“And all our charity is as a polluted garment”</b> (Isaiah 64:5). <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>this garment, each and every thread</b> in it <b>combines to</b> form <b>one large garment, so too</b> with regard to <b>charity, each and every <i>peruta</i> combines to</b> form <b>a great sum.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara comments: <b>Why was</b> this Sage <b>called the infant who perverted the ways of his mother?</b> It was because of the following incident: <b>Rav Aḥadvoi bar Ami asked Rav Sheshet: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a leper renders a person impure</b> through contact <b>during his days of counting,</b> i.e., during the seven days that the leper must count from the start of his purification process, when he brings his birds, until he completes that process with the bringing of his sacrifices? Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: Since he renders</b> his <b>garments impure,</b> as it states that on the seventh day of his purification he must wash his clothes (see Leviticus 14:9), <b>he</b> also <b>renders people impure.</b>

### Part 3
Rav Aḥadvoi <b>said to him: Perhaps connected impurity is different,</b> meaning perhaps he renders his garments impure because they are connected to the source of the impurity, but this does not mean that he renders impure a person whom he touches. A proof for this distinction may be brought from the fact <b>that</b> if <b>one moves an animal carcass,</b> an action that renders him impure even if there was no actual contact with the carcass, <b>he renders</b> the <b>garments</b> that he is wearing <b>impure but does not render</b> another <b>person impure.</b>

### Part 4
Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: But from where do we</b> derive that the carcass of <b>a creeping animal renders a person impure? Is it not because</b> we know <b>that it renders</b> his <b>garments impure?</b> Rav Aḥadvoi <b>said to him: It is written explicitly</b> with regard to the carcass of <b>a creeping animal: “Or a man who touches any creeping animal,</b> whereby he may be made unclean” (Leviticus 22:5). Rav Sheshet said to him: <b>But from where do we</b> derive that <b>semen renders a person impure? Is it not because</b> we say that <b>since it renders</b> his <b>garments impure</b> (see Leviticus 15:17) <b>it</b> also <b>renders a person impure?</b> Rav Aḥadvoi <b>said to him: It is also written explicitly</b> with regard to <b>semen: “Or a man</b> from whom semen is expelled” (Leviticus 22:4), and the Sages expound the superfluous word “or” as serving <b>to include</b> as impure <b>one who touches</b> semen.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates that with each of his answers Rav Aḥadvoi <b>responded to</b> Rav Sheshet <b>in a mocking tone,</b> intimating that he doubted Rav Sheshet’s grasp of Torah verses. <b>Rav Sheshet was</b> deeply <b>offended,</b> and as punishment, <b>Rav Aḥadvoi bar Ami became mute and forgot his learning.</b> Rav Aḥadvoi’s <b>mother came and wept before</b> Rav Sheshet. <b>She cried and cried but he ignored her.</b> As she had once been Rav Sheshet’s nursemaid, <b>she said to him: Look at these breasts of mine from which you suckled.</b> Upon hearing that, Rav Sheshet <b>prayed for mercy for</b> Rav Aḥadvoi, <b>and he was healed.</b> And since it was Rav Aḥadvoi whose behavior led to his mother’s acting in this manner, he was referred to as the infant who perverted his mother’s ways.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: With regard to <b>that which we arrived at,</b> i.e., this particular subject, let us clarify the matter: <b>From where do we</b> derive that a leper renders impure a person with whom he comes into contact during his days of counting? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai says: Washing garments is stated with respect to his days of counting, and washing garments is stated with respect to his days of confirmed</b> leprosy, after he has been declared conclusively impure by a priest. <b>Just as there,</b> when he is a confirmed leper <b>he renders a person impure,</b> as is explicitly stated in the Torah, <b>so too here,</b> during his days of counting <b>he renders a person impure.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara resumes its discussion of the virtues of giving charity. <b>Rabbi Elazar said: One who performs</b> acts of <b>charity in secret is greater than Moses, our teacher. Whereas with regard to Moses, our teacher, it is written: “For I was afraid of the anger and the wrath”</b> (Deuteronomy 9:19), <b>with regard to one who performs</b> acts of <b>charity it is written: “A gift in secret pacifies anger, and a present in the bosom fierce wrath”</b> (Proverbs 21:14). The Gemara comments: <b>And this</b> statement <b>disagrees with</b> a statement <b>of Rabbi Yitzḥak, as Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> A secret gift <b>pacifies anger,</b> but it <b>does not pacify wrath, as it is stated: “And a present in the bosom fierce wrath,”</b> meaning that <b>although a present is in the bosom,</b> i.e., even if one gives charity in secret, nevertheless <b>fierce wrath</b> can still harm him. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says</b> as follows: <b>Any judge who accepts a bribe brings fierce wrath upon the world, as it is stated: “And a present in the bosom</b> fierce wrath.”

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak says: Anyone who gives a <i>peruta</i> to a poor person receives six blessings, and whoever consoles him with words</b> of comfort and encouragement <b>receives eleven blessings.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>One who gives a <i>peruta</i> to a poor person receives six blessings, as it is written: “Is it not to share</b> your bread with the hungry, <b>and that you shall bring the poor that are cast out to your house? When you see the naked,</b> that you cover him” (Isaiah 58:7). And the next verses list six blessings: “Then shall your light break forth like the dawn, and your health shall spring forth speedily, and your righteousness shall go before you, the glory of the Lord shall be your rearguard. Then, shall you call, and the Lord shall answer; you shall cry, and He shall say: Here I am” (Isaiah 58:8–9).

### Part 9
<b>And whoever consoles</b> a poor person <b>with words</b> of comfort and encouragement <b>receives eleven blessings, as it is stated: “And if you draw out your soul to the hungry and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall your light shine in darkness, and your gloom shall be as the noonday. And the Lord shall guide you continually, and satisfy your thirst in drought… And they that shall be of you shall build the old waste places, you shall raise up the foundations of many generations”</b> (Isaiah 58:10–12).

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He who pursues charity and mercy finds life, charity, and honor”</b> (Proverbs 21:21)? Is this to say that <b>because one has pursued charity, he</b> himself <b>shall find charity?</b> That is, shall the reward of one who has always given charity be that he will eventually become poor and other people will act charitably toward him? <b>Rather,</b> the verse serves <b>to tell you</b> that with regard to <b>anyone who pursues charity,</b> giving to the poor and leading others to do so, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, furnishes him with money with which to perform</b> his acts of <b>charity.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: The Holy One, Blessed be He, sends him people who are deserving of charity, so that he will reap</b> his just <b>reward for</b> helping <b>them.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>What</b> does this statement serve <b>to exclude?</b> It serves <b>to exclude Rabba’s homiletical interpretation</b> of a different verse, <b>as Rabba taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Let them be made to stumble before You; deal thus with them in the time of Your anger”</b> (Jeremiah 18:23)? The prophet <b>Jeremiah said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, even when</b> those wicked men who pursued me <b>subdue their inclinations and seek to perform</b> acts of <b>charity before You, cause them to stumble upon</b> dishonest <b>people who are not deserving</b> of charity, <b>so that they will not receive reward</b> for coming to their assistance.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: Anyone who is accustomed to performing</b> acts of <b>charity merits</b> blessing; <b>he will have sons who are masters of wisdom, masters of wealth, and masters of <i>aggada</i>.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Masters of wisdom, as it is written:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC