
### Part 1
<b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye, what</b> does it mean that the <i>tumtum</i> <b>is sustained as a daughter,</b> since Abaye maintains that the <i>tumtum</i> does not have the rights of a daughter? The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> even <b>according to Rava, what</b> does it mean that a <i>tumtum</i> <b>inherits as a son,</b> since Rava concedes that the <i>tumtum</i> and sons do not actually inherit anything? <b>Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> means that it is <b>fitting</b> for the <i>tumtum</i> <b>to inherit but he does not</b> actually inherit. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to sustenance, according to Abaye, the <i>baraita</i> means that it is <b>fitting</b> for the <i>tumtum</i> <b>to be sustained, but he is not</b> actually sustained.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>one who says: If my wife gives birth to a male</b> the offspring shall receive one hundred dinars, if she in fact gave birth to a male, the offspring receives one hundred dinars. If he says: If my wife gives birth to a female the offspring shall receive two hundred dinars, if she in fact gave birth to a female, the offspring receives two hundred dinars. The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that for him a daughter is preferable to a son? But</b> this seems to contradict what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who does not leave</b> behind <b>a son to inherit</b> from <b>him, the Holy One, Blessed be He, is filled with wrath upon him, as it is stated:</b> “If a man dies, and has no son, <b>then you shall cause his inheritance to pass [<i>veha’avartem</i>] to his daughter”</b> (Numbers 27:8). The term <b><i>ha’avara</i></b> means <b>nothing other</b> than <b>wrath, as it is stated: “That day is a day of wrath [<i>evra</i>]”</b> (Zephaniah 1:15).

### Part 3
The Gemara resolves the contradiction: <b>With regard to the matter of inheritance, for him a son is preferable</b> to a daughter, as a son bears his name and retains his ancestral heritage within his father’s tribe, but <b>with regard to the matter of</b> providing for his offspring’s <b>comfort, for him his daughter is preferable</b> to his son, as a son is more capable of coping for himself and the daughter needs more support.

### Part 4
<b>And Shmuel said: Here we are dealing with</b> a mother who is <b>giving birth for the first time, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rav Ḥisda, as Rav Ḥisda says:</b> If one gives birth to <b>a daughter first,</b> it <b>is a good sign for sons. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this is <b>because she raises her brothers,</b> i.e., helps in their upbringing, <b>and there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this is <b>because the evil eye does not have dominion over</b> the father. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: And</b> as <b>for myself, I prefer daughters to sons.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara adds: <b>And if you wish, say:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> statement is <b>this</b> mishna in which preference is given to the daughter? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Which</b> statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> is this referring to? <b>If we say</b> it is referring to the statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda with regard to</b> the term <b>“with everything [<i>bakkol</i>],”</b> that is difficult. The Gemara cites Rabbi Yehuda’s statement. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: “And Abraham was old, well stricken in age; <b>and the Lord had blessed Abraham with everything [<i>bakkol</i>]”</b> (Genesis 24:1). <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> The blessing was <b>that he did not have a daughter. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The blessing was <b>that he had a daughter, and her name</b> was <b>Bakkol.</b> Evidently, Rabbi Yehuda understands the birth of a daughter to be a blessing. The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>Say that you heard Rabbi Yehuda</b> explain that the blessing was that <b>the Merciful One did not even deprive Abraham</b> of <b>a daughter,</b> in addition to his sons. <b>Did you hear him</b> say <b>that</b> a daughter is <b>preferable to a son?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara proposes another of Rabbi Yehuda’s statements: <b>Rather,</b> it is referring to <b>this</b> other statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One is not halakhically obligated to provide sustenance for his children beyond the age of six. Nevertheless, it is <b>a mitzva to provide sustenance for the daughters. And</b> one can infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that it is certainly a mitzva to provide <b>for sons, who are engaged in</b> the study of <b>the Torah;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>a mitzva to provide sustenance for the sons. And</b> one can infer <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that it is certainly a mitzva to provide <b>for daughters,</b> so <b>that they not be disgraced</b> by having to beg for their livelihood. This indicates that with regard to providing sustenance for one’s children, Rabbi Yehuda gives preference to the daughters.

### Part 8
§ The mishna discusses a case where one stipulated that if his wife gives birth to a male the offspring shall receive one hundred dinars, and if she gives birth to a female the offspring shall receive two hundred dinars. The mishna states that if she gave birth to both a male and a female, the male receives one hundred dinars and the female receives two hundred. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> with regard to <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 9:4): If she <b>gave birth to a male and a female, the male receives six dinars</b> of gold, which are equivalent to one hundred fifty dinars of silver, <b>and the female receives two dinars</b> of gold, equivalent to fifty dinars of silver, <b>with what</b> situation is this <i>baraita</i> dealing?

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said: I said this <i>halakha</i> before Rav Kahana,</b> and he explained it as teaching <b>about one who inverted</b> the stipulations of his gift. The <i>baraita</i> is referring to one <b>who said:</b> If <b>a male</b> is born <b>first</b> he will receive <b>two hundred</b> dinars, and if <b>a female</b> is born <b>after him</b> she will receive <b>nothing.</b> And if <b>a female</b> is born <b>first</b> she will receive <b>one hundred dinars,</b> and if <b>a male</b> is born <b>after her</b> he will receive <b>one hundred dinars. And</b> the mother <b>gave birth to a male and a female, but we do not know which of them emerged</b> from the womb <b>first.</b> In this case, the <b>male takes one hundred dinars,</b> as <b>whichever way you</b> look at it, this sum is due to him. <b>The other one hundred dinars are property of uncertain ownership and are divided</b> equally between the male and female.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>that which is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: If <b>she gave birth to a male and a female, he</b> receives <b>only one hundred dinars, how can you find these</b> circumstances? <b>Ravina said:</b> This is referring <b>to</b> one who said: I shall give a certain sum to whoever <b>informs me.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC