
### Part 1
It is related that a man named <b>Ronya</b> had a field that <b>was surrounded by</b> fields belonging to <b>Ravina on</b> all <b>four sides.</b> Ravina built partitions around his fields and <b>said to him: Give me</b> your share of the expense <b>in accordance with what I</b> actually spent when I <b>built the partitions,</b> i.e., half the cost of the partitions. Ronya <b>did not give</b> it <b>to him.</b> Ravina said to him: <b>Give me</b> then at least your share of the expense <b>in accordance with a reduced</b> assessment of the <b>price of reeds.</b> Ronya <b>did not give</b> it <b>to him.</b> Ravina said to him: <b>Give me</b> then at least <b>the wage of a watchman.</b> But <b>he did not give</b> even this <b>to him.</b>

### Part 2
<b>One day,</b> Ronya <b>was harvesting dates.</b> Ravina <b>said to his sharecropper: Go take a cluster [<i>kibbura</i>] of dates from him.</b> The sharecropper <b>went to bring them,</b> but Ronya <b>raised his voice at him</b> in protest, whereupon Ravina <b>said to him: You have revealed that you are pleased</b> with the partitions and the protection that they provide you. Even <b>if it were only a goat</b> that entered your field, <b>wouldn’t</b> the field <b>need safeguarding,</b> to prevent the goat from eating the dates? Ronya <b>said to him:</b> If it were <b>only a goat, doesn’t</b> one <b>need</b> merely <b>to chase it away [<i>le’akhluyei</i>]?</b> No partition is required. Ravina <b>said to him: But wouldn’t you need a man to chase</b> the goat <b>away?</b> Pay me then at least the wage of a watchman.

### Part 3
Ravina <b>came before Rava</b> to adjudicate the matter. Rava <b>said to</b> Ronya: <b>Go appease</b> Ravina <b>with what he</b> expressed his willingness to be <b>appeased with,</b> namely, the wage of a watchman. <b>And if not, I will judge you in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>Rav Huna in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> and you will be required to pay half the cost of the partition based on what Ravina actually spent on it.

### Part 4
Incidental to that episode, the Gemara relates another encounter between Ravina and Ronya. <b>Ronya</b> once <b>bought land adjoining</b> property belonging to <b>Ravina. Ravina considered removing him due to the <i>halakha</i> of one</b> whose field <b>borders</b> the field of his neighbor. When land is up for sale, the owners of the adjoining fields have the right of first refusal. If one of the neighbors is willing to match the highest price being offered to the seller, that neighbor has the preemptive right to purchase the property, and if somebody else buys it, that buyer can be removed. Since Ravina owned the adjacent property, he thought that he enjoyed the right of first refusal. <b>Rav Safra, son of Rav Yeiva, said to Ravina: People say: Four</b> dinars <b>for a large hide [<i>tzalla</i>], four for a small hide [<i>tzelala</i>].</b> Since Ronya also owned land bordering the desired parcel, you cannot remove him even though his plot of land is smaller than yours.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of a dividing <b>wall</b> in a jointly owned <b>courtyard that fell,</b> if one of the owners wishes to rebuild the wall, the court <b>obligates</b> the other owner <b>to build</b> the wall with him <b>up to</b> a height of <b>four cubits.</b> If after the wall was built one of the neighbors claims he alone constructed it and the other did not participate in its building, the latter is nevertheless <b>presumed to have given</b> his share of the money, <b>unless</b> the claimant <b>brings proof that</b> the other <b>did not give</b> his part.

### Part 6
The court <b>does not obligate</b> the reluctant neighbor to contribute to the building of the wall <b>higher than four cubits.</b> But if the reluctant neighbor <b>built another wall close</b> to the wall that had been built higher than four cubits, in order to set a roof over the room that was thereby created, the court <b>imposes upon him</b> the responsibility to pay his share for <b>all</b> of the rebuilt wall, <b>even though he has not</b> yet <b>set a roof over it.</b> Since he has demonstrated his desire to make use of what his neighbor built, he must participate in the cost of its construction. If the builder of the first wall later claims that he did not receive payment from his neighbor, the neighbor <b>is presumed not to have given</b> his share of the money, <b>unless he brings proof that he did</b> in fact <b>give</b> money for the building of the wall.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> If a lender <b>set a time for another</b> to repay the loan that he had extended to him <b>and</b> when the debt came due the borrower <b>said to</b> the lender: <b>I</b> already <b>repaid you within the time, he is not deemed credible,</b> as people do not ordinarily repay their debts before they are due. The lender would be happy <b>if</b> the borrower <b>would only repay</b> his debt <b>on time. Abaye and Rava</b> disagree with Reish Lakish, <b>as they both say: A person is apt to repay</b> his debt <b>within its time,</b> i.e., before it is due. This is because <b>sometimes he happens to have money</b> and the borrower <b>says</b> to himself: <b>I will go</b> and <b>repay</b> my debt

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC