
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells a house</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has not sold the gallery,</b> an extension built above or alongside the main building, <b>and</b> this is so <b>even if</b> the gallery is attached to the house and <b>opens into it. Nor</b> has he sold <b>the room behind</b> the house, even if it is accessible only from inside the house. He has <b>also not</b> sold <b>the roof when it has a parapet ten handbreadths high,</b> as such a roof is considered a separate entity and is therefore not included in the sale of the house. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the parapet <b>has the form of a doorway,</b> that is, if it consists of two upright posts with a beam crossing over them, then <b>even if</b> the parapet <b>is not ten handbreadths high,</b> the roof <b>is not sold</b> together with the house, unless it is specifically included in the sale.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What is a gallery? Here</b> in Babylonia <b>they interpreted</b> this as referring to <b>an attic [<i>apta</i>]. Rav Yosef said:</b> It means <b>a windowed structure [<i>bidka ḥalila</i>]</b> attached to the main building. The Gemara notes that <b>according to the one who says</b> that <b>an attic is not sold</b> together with a house, <b>all the more so is a windowed structure</b> attached to the house <b>not sold</b> together with a house, as it is certainly considered a separate entity and not part of the main building. But <b>according to the one who says</b> that a gallery is <b>a windowed structure</b> attached to the house, it is only such a structure that is not included in the sale of the house, <b>but an attic is sold</b> together with a house.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yosef taught:</b> A small structure attached to a building <b>has three names</b> in the Bible: <b>Gallery [<i>yatzia</i>], side chamber [<i>tzela</i>],</b> and <b>cell [<i>ta</i>].</b> Such a structure is called <b>a gallery, as it is written: “The bottommost gallery [<i>hayyatzia</i>] was five cubits wide”</b> (I Kings 6:6). It is also called <b>a side chamber, as it is written: “And the side chambers [<i>vehatzelaot</i>] were one over another, thirty-three times”</b> (Ezekiel 41:6). Additionally, it is called <b>a cell, as it is written: “And the cell [<i>vehata</i>] was one reed long, and one reed wide; and the space between the cells was five cubits”</b> (Ezekiel 40:7). <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that it can be seen that a small structure attached to a building is called a cell <b>from here,</b> as was taught in the mishna (<i>Middot</i> 4:7): <b>The wall of the Sanctuary</b> was <b>six</b> cubits wide, <b>and the cell [<i>vehata</i>]</b> in back of it was <b>six</b> cubits wide, and <b>the wall of the cell</b> was <b>five</b> cubits wide.

### Part 4
§ Relating to the mishna’s statement that a gallery is not included in the sale of a house, <b>Mar Zutra said: And that</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>when</b> the gallery <b>has</b> an area of at least <b>four</b> by four <b>cubits.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Ravina said to Mar Zutra: According to your</b> opinion, <b>that you say</b> a gallery is not excluded from the sale of a house <b>unless it is</b> at least <b>four</b> by four <b>cubits</b> in size, there is a difficulty. As <b>if that is so,</b> then <b>with regard to</b> the exclusion of <b>a pit</b> or a cistern from the sale of a house, <b>about which we learned</b> in a mishna (64a): One who sells a house has sold <b>neither the pit nor the cistern, even if he writes for</b> the buyer in the bill of sale that he is selling <b>him the depth and the height</b> of the house; <b>so too,</b> should we say that only <b>if they have</b> an area of at least <b>four</b> by four <b>cubits, yes,</b> they are excluded from the sale of the house, but <b>if not, no,</b> they are not excluded? This is difficult, as a pit is not four cubits wide, and consequently, it would never be excluded.

### Part 6
Mar Zutra responded: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in that mishna, <b>this,</b> the excavations, have <b>a discrete use,</b> to store water, and they cannot possibly be used as living quarters, <b>and that,</b> the house, has <b>a discrete use,</b> to serve as living quarters, and so they are considered separate entities even if the excavation is not four cubits wide. But <b>here,</b> in the case of a gallery, both <b>this,</b> the gallery, <b>and that,</b> the house, <b>have the same use,</b> and so <b>if</b> the gallery <b>is</b> at least <b>four</b> by four <b>cubits</b> it is deemed <b>significant</b> and considered a separate entity, <b>but if</b> it is <b>not</b> four by four cubits, it is <b>not</b> deemed <b>significant</b> in its own right, but simply another part of the house.

### Part 7
The mishna teaches that one who sells a house without specifying what is included in the sale has not sold the gallery, <b>nor</b> has he sold <b>the room behind</b> the house, even if it is accessible only <b>from it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Now</b> that the mishna taught that <b>a gallery is not sold</b> along with the house, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to teach that <b>a room</b> behind the house is not included in such a sale?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC