
### Part 1
<b>and stipulate about it</b> with the people of your city that the money collected will be given to whomever needs it, <b>he too made</b> only <b>one purse and stipulated</b> with the people of his city <b>about it. Rav Ashi said: I do not even need to make a stipulation, as whoever comes</b> to donate to this charity fund <b>comes</b> relying <b>on my discretion and</b> understanding that <b>I will give</b> the funds <b>to whomever I want.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: There were <b>these two butchers who made an agreement with each other that whichever one of them worked on the day</b> assigned <b>to the other</b> according to their mutually agreed-upon schedule <b>would tear up the hide</b> of the animal that he slaughtered that day. <b>One of them went and worked on the other’s day, and</b> the other butcher <b>tore up the hide</b> of the animal that he slaughtered. <b>They came before Rava</b> for judgment, and <b>Rava obligated him to pay</b> the butcher who slaughtered that animal.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yeimar bar Shelamya raised an objection to Rava:</b> Isn’t it stated among actions that the residents of a city may take: <b>And to fine</b> people <b>for violating their</b> specifications, i.e., those ordinances that the residents passed? <b>Rava did not respond to him. Rav Pappa said: He did well that he did not respond to him,</b> as <b>this matter</b> applies only <b>where there is no important person</b> in the city, in which case it is permitted for the residents of the city to draw up ordinances on their own. <b>But where there is an important person, it is not in</b> the residents’ <b>power to make stipulations,</b> i.e., regulations; rather, they are required to obtain the approval of the city’s leading authority to give force to their regulations.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught: One does not calculate</b> sums <b>with charity collectors concerning</b> the money they collected <b>for charity,</b> to verify how much they received and how much they distributed, <b>nor</b> does one calculate sums <b>with the</b> Temple <b>treasurers concerning</b> the property <b>consecrated</b> to the Temple. <b>And even though there is no</b> explicit <b>proof of the matter</b> from the Bible, there is nevertheless <b>an allusion to the matter, as it is stated: “And they did not reckon with the men into whose hand they delivered the money to pay out to the workmen; for they dealt in good faith”</b> (II Kings 12:16).

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Elazar says: Even though a person has a trusted treasurer in his house</b> like the aforementioned Temple treasurers, who were fully trusted, <b>he should</b> nevertheless <b>tie up</b> his money <b>and count</b> it, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And the king’s scribe and the High Priest came up, <b>and they tied</b> it in bags <b>and counted</b> the money…And they gave the money that was counted into the hands of them that did the work, that had the oversight of the House of the Lord” (II Kings 12:11–12).

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna says:</b> Charity collectors <b>examine</b> the level of poverty of one who asks <b>for food, but they do not examine</b> the level of poverty of one who asks <b>for clothing.</b> If a person comes before the charity collectors in tattered clothes, he is given clothing without any questions being asked. <b>If you wish, say</b> that this distinction is derived from <b>a verse; if you wish, say</b> instead that it is derived via <b>logical reasoning.</b>

### Part 7
<b>If you wish, say</b> that this distinction is derived via <b>logical reasoning: This one</b> who stands before us in rags <b>is exposed to contempt, whereas that one</b> who is hungry <b>is not exposed to contempt. If you wish, say</b> instead that this distinction is derived from <b>a verse,</b> as it is written: <b>“Is it not to share [<i>paros</i>] your bread with the hungry?”</b> (Isaiah 58:7). The word <i>paros</i> <b>is written with a <i>shin</i>,</b> alluding to the word <i>parosh</i>, meaning <b>examine</b> and investigate, <b>and</b> only <b>then</b> should you <b>give him. And there</b> in the same verse <b>it is written</b> with regard to clothing: <b>“When you see the naked, that you cover him,”</b> indicating that <b>“when you see”</b> him you should <b>immediately</b> cover him.

### Part 8
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> just the opposite: Charity collectors <b>examine</b> the level of poverty of one who asks <b>for clothing, but they do not examine</b> the level of poverty of one who asks <b>for food.</b> He too adduces supports for his opinion. <b>If you wish, say</b> that this distinction is derived via <b>logical reasoning; if you wish, say</b> instead that it is derived from <b>a verse.</b>

### Part 9
<b>If you wish, say</b> that this distinction is derived via <b>logical reasoning: This one</b> who is hungry <b>suffers, whereas that one</b> who is in tattered clothing <b>does not suffer</b> in the same way. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that this distinction is derived from <b>a verse. Here, it is written: “Is it not to share [<i>paros</i>] your bread with the hungry?”</b> meaning, <b>share</b> it <b>immediately, just as</b> the word <b>is read.</b> Since the word is read with a <i>samekh</i>, Rav Yehuda does not understand it as alluding to examining the recipient. <b>And there, it is written: “When you see the naked, that you cover him,”</b> meaning, <b>when it will be</b> clearly <b>apparent to you,</b> after you have investigated the matter and found that the supplicant is deserving, then you shall cover him. The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Yehuda:</b> If a poor person <b>said: Cover me</b> with clothing, the charity collectors <b>examine him;</b> but if he said: <b>Sustain me</b> with food, <b>they do not examine him.</b>

### Part 10
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Pe’a</i> 8:7): <b>One does not give a poor person who is traveling from place to place</b> requesting charity <b>less than a loaf</b> worth <b>a <i>pundeyon</i>,</b> one forty-eighth of a <i>sela</i>, when the standard price of grain is <b>four <i>se’a</i> for a <i>sela</i>.</b> If the poor person <b>sleeps</b> in that place, <b>one gives him provisions for lodging.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is meant by <b>provisions for lodging? Rav Pappa said: A bed and a pillow [<i>bei sadya</i>].</b> And if he <b>spends Shabbat</b> in that place, <b>one gives him food for three meals.</b> A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> a poor person <b>was going door to door</b> asking for charity, one is <b>not</b> required to <b>attend to him</b> and give him money from the charity fund.

### Part 11
It is related that <b>a certain poor person who was going door to door</b> requesting charity <b>came before Rav Pappa,</b> the local charity collector, but Rav Pappa <b>did not attend to him. Rav Sama, son of Rav Yeiva, said to Rav Pappa: If the Master does not attend to him, nobody else will attend to him</b> either; <b>should he</b> be left to <b>die</b> of hunger? Rav Pappa said to him: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> a poor person <b>was going door to door</b> asking for charity, one is <b>not</b> required to <b>attend to him?</b> Rav Sama <b>said to him:</b> That <i>baraita</i> means to say that one is <b>not</b> required to <b>attend to him</b> and give him <b>a large gift,</b> since he is already collecting money as he goes door to door, <b>but one does attend to him</b> and give him <b>a small gift.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rav Asi says: A person should never prevent himself from giving</b> at least <b>one-third of a shekel a year</b> in charity, <b>as it is stated: “And we also established mitzvot upon ourselves, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the House of our God”</b> (Nehemiah 10:33). <b>And Rav Asi says: Charity is equivalent to all the</b> other <b>mitzvot</b> combined, <b>as it is stated</b> in that verse: <b>“We also established mitzvot upon ourselves.” A mitzva is not written here, but</b> rather <b>mitzvot,</b> in the plural, thereby teaching that this mitzva is equivalent to all the other mitzvot.

### Part 13
The Gemara offers <b>a mnemonic</b> device for the following statements extolling the mitzva of charity: <b>Greater; Temple; Moses. Rabbi Elazar says: One who causes others to perform [<i>me’aseh</i>]</b> a meritorious act <b>is greater than one who performs</b> that act himself, <b>as it is stated: “And the causing [<i>ma’aseh</i>] of righteousness shall be peace, and the work of righteousness, quietness, and assurance forever”</b> (Isaiah 32:17). If one <b>merits,</b> the following verse is applied to him: <b>“Is it not to share your bread with the hungry?”</b> (Isaiah 58:7), i.e., he will wholeheartedly give charity to the poor. If he <b>does not merit,</b> the latter clause of that verse is applied to him: <b>“You shall bring the poor that are cast out to your house,”</b> i.e., he will be compelled by the government to billet soldiers in his house and sustain them against his will.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said to the people of Meḥoza: I beg of you, strive with each other</b> to perform acts of charity and righteousness, <b>so that you will</b> live in <b>peace with the government,</b> since if you do not act charitably toward each other, you will end up paying fines to the government. <b>And Rabbi Elazar says: When the Temple is standing, a person contributes his shekel</b> for the Temple service <b>and achieves atonement</b> for his sins. <b>Now that the Temple no longer stands, if</b> people <b>act charitably,</b> it will be <b>well</b> for them; <b>but if not, the nations of the world will come and take</b> their money <b>by force.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And even so,</b> the money taken from them by force <b>is credited to them as</b> if they had freely given <b>charity, as it is stated:</b> “And I will make <b>your oppressors charity”</b> (Isaiah 60:17).

### Part 15
<b>Rava said: This</b> following matter <b>was told to me</b> by <b>the infant</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC