
### Part 1
<b>Rabba</b> actually <b>said</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> If one sold another a sand field and a pond, and the buyer <b>took possession of the sand field, he has</b> also <b>acquired the pond.</b> The Gemara asks: This is <b>obvious, as Shmuel says:</b> If one <b>sold ten fields to</b> another in ten different regions, once he takes possession of one of them, he has acquired them all. The Gemara explains why Rav Naḥman’s statement was nevertheless necessary: It is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that <b>there,</b> in the case of the ten fields, <b>the land is</b> all located in <b>one</b> geographic <b>block</b> with a single use, and therefore all the fields are acquired together. <b>But here,</b> in the case of the sand field and the pond, <b>this,</b> the sand field, has <b>a distinct use, and that,</b> the pond, has a <b>distinct use,</b> and therefore taking possession of one of them should not effect acquisition of the other. Therefore, Rav Naḥman <b>teaches us</b> that if the buyer took possession of the sand field, he has acquired the pond as well.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells an olive press</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold</b> with it <b>the <i>yam</i> and the <i>memel</i> and the <i>betulot</i>,</b> the immovable elements of the olive press. <b>But he has not sold</b> with it <b>the <i>avirim</i> and the <i>galgal</i> and the <i>kora</i>,</b> the movable utensils of the olive press. <b>When</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold</b> along with the olive press, even the movable utensils. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One <b>who sells an olive press has sold the <i>kora</i></b> as well, as it is the most fundamental element of the olive press.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara explains the terms used in the mishna. The <b><i>yam</i></b> is the <b>lentil,</b> the round stationary container into which the olives are placed before being crushed. As for the <b><i>memel</i>, Rabbi Abba bar Memel said:</b> This is the <b>crusher,</b> the utensil used to pound and crush the olives. As for the <b><i>betulot</i>, Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> These are the <b>cedar posts [<i>klonsot</i>] that support the beam</b> of the olive press. The <b><i>avirim</i></b> are the <b>pressers,</b> wooden boards that are placed on top of the crushed olives, and upon which the beam is lowered in order to press the olives. The <b><i>galgal</i></b> is the <b><i>ḥumrata</i>,</b> a round stone that is placed on the beam to weigh it down. The <b><i>kora</i></b> is the heavy wooden <b>beam</b> used to press down upon the olives and thereby extract the oil.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, 3:2): One <b>who sells an olive press</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold</b> with it <b>the boards</b> that are fixed in place to hold the olives; <b>and the vats</b> for collecting the oil, <b>and the crushers,</b> used to pound and crush the olives before pressing them, <b>and the lower millstone,</b> i.e., the stationary millstone base; <b>but not the upper</b> millstone. <b>But when</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold. Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he executes the sale without specification, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he adds the phrase that he is selling everything that is in the olive press, <b>he has not sold the</b> wooden <b>boards</b> that are placed on top of the crushed olives when they are being pressed, <b>nor</b> has he sold <b>the sacks, nor</b> has he sold <b>the leather bags</b> for carrying the olives, as these are all movable goods that are not specifically part of the olive press.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> One <b>who sells an olive press has sold the</b> heavy wooden <b>beam</b> used to press down upon the olives, <b>as it is called an olive press [<i>beit habad</i>] only due to</b> this <b>beam,</b> the most essential part of the press, and this beam is otherwise known as a <i>bad</i>.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells a bathhouse</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has not sold</b> with it <b>the boards</b> that are placed on the floor, <b>nor</b> has he sold <b>the basins or the curtains [<i>habilaniyot</i>]. When</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold</b> along with the bathhouse. <b>Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he executes the sale without specification, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he adds the phrase that he is selling everything that is in the bathhouse, <b>he has not sold the tanks of water, nor</b> has he sold <b>the storerooms for wood,</b> as an explicit sales agreement is required for these matters.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, 3:3): One <b>who sells a bathhouse</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold</b> with it <b>the storeroom</b> for <b>the boards, and the storeroom</b> for <b>the</b> implements called <b><i>yekamin</i>, and the storeroom for the basins, and the storeroom for the curtains [<i>vilaot</i>], but</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the boards themselves, nor the <i>yekamin</i> themselves, nor the basins themselves, nor the curtains themselves. When</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, all these</b> components <b>are sold</b> along with the bathhouse. <b>Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he executes the sale without specification, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he adds the phrase that he is selling everything that is in the bathhouse, <b>he has not sold him the pools that supply him with water, whether</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC