
### Part 1
If the owner of the vineyard <b>neglected</b> to make the necessary repairs <b>and did not</b> properly <b>build a partition</b> between the fields, the grain and grapes are <b>rendered forbidden</b> due to the prohibition of diverse kinds planted in a vineyard, <b>and he is liable for the</b> monetary <b>loss.</b> He must compensate the owner of the grain for the damage suffered, as it is the vineyard owner’s fault that deriving benefit from the grain is now prohibited.

### Part 2
According to the understanding that the term <i>meḥitza</i> means a partition, one can infer: <b>The reason</b> that they build a wall <b>is that they</b> both <b>wished</b> to make a partition in their jointly owned courtyard. <b>But if they did not</b> both <b>wish</b> to do so, the court <b>does not obligate</b> the reluctant partner to build such a wall, although his neighbor objects to the fact that the partner can see what he is doing in his courtyard. <b>Apparently,</b> it may be concluded that <b>damage</b> caused by <b>sight,</b> that is, the discomfort suffered by someone because he is exposed to the gaze of others while he is in his own private domain, <b>is not called damage.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara objects to this conclusion: <b>But say</b> that the term <b><i>meḥitza</i></b> used in the mishna means <b>a division, as it is written: “And the division of [<i>meḥetzat</i>] the congregation was”</b> (Numbers 31:43), referring to the half of the spoil that belonged to the entire congregation. According to this interpretation the mishna means: <b>Since they wished</b> to divide the jointly owned courtyard, <b>they build</b> a proper <b>wall</b> in the center even <b>against the will</b> of one of the partners. <b>Apparently,</b> it may be concluded that <b>damage</b> caused by <b>sight is called damage.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this line of reasoning: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the term <i>meḥitza</i> means a division, the words: <b>Who wished to make a division,</b> are imprecise, as the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have said: Who wished to divide. Rather, what</b> is the meaning of the term <i>meḥitza</i>? <b>A partition.</b> The Gemara retorts: If so, the words: <b>They build the wall,</b> are imprecise, as the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have said: They build it,</b> since the wall and the partition are one and the same. The Gemara responds: <b>Had</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught:</b> They build <b>it, I would say that a mere partition of pegs [<i>bimseifas</i>]</b> would suffice. He therefore <b>teaches us</b> that they build an actual <b>wall,</b> all in accordance with the regional custom.

### Part 5
The mishna teaches: Partners who wished to make a partition in a jointly owned courtyard <b>build the wall</b> for the partition <b>in the middle</b> of the courtyard. The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that if they agree to build a wall it should be built in the middle? Why should one of them contribute more than the other?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> in a case <b>where one</b> of the partners <b>went ahead and convinced the other</b> that they should build a partition. <b>Lest you say</b> that the second <b>can</b> later <b>say to</b> the first when the latter comes to begin construction: <b>When I was persuaded by you</b> to build a partition, it was <b>with regard to the airspace.</b> I agreed to the erection of a minimal barrier that would result in a loss of open space in the courtyard. <b>But I was not persuaded by you with regard to the use</b> of the courtyard. I did not agree to forfeit any usable space on the ground in my share of the courtyard for the building of a wall. To counter this, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that since they agreed to make a partition, they must each contribute a part of the courtyard for the building of the wall.

### Part 7
§ After having determined that the wording of the mishna is unproblematic only if the term <i>meḥitza</i> means a wall, it follows that damage caused by sight is not called damage. The Gemara asks: <b>And is damage</b> caused by <b>sight</b> in fact <b>not called damage?</b> The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the proofs, which follow, that challenge this assumption: <b>Garden, wall, compels, and they divide, windows, as Rav Naḥman.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> that which the mishna teaches: <b>And similarly with regard to a garden,</b> in a place where it is customary to build a partition in the middle of a garden jointly owned by two people, and one of them wishes to build such a partition, the court obligates his neighbor to join in building the partition. This indicates that invading one’s privacy by looking at him while he is in his private domain is called damage.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>A garden is different</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> governing invasion of privacy, <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Abba, as Rabbi Abba says</b> that <b>Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It is <b>prohibited for a person to stand in another’s field</b> and look at his crop <b>while</b> the grain <b>is standing,</b> because he casts an evil eye upon it and thereby causes him damage, and the same is true for a garden. Since the issue in this case is damage resulting from the evil eye, no proof can be brought with regard to the matter of damage caused by sight.

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> the mishna <b>teaches: And similarly</b> with regard to a garden, which suggests that a garden and a courtyard are governed by the same rationale. The Gemara answers: The term: And similarly, is stated not with regard to the reason for the obligation to construct a wall, but <b>with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>non-chiseled and chiseled stones.</b> A partition in a garden is built with the same materials used for the building of a wall in a courtyard, in accordance with regional custom.

### Part 11
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (5a): In the case of a dividing <b>wall</b> in a jointly owned <b>courtyard that fell,</b> if one of the owners wishes to rebuild the wall, the court <b>obligates</b> the other owner <b>to build</b> the wall with him again <b>up to</b> a height of <b>four cubits.</b> This indicates that damage caused by sight is called damage. The Gemara rejects this proof: The case of a wall that <b>fell is different;</b> since a wall had already stood there, the court compels the owners to rebuild it as it was.

### Part 12
The Gemara expresses its astonishment: <b>And he who asked</b> the question, <b>why did he ask it</b> at all? The mishna is clearly referring to a wall that has fallen, which means that the joint owners have already agreed in the past to build a partition between their respective portions. The Gemara answers: He who asked the question maintains that the joint owners can be compelled to build a wall even in a case where a wall had not stood there before, to prevent any invasion of privacy. And the mishna does not address the case of a wall that fell to teach that only in such a case is there an obligation to build a wall. Rather, <b>it was necessary</b> to teach <b>the latter clause,</b> which states that even in a case where there had previously been a high wall the court <b>does not obligate him</b> to rebuild it <b>higher than four cubits,</b> because once there is a wall of four cubits there is no further invasion of privacy.

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an additional proof that damage caused by sight is called damage, from what is taught in a mishna (7b): The residents of a courtyard <b>can compel</b> each inhabitant of that courtyard <b>to</b> financially participate in the <b>building of a gatehouse and a door to the</b> jointly owned <b>courtyard,</b> so that the courtyard not be open to the eyes of those standing in the public domain. <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>damage</b> caused by <b>sight is called damage.</b> The Gemara answers: This is not a proof to the <i>halakha</i> in the case of two neighbors, as the <b>damage</b> of being exposed to the gaze <b>of</b> the general <b>public,</b> which has unimpeded sight of what is happening in the courtyard, <b>is different</b> and certainly called damage.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And is</b> exposure to the sight of <b>an individual not</b> considered damage? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof that it is called damage from what is taught in a mishna (11a): <b>One divides a courtyard</b> at the request of one of the co-owners <b>only</b> if its area is sufficient so <b>that there will be in it four</b> by four <b>cubits for this one and four</b> by four <b>cubits for that one,</b> that is, the same minimal dimensions for each of the co-owners. This means that <b>if there is enough for this</b> one <b>and enough for that</b> one, <b>they do divide</b> the courtyard at the request of one of the owners. <b>What, is it not</b> so that the courtyard must be divided <b>with a wall</b> that will prevent one neighbor from seeing the other? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> perhaps it is divided <b>with a mere partition of pegs</b> through which one can still see.

### Part 15
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof that damage caused by sight is called damage from what is taught in a mishna (22a): One who desires to build a wall opposite <b>the windows</b> of a neighbor’s house must distance the wall <b>four cubits</b> from the windows, <b>whether above, below, or opposite. And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught with regard to</b> that mishna: Concerning the requirement of a distance <b>above,</b> the wall must be high <b>enough so that one cannot peer</b> into the window <b>and see</b> into the window; concerning the requirement of a distance <b>below,</b> the wall must be low <b>so that he will not</b> be able to <b>stand</b> on top of it <b>and see</b> into the window; <b>and</b> concerning the requirement of a distance <b>opposite,</b> one must distance the wall from the windows <b>so that it will not darken</b> his neighbor’s house by blocking the light that enters the house through the window. This indicates that there is a concern about the damage caused by exposure to the gaze of others.

### Part 16
The Gemara rejects this argument: The <b>damage</b> of being exposed to the sight of others while <b>in</b> one’s own <b>house is different,</b> as people engage in activities in their homes that they do not want others to see. By contrast, a courtyard is out in the open and it is possible that the residents are indifferent to being observed.

### Part 17
The Gemara challenges this distinction: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> If one’s <b>roof is adjacent to another’s courtyard, he must make a parapet</b> around the roof <b>four cubits high</b> so that he will not be able to see into his neighbor’s courtyard. This indicates that the damage of being exposed to the eyes of others even in a courtyard is called damage. The Gemara refutes this proof: The situation <b>is different there, as the owner of the courtyard can say to the owner of the roof: I</b> make <b>use</b> of <b>my</b> courtyard <b>on a regular</b> basis. <b>You,</b> by contrast, <b>do not</b> make <b>use</b> of <b>your</b> roof <b>on a regular</b> basis, but only infrequently. Consequently, <b>I do not know when you will go up</b> to the roof,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC