
### Part 1
<b>in the summer season or in the rainy season, nor</b> has he sold him <b>the storeroom for the wood. But if</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: <b>I am selling you the bathhouse and all of its accompaniments, all these</b> components <b>are sold.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to another: I am selling you</b> this <b>olive press and all of its accompaniments. There were certain stores outside</b> of the olive press, <b>where,</b> in addition to the ordinary services that these stores provided, <b>sesame seeds would</b> also <b>be spread out</b> to dry before they would be pressed for their oil. The seller and the buyer disagreed about whether these stores were included in the sale, and the buyer <b>came before Rav Yosef,</b> presenting him with his claim to ownership of the stores.

### Part 3
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: We learned</b> in the previously cited <i>baraita</i> that <b>if</b> the seller <b>says</b> to the buyer: <b>I am selling you the bathhouse and all of its accompaniments, all these</b> components <b>are sold.</b> Rav Yosef held that in this case too, the disputed stores were sold. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya teach</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They are not all sold? Rather,</b> the issue should be resolved as <b>Rav Ashi said: We consider</b> the seller’s statement, and <b>if he said to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>the olive press and all of its accompaniments, and these are its boundaries,</b> and he included the area of the stores within those boundaries, the buyer <b>has acquired</b> those stores, <b>but if</b> the seller does <b>not</b> say this, <b>he has not acquired</b> them, as they are not actually part of the olive press.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One <b>who sells a city</b> without specifying what is included in the sale <b>has sold</b> with it <b>the houses, the pits,</b> the <b>ditches and caves, the bathhouses and the dovecotes,</b> and <b>the olive presses and <i>beit hashelaḥin</i>,</b> as will be explained in the Gemara, <b>but</b> he has <b>not</b> sold <b>the movable property</b> in the city. <b>But when</b> the seller <b>says to</b> the buyer: I am selling you <b>it and everything that is in it, even if there were cattle and</b> Canaanite <b>slaves in</b> the city, <b>all these</b> entities <b>are sold. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One <b>who sells a city has sold</b> with it <b>the <i>santar</i>,</b> the meaning of which will be explained in the Gemara.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Avya, said to Rav Ashi: Learn from</b> the mishna that the legal status of a Canaanite <b>slave is like</b> that of <b>movable property, as if</b> it is <b>like</b> that of <b>land,</b> the slave <b>should be sold along with the city.</b> Rav Ashi responded: <b>Rather, what</b> do you claim, that the legal status of a Canaanite <b>slave is like</b> that of <b>movable property?</b> If that is the case, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the mishna’s statement that <b>even</b> if there were cattle and Canaanite slaves in the city, they are all sold? This is obvious, as the slaves should be treated no differently than the rest of the city’s movable property.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, what have you to say?</b> You must explain that there <b>is a difference between movable property that moves about</b> by itself, such as slaves, <b>and movable property that does not move about</b> by itself, i.e., inanimate objects. In exactly the same manner, one can claim that <b>even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the legal status of a Canaanite <b>slave is like</b> that of <b>land,</b> there <b>is a difference between land that moves about</b> by itself, i.e., slaves, <b>and land that does not move about</b> by itself.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> One <b>who sells a city has sold</b> with it <b>the <i>santar</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the term <b><i>santar</i>? Here</b> in Babylonia <b>they interpreted</b> it to mean the land <b>registrar [<i>bar maḥavanita</i>]</b> in charge of keeping track of property boundaries. <b>Shimon ben Avtolemos</b> disagrees and <b>says</b> that it is referring to <b>the fields</b> that surround the city. The Gemara comments: <b>The one who says</b> that <i>santar</i> means the land <b>registrar</b> understands that according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, when one sells a city, <b>all the more so</b> are <b>the fields</b> that surround the city included in the sale. <b>But the one who says</b> that it means <b>the fields</b> that surround the city holds that the land <b>registrar</b> is <b>not sold</b> with the city.

### Part 8
The Gemara attempts to adduce proof in support of one of the opinions: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna here that <b>the olive presses and <i>beit hashelaḥin</i></b> are sold along with the city. The Sages initially <b>maintained: What</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i>?</b> This is referring to irrigated <b>fields,</b> fields that require additional irrigation to supplement the rain that they receive. <b>As it is written:</b> “Who gives rain upon the earth <b>and sends [<i>shole’aḥ</i>] water upon the fields”</b> (Job 5:10). <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that <i>santar</i> means the land <b>registrar, the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>said</b> that <b>the fields</b> that surround the city <b>are sold</b> with the city, but the land <b>registrar is not sold, and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel comes to say</b> that <b>even</b> the land <b>registrar is sold. But according to the one who says</b> that <i>santar</i> means <b>fields, this</b> is what <b>the first <i>tanna</i> is saying as well.</b> In what way, then, does Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel disagree with the first <i>tanna</i>?

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Do you maintain</b> that <b>what</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i></b> is irrigated <b>fields?</b> This is <b>not</b> the case. Rather, <b>what</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i>?</b> This is referring to <b>gardens</b> found within the city, <b>as it is stated: “Your shoots [<i>shelaḥayikh</i>] are an orchard of pomegranates”</b> (Song of Songs 4:13). <b>But the fields</b> that surround the city <b>are not sold. And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel comes to say</b> that <b>even</b> the <b>fields are sold as well.</b> This is one version of the discussion.

### Part 10
<b>Some say</b> that the discussion took place as follows: The Sages initially <b>assumed</b> that <b>what</b> is meant by <b><i>shelaḥin</i>?</b> This is referring to <b>gardens</b> found within the city. <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that <i>santar</i> means <b>the fields</b> that surround the city, <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>said</b> that <b>the gardens</b> found within the city <b>are sold</b> along with the city, but <b>the fields</b> that surround the city <b>are not sold, and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel comes to say</b> that <b>even the fields</b> that surround the city <b>are sold.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC