
### Part 1
<b>so that I can hide from you</b> at that time and avoid coming under your gaze.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara has so far presented one version of the discussion of the mishna. <b>A different version relates</b> the discussion as follows: The Sages initially <b>assumed: What</b> is the meaning of the term <b><i>meḥitza</i></b> mentioned in the mishna? <b>A division,</b> not a partition, <b>as it is written: “And the division of [<i>meḥetzat</i>] the congregation was”</b> (Numbers 31:43). According to this interpretation, the mishna means to say: <b>Since they wished</b> to divide the jointly owned courtyard, <b>they build</b> a proper <b>wall</b> in the center even <b>against the will</b> of one of the partners. <b>Apparently,</b> it may be concluded that <b>damage</b> caused by <b>sight is called damage.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara objects to this conclusion: <b>But</b> why not <b>say: What</b> is the meaning of the term <b><i>meḥitza</i></b> mentioned in the mishna? It means <b>a partition.</b> This usage would be <b>as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Consider the case where <b>a partition of [<i>meḥitzat</i>] a vineyard</b> which separates the vineyard from a field of grain <b>was breached,</b> resulting, if the situation is not rectified, in the grain and grapes becoming items from which deriving benefit is prohibited. The owner of the field of grain may <b>say to</b> the owner of the vineyard: <b>Build a partition</b> between the vineyard and the field of grain. If the owner of the vineyard did so, and the partition <b>was breached again,</b> the owner of the field of grain may <b>say to him</b> again: <b>Build a partition.</b> If the owner of the vineyard <b>neglected</b> to make the necessary repairs <b>and did not</b> properly <b>build a partition</b> between the fields, the grain and grapes are <b>rendered forbidden</b> due to the prohibition of diverse kinds planted in a vineyard, <b>and he is liable for the</b> monetary <b>loss.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara concludes stating the objection: <b>And</b> according to the understanding that the term <i>meḥitza</i> means a partition, one can infer: <b>The reason</b> that they build a wall is <b>that they</b> both <b>wished</b> to make a partition in their jointly owned courtyard. <b>But if they did not</b> both <b>wish</b> to do so, the court <b>does not obligate</b> the reluctant partner to build such a wall, although his neighbor objects to the fact that the partner can see what he is doing in his courtyard. <b>Apparently,</b> it may be concluded that <b>damage</b> caused by <b>sight is not called damage.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>If so,</b> the words: <b>They build the wall,</b> are imprecise, as the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have said: They build it,</b> since the wall and the partition are one and the same. The Gemara retorts: <b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning of the term <i>meḥitza</i>? <b>A division. If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the term <i>meḥitza</i> means a division, the words: <b>Who wished to make a division,</b> are imprecise, as the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have said: Who wished to divide.</b> The Gemara answers: The phrasing of the mishna is <b>as people</b> commonly <b>say: Come, let us make a division.</b> Consequently, the mishna can also be understood as referring to two people who wished to divide a jointly owned area.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks, according to the understanding that <i>meḥitza</i> means division: <b>But if damage</b> caused by <b>sight is called damage, why</b> does the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically</b> teach that <b>if they wish,</b> they build a wall? <b>Even if they did not</b> both <b>wish</b> to do so, it should <b>also</b> be possible to compel the reluctant party to build a wall between them. <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Our mishna</b> is referring to a courtyard <b>that is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division.</b> Joint owners of a courtyard cannot be compelled to divide the courtyard unless each party will receive at least four square cubits of the courtyard. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>this</b> ruling of the mishna applies only in the case <b>where they</b> both <b>wished</b> to divide the courtyard.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: According to this understanding, <b>what is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaching us?</b> Is he teaching us <b>that when</b> a courtyard <b>is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division, if they</b> nevertheless <b>wished</b> to do so, <b>they divide</b> it? But <b>we</b> already <b>learned</b> this in the latter clause of a different mishna (11a): <b>When</b> do they not divide the courtyard because it is not large enough to compel division? <b>When</b> the joint owners <b>do not both wish</b> to divide it. <b>But when both of them wish</b> to divide it, <b>they divide</b> it <b>even</b> if it is <b>smaller than this,</b> i.e., smaller than four square cubits for each party. The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> we had learned this <i>halakha</i> only <b>from there, I would say</b> that they divide the courtyard <b>even</b> if it is <b>smaller than this by</b> constructing <b>a mere partition of pegs,</b> which does not prevent invasion of privacy. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us here</b> in this mishna that if they wish to divide the courtyard they can be compelled to build a proper <b>wall.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach this</b> mishna <b>and not teach that</b> other mishna, as this mishna teaches more details than the later one. The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for</b> the <i>tanna</i> to teach the other mishna to introduce <b>the last clause</b> of that mishna, which states: <b>And</b> jointly owned <b>sacred writings</b> that are contained in a single scroll <b>should not be divided even if both</b> owners <b>wish</b> to do so.

### Part 9
The Gemara brings <b>a different version</b> of the previous discussion: <b>And if they wished</b> to divide the courtyard, <b>what of it?</b> What forces them to build the wall? If one of the parties does not wish to build a wall, <b>let him retract. Rav Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that the mishna is not discussing a case where they merely reached a verbal agreement to divide the courtyard, but rather with a case where each party <b>performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the other, confirming their respective commitments. Therefore, neither side can retract.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Rather than teaching us</b> a case <b>where</b> the courtyard <b>is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division, but</b> nevertheless <b>they wished</b> to divide it, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach us</b> a case <b>where</b> the courtyard <b>is subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division, even if they did not</b> both <b>wish</b> to divide it. The Gemara answers: <b>Had it taught us</b> only a case <b>where</b> the courtyard <b>is subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division</b> that applies <b>even if they did not</b> both <b>wish</b> to divide it, <b>I would say</b> that in a case where the courtyard <b>is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division</b> then <b>even if they</b> both <b>wished</b> to divide it, if one of the parties does not wish to build a proper wall he <b>cannot</b> be compelled to do so. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that he is compelled to participate.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But how can you say this? Doesn’t the latter clause</b> of the mishna (11a) <b>teach: When</b> do they not divide the courtyard because it is not large enough to compel division? <b>When the</b> joint owners <b>do not both wish</b> to divide it. <b>But when both of them wish</b> to divide it, <b>they divide</b> it even if it is smaller than this. <b>What,</b> is this clause of the mishna <b>not</b> referring <b>to</b> the fact that either one can force the other to build a proper <b>wall?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is referring to <b>a mere partition of pegs</b> and not to an actual wall.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach this</b> mishna <b>and not teach that</b> other mishna, as this mishna teaches more details than the later one. The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to teach the other mishna for <b>the last clause</b> of that mishna, which states: <b>And</b> jointly owned <b>sacred writings</b> that are contained in a single scroll <b>should not be divided even if both</b> owners <b>wish</b> to do so. This concludes the alternative version of the discussion.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues its analysis of the mishna: <b>To what</b> case <b>did you interpret the mishna</b> to be referring? To a case <b>where</b> the courtyard <b>is not subject to the <i>halakha</i> of division.</b> But <b>if there is no <i>halakha</i> of division,</b> then <b>if they wished</b> to divide the courtyard, <b>what of it;</b> how can either one force the other to build a wall? If the parties no longer want to build a wall, <b>let them retract. Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It is referring to a case where each party <b>performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the other, confirming their respective commitments. Therefore, neither party can retract.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> even <b>if</b> each party <b>performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the other, <b>what of it? It is merely a verbal acquisition,</b> meaning there was no actual transfer of property, but only a verbal agreement to act in a certain manner in the future and not a true act of acquisition. The Gemara answers: <b>They performed</b> an act of <b>acquisition with</b> the other <b>with regard to directions,</b> i.e., not only did they verbally agree to divide the courtyard, they also determined which of them would get which part of the courtyard. Consequently, the acquisition related to actual property, a particular plot of land. <b>Rav Ashi said: For example, this one walked through his</b> designated portion and <b>performed an act demonstrating ownership</b> there, <b>and that one walked through his</b> designated portion <b>and performed an act demonstrating ownership</b> there.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: In <b>a place where it is customary to build</b> such a wall with non-chiseled stone [<i>gevil</i>], or chiseled stone [<i>gazit</i>], or small bricks [<i>kefisin</i>], or large bricks [<i>leveinim</i>], they must build the wall with that material. The Gemara identifies the various building materials: <b><i>Gevil</i></b> refers to <b>stones that are not planed. <i>Gazit</i></b> means <b>stones that are planed, as it is written: “All these were of costly stones, according to the measures of chiseled stones [<i>gazit</i>],</b> sawed with saws, within and without” (I Kings 7:9). This teaches that chiseled stones are those that have been planed and smoothened. <b><i>Kefisin</i></b> refers to <b>small bricks. <i>Leveinim</i></b> means <b>large bricks.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rabba, the son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: From where</b> do you know <b>that <i>gevil</i></b> refers to <b>stones that are not planed, and this extra handbreadth</b> that a wall of <i>gevil</i> has compared to what a wall of <i>gazit</i> has is <b>for the protruding edges?</b> That is, a wall of <i>gevil</i> is six handbreadths thick because the stones have not been planed and smoothened, and therefore protrude somewhat outward. <b>Perhaps</b> <i>gevil</i> refers to planed stones that <b>are half</b> the thickness <b>of <i>gazit</i>,</b> namely, just two and a half handbreadths, as compared to <i>gazit</i>, which is five handbreadths thick; <b>and this extra handbreadth</b> in a wall of <i>gevil</i> <b>is</b> for the space <b>between the</b> two <b>rows [<i>urbei</i>].</b> That is, a wall of <i>gevil</i> is actually two walls of planed stones that are each two and a half handbreadths thick; and the two walls are separated by one handbreadth, which is later filled in with mortar for added strength.

### Part 17
A proof for this explanation can be brought from <b>what we say,</b> i.e., that <b><i>kefisin</i></b> are <b>small bricks,</b> whereas <b><i>leveinim</i></b> are <b>large bricks,</b> twice the thickness of small bricks. <b>And this extra handbreadth</b> of thickness that a wall of <i>kefisin</i> has compared to what a wall of <i>levinim</i> has is for the space <b>between the</b> two <b>rows</b> of small bricks.

### Part 18
Rav Ashi <b>said to him: And according to your reasoning, from where do we</b> derive that <b><i>kefisin</i></b> are <b>small bricks? Rather,</b> the Sages <b>learned this as a tradition.</b> And <b>so too, they learned as a tradition</b> that <b><i>gevil</i> refers to non-planed stones.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara presents a different version of the discussion. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Avya, said to Rav Ashi: From where</b> do you know <b>that <i>kefisin</i> are small bricks,</b> one-half the width of large bricks, <b>and this extra handbreadth</b> of thickness that a wall of <i>kefisin</i> has compared to what a wall of <i>leveinim</i> has covers the space <b>between the</b> two <b>rows</b> of <i>kefisin</i>? <b>Perhaps</b> you should say <b>what</b> are <b><i>kefisin</i>? Stones that</b> are <b>not planed, and this extra handbreadth</b> of thickness that a wall of <i>kefisin</i> has in comparison to what a wall of <i>leveinim</i> has <b>is for the protruding edges.</b> And proof for this explanation can be brought from <b>what we say,</b> i.e., that <b><i>gevil</i></b> refers to <b>stones that</b> are <b>not planed,</b> whereas <b><i>gazit</i></b> means <b>planed stones, and this extra handbreadth</b> of thickness that a wall of <i>gevil</i> has compared to what a wall of <i>gazit</i> has <b>is for the protruding edges.</b>

### Part 20
Rav Ashi <b>said to him: And according to your reasoning, from where do we</b> derive that <b><i>gevil</i> are stones that</b> are <b>not planed? Rather,</b> the Sages <b>learned</b> this <b>as a tradition. Here too, they learned as a tradition</b> that <i>kefisin</i> are small bricks.

### Part 21
<b>Abaye said: Learn from it</b> that the space left <b>between the</b> two <b>rows</b> of a wall <b>is always a handbreadth.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>This matter</b> applies only when the two rows of the wall are filled in <b>with mortar. But</b> when they are filled in <b>with gravel [<i>berikhsa</i>], more</b> space <b>is required. And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>this matter</b> applies only when the two rows of the wall are filled in <b>with gravel. But when mortar</b> is used to fill in the space, <b>not as much</b> space <b>is required,</b> and less than a handbreadth suffices.

### Part 22
§ The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that</b> in the case of a wall of <b>chiseled stone, if for every four cubits of height there are five</b> handbreadths <b>of thickness</b> the wall <b>will stand,</b> and <b>if not it will not stand,</b> as this is the required ratio between a wall’s height and its thickness? <b>But wasn’t there</b> the <b>one-cubit-thick wall separating the Holy of Holies from the Sanctuary of the Temple [<i>amah teraksin</i>]</b> separating the Holy of Holies from the Sanctuary, <b>which was thirty cubits high and its thickness was only six handbreadths and</b> nevertheless <b>stood?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since there was an extra handbreadth</b> of thickness, it was able to <b>stand</b> even to such a great height.

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that <b>in the Second Temple they did not fashion an <i>amah teraksin</i></b> to separate between the Holy of Holies and the Sanctuary, as they had done in the First Temple? The Gemara answers: <b>When</b> a partition <b>stands</b> even though it is only six handbreadths thick, <b>it is</b> able to remain standing up to <b>thirty</b> cubits in height. But <b>it will not</b> be able to <b>stand</b> if it is <b>more</b> than that height. The Second Temple was taller than the First Temple, and therefore the partition separating the Holy of Holies from the Sanctuary also had to be higher.

### Part 24
The Gemara comments: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> the Second Temple <b>was taller</b> than the First Temple? <b>As it is written: “The glory of this latter house shall be greater than that of the former”</b> (Haggai 2:9). <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagree about the meaning of this verse, <b>and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar</b> who disagreed as to its meaning. <b>One</b> of them <b>said</b> that it means that the Second Temple will be greater <b>in</b> the size of its <b>structure,</b> i.e., taller. <b>And one</b> of them <b>said</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC