
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where</b> the shard <b>does not have</b> the sufficient <b>measure</b> for ritual impurity, and is therefore considered insignificant. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shabbat</i> 82a): One who carries a shard of <b>earthenware</b> on Shabbat is liable only if it is <b>equivalent</b> in size to that which is used <b>to place between one pillar and another</b> when they are piled on the ground, to strengthen the pillars.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>An earthenware vessel</b> reduces the dimensions of a window. The Gemara challenges: But it is <b>fit for one</b> to use; therefore, it is likely to be removed from the window. The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where</b> the earthenware <b>is dirty.</b> The Gemara challenges: Even so, <b>it is fit for a bloodletter</b> to collect the blood. It would not matter to him if the earthenware were dirty. The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where it is perforated</b> and therefore unfit for that use.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>A Torah scroll</b> reduces the dimensions of a window. The Gemara challenges: But it <b>is fit for reading;</b> therefore, it might be removed. The Gemara answers: This is referring to a Torah scroll <b>that is worn out</b> and unfit for reading. The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> one is <b>required</b> to place the Torah scroll in <b>a repository</b> for unusable sacred books; therefore, he will certainly remove it to be stored away. The Gemara answers: This is referring to one who determines that <b>its repository will be there.</b> In other words, it was placed in the window with the intent of storing it there in its worn-out state.

### Part 4
§ With regard to the <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i> referring to salt, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rav says: One can construct a barrier</b> to delineate a private domain on Shabbat or to block the spreading of ritual impurity <b>with anything except for salt and fat,</b> as salt crumbles and fat melts in the heat. <b>And Shmuel says: Even salt</b> can be used as a barrier. <b>Rav Pappa said: And they do not disagree,</b> as <b>this</b> ruling of Shmuel is referring to <b>Sodomite salt,</b> which is like stone and can be used as a barrier, and <b>that</b> ruling of Rav is referring <b>to <i>isterokanit</i> salt,</b> which is taken from the sea and is composed of grains.

### Part 5
The Gemara adds: <b>And now that Rabba said:</b> If <b>a person makes two piles of salt</b> at the opening to an alleyway <b>and places</b> a cross <b>beam on top of them,</b> so <b>that the salt supports the</b> cross <b>beam and the</b> cross <b>beam supports the salt</b> by weighing it down and compressing it, he can use this beam to render it permitted to carry in the alleyway on Shabbat, one can say that <b>even <i>isterokanit</i> salt</b> can be used as a barrier. <b>And</b> even so, Rav and Shmuel <b>do not disagree: This</b> ruling of Shmuel is referring to a case <b>where there is</b> a cross <b>beam</b> to weigh the salt down, and <b>that</b> ruling of Rava is referring to a case where <b>there is no</b> cross <b>beam.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that <b>one must distance a mill</b> from a neighbor’s wall by a distance of <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>from the lower stone</b> of the mill, <b>which is four</b> handbreadths <b>from the upper stone</b> of the mill. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that one must distance a mill from the property of his neighbor? It is <b>due to the vibrations</b> it causes. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> the measure for distancing a mill <b>on a base</b> is <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>from the lower millstone [<i>ha’isterobil</i>], which is four</b> handbreadths <b>from the mouth [<i>hakelet</i>],</b> where the wheat is fed in? But <b>there, what vibrations are there? Rather,</b> the reason for the distancing is <b>due to the noise</b> generated by the mill.

### Part 7
The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> there must be a distance of <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>from the</b> protruding <b>base</b> of <b>an oven</b> until the wall, <b>which is four</b> handbreadths <b>from the</b> narrow <b>upper rim</b> of the oven. <b>Abaye said: Learn from</b> the mishna that <b>the base of an oven</b> is <b>a handbreadth</b> wider than its rim. The practical <b>difference</b> of this observation is with respect <b>to buying and selling,</b> i.e., a buyer should know that this is the proper ratio for the dimensions of an oven.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may not set up an oven inside a house unless there is a space four cubits high above it,</b> i.e., between the top of the oven and the ceiling, to avoid burning the ceiling, which serves as the floor of the residence above. If <b>one was setting up</b> an oven <b>in the upper story, there must be a plaster floor beneath it,</b> which serves as the ceiling of the lower story, at least <b>three handbreadths</b> thick, so that the ceiling below does not burn. <b>And</b> in the case <b>of a stove</b> the plaster floor must be at least one <b>handbreadth</b> thick.

### Part 9
<b>And if</b> he <b>causes damage</b> in any case, <b>he pays</b> compensation for that <b>which he damaged. Rabbi Shimon says: They said all of these measurements</b> to teach <b>only that if he causes damage he is exempt from paying,</b> as he took all reasonable precautions.

### Part 10
The mishna continues: <b>A person may not open a bakery or a dye shop beneath the storeroom of another, and</b> he <b>may not</b> establish <b>a cattle barn</b> there, as these produce heat, smoke, and odors, which rise and damage the items in the storeroom. The mishna comments: <b>In truth,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that in the case <b>of</b> a storeroom of <b>wine</b> the Sages rendered it <b>permitted</b> to set up a bakery and a dye shop beneath, as the heat that rises does not damage the wine. <b>But</b> they did <b>not</b> render it permitted to establish <b>a cattle barn,</b> because its odor damages the wine.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that in the case of <b>an oven</b> the plaster floor must be <b>four</b> handbreadths thick, <b>and with regard to a stove</b> it must be <b>three?</b> By contrast, the mishna says that the plaster floor beneath and oven and a stove must be three handbreadths and one handbreadth thick, respectively. <b>Abaye said: When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> ovens and stoves <b>of bakers.</b> Since they bake all day long, their implements get very hot. The <b>oven</b> discussed <b>in our</b> mishna is similar to <b>a baker’s stove,</b> which is why in both cases a distance of three handbreadths is required.

### Part 12
The mishna teaches that one <b>may not open a bakery</b> or a dye shop beneath the storeroom of another, and he may not establish a cattle barn there. A Sage <b>taught: If the cattle barn preceded the storeroom it is permitted,</b> i.e., the barn owner is not required to move it. With regard to this point, <b>Abaye raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>he cleaned and sprinkled</b> the area, i.e., he prepared it for use <b>as a storeroom</b> but he has not yet filled it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is it considered a storeroom already, and therefore others may no longer put a cattle barn beneath it, or perhaps the <i>halakha</i> is that as long as it is empty he cannot prevent others from establishing a cattle barn?

### Part 13
Similarly, if he <b>added windows</b> for ventilation, which demonstrates his intention to use it as a storeroom, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Likewise, if he establishes <b>an enclosed veranda beneath the storeroom, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If he <b>built an upper room on top of his house</b> for storage, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? None of these questions are answered, and the Gemara declares that they <b>shall stand</b> unresolved. The Gemara cites a similar question: <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, raises a dilemma:</b> If he placed <b>dates and pomegranates</b> there, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is this considered the start of its use as a storeroom or not? No answer was found to this question either, and the Gemara declares: The dilemma <b>shall stand [<i>teiku</i>]</b> unresolved.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that <b>in truth, it is permitted</b> in the case <b>of wine</b> but not in the case of a cattle barn. The Gemara states that a Sage <b>taught: They permitted</b> it in the case <b>of wine because</b> the heat and the smoke <b>improve</b> the wine. <b>But</b> they did <b>not</b> permit one to establish <b>a cattle barn, because</b> a barn <b>creates a bad odor. Rav Yosef said: This</b> wine <b>of ours</b> spoils quickly, and therefore <b>even the smoke of a candle also damages it. Rav Sheshet said: And alfalfa [<i>ve’aspasta</i>] is considered like a cattle barn</b> in this regard, because it rots over time and creates a foul odor.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a resident wants to open <b>a store in</b> his <b>courtyard,</b> his neighbor <b>can protest</b> to prevent <b>him</b> from doing so <b>and say to him: I am unable to sleep due to the sound of people entering</b> the store <b>and the sound of people exiting. But</b> one <b>may fashion utensils</b> in his house and <b>go out and sell</b> them <b>in the market,</b> despite the fact that he is not allowed to set up a store in the courtyard, <b>and</b> the neighbor <b>cannot protest</b> against <b>him</b> doing so <b>and say to him: I am unable to sleep due to the sound of the hammer</b> you use to fashion utensils, <b>nor</b> can he say: I cannot sleep <b>due to the sound of the mill</b> that you use to grind, <b>nor</b> can he say: I cannot sleep <b>due to the sound of the children.</b> It is permitted for one to make reasonable use of his own home.

### Part 16
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, which states that one can prevent his neighbor from opening a store in the courtyard because the noise keeps him awake, <b>and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause,</b> which states that one cannot protest when his neighbor performs labor that is noisy? <b>Abaye said:</b> In <b>the latter clause we arrive at</b> the case of one who operates in <b>another courtyard,</b> i.e., one cannot prevent activity in a separate courtyard that is connected to the alleyway in which he lives. <b>Rava said to him: If so, let it teach</b> that <b>in a different courtyard it is permitted.</b> Why does the mishna not specify that it is referring to a different courtyard? <b>Rather, Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC