
### Part 1
If <b>a minor girl</b> was widowed <b>after</b> her <b>betrothal,</b> a surviving brother of her betrothed <b>can perform levirate betrothal only with the consent of her father. And</b> in the case of <b>a young woman,</b> he can do so <b>either with her consent [<i>mida’at atzmah</i>] or with the consent of her father, unlike</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> standard <b>betrothal.</b> This indicates that a young woman can accept levirate betrothal on her own, despite the fact that it removes her from her father’s authority.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, if</b> it <b>was stated, it was stated like this: Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: What is</b> the <b>reason of Rabbi Yoḥanan, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis?</b> With regard to <b>betrothal, which</b> takes effect only <b>with</b> the <b>consent</b> of the one who accepts the betrothal, <b>her father</b> can accept it <b>but not her,</b> since betrothal requires his approval. With regard to a bill of <b>divorce,</b> which can be given <b>without her consent, either she or her father</b> can receive it.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t levirate betrothal</b> valid only <b>with her consent,</b> like other betrothals, <b>and</b> yet <b>it teaches</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that <b>either she or her father</b> can accept it? The Gemara answers: <b>There</b> it is referring <b>to levirate betrothal that is</b> performed <b>against her will, and it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a <i>yavam</i> <b>performs levirate betrothal with his <i>yevama</i> without her consent, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The <i>yavam</i> <b>acquires</b> her. <b>And the Rabbis say: He does not acquire</b> her.

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>He derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of levirate betrothal <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>sexual intercourse that</b> a <i>yavam</i> engages in with <b>a <i>yevama</i>: Just as intercourse with</b> the <b><i>yevama</i></b> renders her acquired even if it is done <b>against her will, so too here,</b> in the case of levirate betrothal, the <i>yavam</i> can betroth her <b>against her will. And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>we derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of levirate betrothal <b>from</b> standard <b>betrothal: Just as betrothal</b> can be performed only <b>with her consent, so too here,</b> levirate betrothal can be performed only <b>with her consent.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies: <b>With regard to what do they disagree? Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that <b>one should derive matters</b> involving <b>a <i>yevama</i> from</b> other matters involving <b>a <i>yevama</i>,</b> and the marriage between a <i>yevama</i> and a <i>yavam</i> can be formalized against her will. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>one should derive</b> matters involving <b>betrothal from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>betrothal,</b> as levirate betrothal is structured like standard betrothal in other respects.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to rule with regard to betrothal <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan explains,</b> that only the father can accept betrothal, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that it teaches</b> in the <b>latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> that with regard to levirate betrothal, in the case of <b>a young woman,</b> the <i>yavam</i> can perform it either with her consent or with the consent of her father, <b>unlike</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> standard <b>betrothal.</b> This indicates that she can be betrothed in standard betrothal only with her father’s agreement. The Gemara asks: <b>Then shall we say</b> that <b>this should be a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish,</b> who holds that according to the Rabbis a young woman can also accept her own betrothal? The Gemara answers: <b>Reish Lakish</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says: Two hands do not acquire</b> an item <b>as one.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> why does the <i>baraita</i> state: <b>Unlike</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> standard <b>betrothal? It should</b> have stated: <b>Unlike</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to divorce,</b> as Rabbi Yehuda stated his opinion in the mishna with regard to divorce, not betrothal. The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so,</b> it should have referred to divorce, but <b>since it taught</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>levirate betrothal, which</b> is <b>similar to betrothal, it also taught: Unlike</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> standard <b>betrothal.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>is levirate betrothal different from</b> divorce? Why can a young woman accept the former but not receive a bill of divorce, when both levirate betrothal and divorce can be performed without her consent? The Gemara answers: The <i>halakha</i> of levirate betrothal is different. <b>Since she is bonded</b> to the <i>yavam</i> <b>and standing</b> in wait for him, acceptance of the betrothal money by the <i>yevama</i> suffices to effect the levirate betrothal. The Gemara comments: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> explanation, the statement of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan also should not pose a difficulty for you from the outset.</b> One cannot question his statement with regard to the Rabbis’ opinion in the case of betrothal. <b>Levirate betrothal is different, since</b> the <i>yevama</i> <b>is bonded</b> to the <i>yavam</i> <b>and standing</b> in wait for him.

### Part 9
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna that <b>a man can betroth his daughter</b> to a man <b>when she is a young woman, by himself or by</b> means of <b>his agent.</b> The Gemara analyzes this: <b>Yes,</b> he can betroth her <b>by himself or by</b> means of <b>his agent, but no,</b> she cannot become betrothed <b>by herself or by</b> means of <b>her agent.</b> This is <b>a conclusive refutation of Reish Lakish,</b> who holds that according to the opinion of the Rabbis a young woman can accept her own betrothal. The Gemara answers: <b>Reish Lakish</b> could have <b>said to you: This</b> mishna <b>too is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But can you establish this</b> mishna <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda? But the last clause,</b> in the following mishna (46b), <b>teaches:</b> In the case of <b>one who says to a woman: Be betrothed to me with this date</b> and adds: <b>Be betrothed to me with that</b> date, she is betrothed only if one of them is worth one <i>peruta</i> on its own. <b>And we say: Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that the two dates are valued separately only if he said: <b>Become betrothed</b> and: <b>Become betrothed,</b> in a separate statement when giving each date, but that if he said: Become betrothed, only once, the value of the two dates are added together?

### Part 11
<b>And Rabba said: It is Rabbi Shimon, who says</b> that one is not liable to bring multiple offerings for taking false oaths to multiple people in the same utterance. For example, if one says: I take an oath that I do not have your item, nor yours, nor yours, he brings a single offering. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>unless one states</b> an expression of <b>an oath to each and every one</b> of the plaintiffs, by stating: I take an oath I do not have yours; I take an oath I do not have yours, in which case he brings multiple offerings. Consequently, the <i>tanna</i> of this mishna is Rabbi Shimon, not Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 12
<b>And if you would say</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the <b>entire</b> mishna concerning betrothal is <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and</b> that <b>with regard to the specification</b> of separate oaths <b>he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> this cannot be. <b>But does he</b> in fact <b>hold in accordance</b> with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon with regard to the specification of separate oaths?

### Part 13
<b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>This is the principle</b> with regard to one’s liability to bring offerings for a false oath: If he <b>included</b> all the statements in one oath <b>he is liable</b> for <b>only one</b> oath, but if he <b>specified</b> them, <b>he is liable for each and every one;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If one said: I take <b>an oath</b> that I do not have your deposit, <b>nor yours, nor yours, nor yours,</b> and he was found to have taken a false oath, <b>he is liable</b> to bring an offering <b>for each and every one. Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If he said: I do <b>not</b> have <b>yours, nor yours, nor yours, and nor yours,</b> I take <b>an oath,</b> then <b>he is liable for each and every one.</b> Since he stated the oath at the end, it refers back to each element of his statement. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: He is liable</b> to bring more than one offering <b>only if</b> he <b>states</b> an expression of <b>an oath for each and every one.</b> This indicates that Rabbi Yehuda disagrees with Rabbi Shimon with regard to the question of when oaths are considered distinct.

### Part 14
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara explains in the opposite manner: The <i>tanna</i> of the <b>entire</b> mishna concerning betrothal is <b>Rabbi Shimon, and with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>agency he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> that only the father of a young woman can appoint an agent to accept her betrothal or receive her bill of divorce.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates: One day <b>Rabbi Asi did not go to the study hall. He found Rabbi Zeira</b> and <b>said to him: What was said today in the study hall?</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: I too did not go,</b> but <b>Rabbi Avin is the one who went, and he said: The entire coterie</b> sided <b>with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> that there is a difference between betrothal and divorce in the case of a young woman. <b>And Reish Lakish screamed</b> at them <b>like a crane:</b> Doesn’t the verse state: <b>“And she departs</b> out of his house <b>and</b> goes and <b>becomes</b> another man’s wife” (Deuteronomy 24:2), juxtaposing the <i>halakhot</i> of divorce and betrothal? <b>But no one paid any attention to him.</b> Rabbi Asi <b>said to him:</b> Is <b>Rabbi Avin reliable?</b> Can one be sure that he transmitted an accurate report? Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: Yes,</b> in this case he can be trusted, since the elapsed time <b>was</b> only <b>like</b> the interval between catching a fish <b>from the sea</b> and bringing it <b>to a frying pan [<i>tignei</i>].</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says:</b> When <b>I</b> quote this statement, I do <b>not</b> state it in the name of <b>Rabbi Avin, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, nor Rabbi Avin bar Kahana, but</b> in the name of <b>Rabbi Avin, without specification.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What difference is there?</b> Why does it matter which Rabbi Avin is cited as the source of this statement? The Gemara answers: It would matter if one were <b>to raise a contradiction between</b> one of <b>his</b> rulings and another one of <b>his</b> rulings. If there were to be a conflicting opinion attributed to a specific Rabbi Avin, e.g., Rabbi Avin, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, it would not be a true contradiction, as this statement might have been issued by a different Rabbi Avin.

### Part 17
<b>Rava asked Rav Naḥman:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC