
### Part 1
<b>she may not eat.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that <b>converts and emancipated slaves</b> ascended from Babylonia. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rav Ḥisda says: As the verse states</b> with regard to the eating of the Paschal offering upon the return to Eretz Yisrael: “And the children of Israel who had come back from the exile ate, <b>and all such as had separated themselves to them from the impurity of the nations of the land</b> to seek the Lord, the God of Israel, did eat” (Ezra 6:21), indicating that converts and emancipated slaves who had abandoned “the impurity of the nations of the land,” i.e., idolatry, joined Ezra.

### Part 3
The mishna taught that <b><i>mamzerim</i></b> were among those who ascended from Babylonia. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written: “And Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard”</b> (Nehemiah 2:19), <b>and</b> elsewhere <b>it is written</b> with regard to Tobiah the Ammonite: <b>“For there were many in Judah sworn to him because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah”</b> (Nehemiah 6:18). The Gemara proceeds to explain: This <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that in the case of <b>a gentile or a slave who engaged in sexual intercourse with a Jewish woman, the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> Since Tobiah the Ammonite, a gentile, married a Jewish woman, as did his son, there were clearly <i>mamzerim</i> among those who ascended.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that in that case <b>the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>. But according to the one who says</b> that the lineage of <b>the offspring is unflawed</b> and has the status of the mother, <b>what can be said? And furthermore, from where</b> is it clear <b>that</b> Jehohanan <b>had offspring</b> from this wife? <b>Perhaps he did not have offspring,</b> and it is possible that there were no <i>mamzerim</i>. <b>And furthermore,</b> even if they did have offspring, <b>from where</b> is it clear <b>that they had</b> offspring <b>here,</b> in Babylonia, who then <b>ascended</b> to Eretz Yisrael? <b>Perhaps they were there,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, all the time, as they may have been one of the families that was not exiled to Babylonia, and therefore they cannot be used as the proof that <i>mamzerim</i> ascended from Babylonia.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> the proof that <i>mamzerim</i> were among those who ascended from Babylonia is <b>from here: “And these were they that ascended from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they could not tell their fathers’ houses, nor their offspring, whether they were of Israel”</b> (Nehemiah 7:61). The Gemara explains that these names are to be interpreted as follows: <b>“Tel Melah”; these are people whose</b> licentious <b>actions were similar to the act of Sodom, which was turned into a mound of salt [<i>tel melaḥ</i>]. “Tel Harsha”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who calls</b> a man <b>father, and his mother silences him,</b> as the word <i>ḥarsha</i> is similar to <i>maḥarishto</i>, meaning: Silences him. In any event, the statement that there were those who acted licentiously, as did the people of Sodom, means that there were <i>mamzerim</i> among them.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues with its explication of the verse: <b>“But they could not tell their fathers’ houses, nor their offspring, whether they were of Israel”; this</b> is referring to <b>a foundling who is gathered from the marketplace.</b> Such a person does not even know if he is Jewish, as he has no knowledge of his parents. With regard to the names <b>“Cherub, Addon, and Immer,” Rabbi Abbahu says</b> that these terms should be expounded as follows: <b>The Master [<i>Adon</i>],</b> God, <b>said: I said</b> that <b>the Jewish</b> people <b>shall be as important before Me as a cherub, but they made themselves</b> impudent <b>as a leopard [<i>namer</i>]. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different version: <b>Rabbi Abbahu said: The Master [<i>Adon</i>] said</b> that <b>although they made themselves as a leopard [<i>namer</i>], they are as important before Me as a cherub.</b>

### Part 7
§ Explicating the same verse, <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says:</b> In the case of <b>anyone who marries a woman who is not suited for him</b> to marry due to her lineage, <b>the verse ascribes him</b> blame <b>as though he plowed [<i>ḥarash</i>] all</b> of <b>the entire world and sowed it with salt [<i>melaḥ</i>], as it is stated</b> with regard to those of flawed lineage who ascended from Babylonia: <b>“And these were they that ascended from Tel Melah, Tel Harsha.”</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabba bar Rav Adda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> In the case of <b>anyone who marries a woman</b> of flawed lineage only <b>for the sake of money, he will have offspring</b> who will act <b>inappropriately, as it is stated: “They have dealt treacherously against the Lord, for they have begotten strange children;</b> now shall the new moon devour them with their portions” (Hosea 5:7).

### Part 9
Rabba bar Rav Adda explains the verse: <b>And lest you say</b> that at least the <b>money</b> that they received as dowry <b>was spared,</b> although they suffer from the acts of their offspring, <b>the verse states: “Now shall the new moon devour them with their portions,”</b> meaning their property shall be consumed in a single month. <b>And lest you say his portion</b> will be lost <b>but not the portion</b> of his wife, <b>the verse states “their portions”</b> in the plural. <b>And lest you say</b> this will occur <b>after a long time,</b> but in the interim he will benefit from the money, <b>the verse states: “The new moon.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred</b> that their money will be lost immediately? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: A month comes and a month goes, and their money is</b> already <b>lost.</b> In any event, the fact that the punishment they receive is the loss of their portions indicates that the sin in this case was marrying for the sake of money.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabba bar Rav Adda says, and some say Rabbi Salla says</b> that <b>Rav Hamnuna says:</b> In the case of <b>anyone who marries a woman who is not suited for him</b> to marry due to her lineage, <b>Elijah binds him</b> in the manner that those liable to receive lashes are bound, <b>and the Holy One, Blessed be He, straps him. And</b> a Sage <b>taught: Concerning all of them, Elijah writes and the Holy One, Blessed be He, signs</b> the following: <b>Woe to he who disqualifies his offspring, and who brings a flaw to his family</b> lineage, <b>and who marries a woman who is not</b> halakhically <b>suited for him</b> to marry. <b>Elijah binds him and the Holy One, Blessed be He, straps him.</b>

### Part 11
He further said: <b>And anyone who disqualifies</b> others by stating that their lineage is flawed, that is a sign that he himself <b>is</b> of <b>flawed</b> lineage. Another indication that one’s lineage is flawed is that <b>he never speaks in praise</b> of others. <b>And Shmuel says:</b> If one habitually claims that others are flawed, <b>he disqualifies</b> himself <b>with his</b> own <b>flaw.</b> The flaw he accuses them of having is in fact the one that he has.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara recounts a related incident: There was <b>a certain man from Neharde’a who entered a butcher shop in Pumbedita. He said to them: Give me meat. They said to him: Wait until the servant of Rav Yehuda bar Yeḥezkel has taken</b> his meat, <b>and</b> then <b>we will give</b> it <b>to you.</b> The man <b>said</b> to them in anger: <b>Who is</b> this <b>Yehuda bar Sheviske’el,</b> a derogatory name for a glutton for meat, <b>that he should precede me, that he should take before me? They went</b> and <b>told Rav Yehuda</b> what the man had said. Rav Yehuda <b>excommunicated him,</b> in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> of one who disparages a Torah scholar. <b>They</b> also <b>said</b> to him that the same man <b>was in the habit of calling people slaves.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>proclaimed about him that he is a slave</b> and may not marry a Jew.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues the story: <b>That</b> man <b>went and summoned</b> Rav Yehuda <b>to judgment before Rav Naḥman,</b> who was a judge in Neharde’a. When the <b>summons arrived</b> in Pumbedita, <b>Rav Yehuda went before Rav Huna</b> to seek his council. Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Should I go or should I not go?</b> Rav Huna <b>said to him:</b> As for the obligation <b>to go, you are not required to go, since you are a great man</b> and therefore are not under the jurisdiction of Rav Naḥman’s court. <b>But due to the honor of the Exilarch’s house,</b> as Rav Naḥman was the son-in-law of the Exilarch, <b>get up</b> and <b>go.</b>

### Part 14
Rav Yehuda <b>arrived</b> in Neharde’a and <b>found</b> Rav Naḥman <b>constructing a parapet.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> Rav Naḥman: <b>Does the Master not hold in accordance with that</b> <i>halakha</i> that <b>Rav Huna bar Idi says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Once a person has been appointed a leader of the community, he is prohibited from performing labor before three</b> people, so that he not belittle the honor of his position? Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: It is</b> merely <b>a little fence [<i>gundarita</i>] that I am constructing.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Is</b> the term <b><i>ma’akeh</i>, which is written in the Torah, or</b> the corresponding term <b><i>meḥitza</i>, which the Sages said, distasteful</b> to you? Why do you use a term that is used by neither the Torah nor the Sages?

### Part 15
During their meeting, Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Let the Master sit on the bench [<i>karfita</i>].</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Is</b> the term <b><i>safsal</i>, which the Sages said, or</b> the word <b><i>itzteva</i>, which</b> common <b>people say, distasteful</b> to you? Why are you using uncommon terms? Rav Naḥman then <b>said to him: Let the Master eat a citron [<i>etronga</i>].</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel said: Anyone who says <i>etronga</i></b> demonstrates <b>one-third of a haughtiness of spirit.</b> Why? He should <b>either</b> say <b><i>etrog</i>, as the Sages called it, or <i>etroga</i>, as</b> common <b>people say</b> in Aramaic. Saying <i>etronga</i> is a sign of snobbery, as it was employed by the aristocratic class. He subsequently <b>said to him: Let the Master drink a cup [<i>anbaga</i>]</b> of wine. Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Is</b> the term <b><i>ispargus</i>, as the Sages called it, or <i>anpak</i>, as</b> common <b>people say, distasteful</b> to you?

### Part 16
Later on, Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Let</b> my daughter <b>Donag come</b> and <b>pour us drinks.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel says: One may not make use of a woman</b> for a service such as this. Rav Naḥman replied: <b>She is a minor.</b> Rav Yehuda retorted: <b>Shmuel explicitly says: One may not make use of a woman at all, whether</b> she is <b>an adult or a minor.</b>

### Part 17
Later on, Rav Naḥman suggested: <b>Let the Master send</b> greetings of <b>peace to</b> my wife <b>Yalta.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel says: A woman’s voice is</b> considered <b>nakedness,</b> and one may not speak with her. Rav Naḥman responded: It is <b>possible</b> to send your regards <b>with a messenger.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC