
### Part 1
<b>and</b> they would <b>exempt married women</b> from <i>ḥalitza</i> and levirate marriage. The Gemara elaborates: In <b>what</b> way would they <b>expound</b> the verse to lead them to this conclusion? The verse states: <b>“The wife of the dead man shall not be married outside of the family to one not of his kin;</b> her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her and take her to him to be his wife, and consummate the levirate marriage” (Deuteronomy 25:5). They understood the word “outside” to be a description of the woman: <b>She who sits outside,</b> i.e., one who is only betrothed; <b>she shall not be married to one not of his kin,</b> and it is with her that the obligation of levirate marriage applies. <b>But she who is not sitting outside,</b> but who has already married, <b>shall marry one not of his kin.</b> Consequently, the concern with regard to the Samaritans is that their descendants include the children of a widow who unlawfully wed one who was not her brother-in-law.

### Part 2
After having explained which prohibition the Samaritans violated, the Gemara explains how this accounts for the prohibition with regard to marriage with Samaritans. <b>And Rabbi Akiva</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as he says:</b> The offspring of intercourse <b>for which</b> one <b>is liable</b> for violating <b>a prohibition is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> Therefore, the descendants of a <i>yevama</i> who had transgressed the prohibition of: “The wife of the deceased shall not be married outside of the family to one not of his kin,” have the status of <i>mamzerim</i>.

### Part 3
<b>And some say</b> a third opinion as to why the Sages disqualified Samaritans for marriage: It is <b>because they are not well versed in the details of mitzvot.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the one indicated by the phrase: <b>Some say? Rav Idi bar Avin said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Pesaḥim</i> 2:2): <b>The <i>matza</i> of a Samaritan is permitted</b> to be eaten on Passover and is not considered to be leavened bread, <b>and a person can fulfill his obligation</b> to eat <i>matza</i> on the first night <b>of Passover with it; but Rabbi Eliezer prohibits</b> it, <b>since</b> Samaritans <b>are not well versed in the details of mitzvot,</b> and there is concern that their <i>matza</i> might be leavened. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says</b> that this is not a concern, as with regard to <b>any mitzva that Samaritans embraced</b> and accepted, <b>they are more exacting in its</b> observance <b>than</b> are <b>Jews.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But here,</b> with regard to marriage, in <b>what</b> details are <b>they not well versed?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>because they are not well versed with regard to the laws of betrothal and divorce.</b> Consequently, it is possible that their bills of divorce were invalid, or that a betrothed woman was allowed to remarry without having received a bill of divorce, which would mean that her future children would be <i>mamzerim</i>.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says:</b> Samaritans are of flawed lineage because <b>a <i>mamzer</i></b> resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between a man and <b>his sister and a <i>mamzer</i></b> resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between a man and his <b>brother’s wife were assimilated among them,</b> and they therefore all have the status of <i>mamzerim</i> due to the uncertainty as to the identity of those assimilated <i>mamzerim</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he teaching us</b> by providing the details of how they are <i>mamzerim</i> due to uncertainty? If he intended to incidentally teach us the <i>halakha</i> that the offspring from intercourse <b>for which</b> one <b>is liable to receive <i>karet</i> is a <i>mamzer</i>, let him teach one</b> example, by mentioning the example of a <i>mamzer</i> from a sister. The Gemara answers: He did not mention these details to teach us a <i>halakha</i>, but rather <b>the incident that took place, took place in this way,</b> and that is why the Samaritans were considered to be of flawed lineage.

### Part 6
<b>And Rava says:</b> A Canaanite <b>slave and</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant were assimilated among them.</b> The Gemara asks: In these cases, <b>the prohibition</b> is <b>due to what?</b> It is <b>due to</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant,</b> whose children are slaves. But if so, <b>let him teach one</b> example; why also mention a Canaanite slave, whose child resulting from intercourse with a Jewish woman is of unflawed lineage? The Gemara again answers: <b>The incident that took place, took place in this way.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> A priest <b>who marries a woman</b> who is <b>the daughter of a priest must investigate with regard to her</b> background, i.e., he must check previous generations of her family tree from both the maternal and paternal sides, for <b>four mothers, which are eight.</b> How so? He investigates the lineage of <b>her mother, and the mother of her mother, and the mother of her mother’s father, and her mother,</b> i.e., the mother of her mother’s fathers’ mother. <b>And</b> he also investigates the lineage of <b>the mother of her father, and her mother,</b> i.e., the mother of her father’s mother, <b>and the mother of her father’s father, and her mother</b> i.e., the mother of her father’s father’s mother. If he seeks to marry <b>a Levite</b> woman <b>or an Israelite</b> woman, <b>he adds to these</b> an investigation of mothers of <b>one additional</b> generation.

### Part 8
With regard to these investigations, <b>one need not investigate from the altar and above.</b> If his ancestors included a priest who served at the altar, one checks no further, as the court would have investigated his lineage before allowing him to participate in the Temple service. <b>Nor</b> do they check <b>from the platform,</b> used by Levites for singing in the Temple, <b>and above, nor from the Sanhedrin and above,</b> since only one whose lineage has been examined and who was found to be fit can be appointed to the Sanhedrin. <b>And</b> similarly, <b>anyone whose ancestors held public posts, and</b> anyone whose ancestors were <b>charity collectors, may marry into the priesthood, and there is no need to investigate their</b> lineage, since no one of flawed lineage would be appointed to those positions.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: Even</b> the descendants of <b>one who had signed</b> as <b>a witness in the old court [<i>ba’arki</i>] of Tzippori</b> do not need to have their lineage investigated. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus says: Even</b> the descendants of <b>one who was written</b> in <b>the army list [<i>be’isteratya</i>] of the</b> Jewish <b>king</b> do not need to have their lineage investigated.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What is different about women</b> that <b>we investigate</b> their lineage, <b>and what is different about men</b> that <b>we do not investigate</b> their lineage? Why shouldn’t we also examine the lineage of a bride’s male ancestors for any possible flaw, as we do her female ancestors? The Gemara answers: <b>When women quarrel with each other, it is through</b> accusations of engaging in <b>forbidden sexual intercourse,</b> i.e., licentiousness, <b>that they quarrel. And if it is so that there is a matter</b> of a flaw with regard to the lineage of the woman in question, <b>it</b> would <b>not</b> generate <b>publicity.</b> By contrast, <b>when men quarrel with each other, it is through</b> accusations of flawed <b>lineage that they quarrel.</b> Therefore, <b>if it is so that there is a matter</b> of a flaw with regard to her father’s lineage, <b>it</b> would generate <b>publicity,</b> even if no investigation is conducted.

### Part 11
The Gemara inquires: <b>But she should also investigate his</b> lineage; why is only the lineage of the woman investigated? The Gemara comments: This <b>supports Rav, as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It was <b>not prohibited</b> for <b>women</b> of <b>unflawed</b> lineage, i.e., daughters of priests, <b>to marry</b> men of <b>flawed</b> lineage, such as <i>ḥalalim</i>, converts, or emancipated slaves. Therefore, women are not required to investigate the lineage of potential husbands.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava taught</b> that one needs to investigate <b>four mothers who are twelve,</b> adding an additional two generations of mothers of each of the woman’s parents. <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: Four mothers who are sixteen.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to Rav Adda bar Ahava,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC