
### Part 1
It is <b>necessary</b> to state this verse for another reason, as <b>it might enter your mind to say: Derive</b> a verbal analogy with regard to <i>Sukkot</i>, where the verse states: “On the <b>fifteenth</b> day of this seventh month is the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>” (Leviticus 23:34), <b>from</b> Passover, where the verse states: “And on the <b>fifteenth</b> day of the same month is the <b>festival of Passover”</b> (Leviticus 23:6). One would then say that <b>just as there women are obligated</b> to eat <i>matza</i> on the first night of Passover, despite the fact that it is a time-bound mitzva, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the mitzva of residing in the <i>sukka</i>, <b>women are obligated.</b> Therefore it <b>was necessary</b> for the verse to use the term “the homeborn” to exclude women from the obligation to reside in a <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara further asks: <b>But there is</b> the mitzva of <b>appearance,</b> i.e., the obligation to bring a burnt-offering on pilgrimage Festivals, <b>which is a positive, time-bound mitzva. And the reason</b> women are exempt from this obligation is <b>that the Merciful One writes,</b> with regard to this mitzva: “Three times in the year all of <b>your males</b> shall appear before the Lord God” (Exodus 23:17), which serves <b>to exclude women.</b> It may be derived from here that <b>if that were not so, women</b> would be <b>obligated.</b> This indicates that women are not necessarily exempt from every positive, time-bound mitzva.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary</b> for the verse to teach the <i>halakha</i> in this case as well, as <b>it might enter your mind to say: Derive</b> a verbal analogy with regard to <b>appearance,</b> where the verse states: Three times in the year all of your males shall appear,” <b>from</b> the <b>appearance</b> stated with regard to the mitzva of <b>assembly,</b> about which the verse states: “When all of Israel come to appear before the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 31:11). One would then say that just as women are obligated in the mitzva of assembly, so too they should be obligated to appear on a pilgrimage Festival. It is therefore necessary for the Torah to state explicitly that women are exempt from the mitzva of appearance on a pilgrimage Festival.

### Part 4
With regard to the primary proof for the principle that women are exempt from positive, time-bound mitzvot, the Gemara asks: <b>But before deriving</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>from phylacteries, to exempt</b> women from all positive, time-bound mitzvot, <b>derive</b> it <b>from</b> the mitzva of <b>rejoicing</b> on a Festival, in which women are obligated, <b>to obligate</b> women in all these mitzvot. <b>Abaye said:</b> The mitzva of rejoicing does not apply directly to women. Rather, <b>a woman is rendered joyful by her husband,</b> i.e., the mitzva is for him to gladden her on a Festival.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What can be said</b> with regard to <b>a widow,</b> who no longer has a husband but is nevertheless obligated to be joyful on a Festival, as it is written: “And you shall rejoice before the Lord your God, you…and the widow” (Deuteronomy 16:11)? The Gemara answers that the mitzva does not apply directly to a widow; rather, it applies <b>to</b> the men <b>with whom she is present,</b> i.e., they have an obligation to ensure that widows rejoice on the Festivals.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>derive</b> that women are obligated in all positive, time-bound mitzvot <b>from</b> the mitzva of <b>assembly,</b> in which women are explicitly obligated despite the fact that it is a time-bound mitzva. The Gemara answers: One cannot derive in this manner, <b>because</b> the verses concerning <b><i>matza</i> and assembly are two verses that come as one,</b> i.e., to teach the same matter, that women are obligated in these mitzvot despite the fact that these are positive, time-bound mitzvot. <b>And</b> there is a principle that <b>any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent that applies to other cases. Rather, the two instances are considered exceptions.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> the verses concerning <b>phylacteries and appearance</b> are <b>also two verses that come as one,</b> as they both indicate that women are exempt from positive, time-bound mitzvot, <b>and</b> therefore the verses do <b>not teach</b> a precedent. The Gemara answers: These are not considered as two verses that come as one, as both <b>are necessary,</b> each for its own reason. <b>As, if the Merciful One had written</b> that women are exempt from donning <b>phylacteries and had not written</b> that they are exempt from the mitzva of <b>appearance, I would say: Derive</b> a verbal analogy to obligate women from the verse stated with regard to <b>appearance from</b> the <b>appearance</b> stated with regard to the mitzva of <b>assembly.</b> Therefore, it is necessary for the Torah to teach that women are exempt from the mitzva of appearance.

### Part 8
<b>And if the Merciful One had written</b> that women are exempt from <b>appearance, and had not written</b> that they are exempt from donning <b>phylacteries, I would say: I will compare phylacteries to <i>mezuza</i>,</b> which would mean that women are obligated in the mitzva of phylacteries. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> for both phylacteries and appearance, and they are not two verses that come as one.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> the verses concerning <b><i>matza</i> and assembly</b> are <b>also necessary,</b> each for its own reason, and they are not two verses that come as one either. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>For what</b> purpose are both of them <b>necessary? Granted, if the Merciful One had written</b> that women are obligated in the mitzva of <b>assembly but had not written</b> that they are obligated in eating <b><i>matza</i>, I would say: Derive</b> a verbal analogy with regard to Passover, where the verse states: “And on the <b>fifteenth</b> day of the same month is the festival of Passover” (Leviticus 23:6), from <i>Sukkot</i>, where the verse states: “On the <b>fifteenth</b> day of this seventh month is the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>” (Leviticus 23:34), teaching that women are exempt from eating <i>matza</i>, just as they are exempt from residing in a <i>sukka</i>. Therefore, it is necessary for a verse to teach that women are obligated in eating <i>matza</i>.

### Part 10
<b>But let the Merciful One write</b> that women are obligated in eating <b><i>matza</i>, and it</b> would <b>not</b> be <b>necessary</b> to state the same <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>assembly, and I</b> would <b>say</b> on my own: If <b>children are obligated</b> in assembly, as is stated explicitly in the verse “Assemble the people, the men and the women and the children” (Deuteronomy 31:12), are <b>women not all the more so</b> obligated? <b>Therefore,</b> as it is explicitly stated that women are obligated in assembly, the verses concerning <i>matza</i> and assembly are <b>two verses that come as one, and</b> consequently do <b>not teach</b> a precedent.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> as a principle that two verses that come as one <b>do not teach</b> a precedent. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that two verses that come as one <b>do teach</b> a precedent, <b>what can be said?</b>

### Part 12
<b>And furthermore,</b> one can ask: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>women are obligated in positive mitzvot that are not time bound?</b> The Gemara answers <b>that</b> one <b>derives</b> this <b>from</b> the mitzva of <b>fearing</b> one’s mother and father: <b>Just as women are obligated</b> in the mitzva of <b>fear</b> (Leviticus 19:3), <b>so too, women are obligated in every positive mitzva that is not time bound.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>derive</b> the opposite <b>from Torah study:</b> Just as women are exempt from Torah study, so too they should be exempt from all positive mitzvot that are not time bound. The Gemara answers: One cannot derive an exemption for women from their exemption from Torah study, <b>because Torah study and procreation are two verses that come as one,</b> as in both cases women are exempt, despite the fact that these are not time-bound mitzvot. <b>And any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC