
### Part 1
<b>If</b> the agent <b>subtracted ten</b> from the denominator and separated one-fortieth <b>or added ten</b> to the denominator and separated one-sixtieth, thereby giving more or less than the owner intended, <b>his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>. From where do we</b> derive that one can appoint an agent to separate <i>teruma</i>? <b>And if you would say that</b> it <b>is derived from divorce,</b> one could argue: <b>What</b> is an aspect unique <b>to divorce is that it is</b> considered <b>a non-sacred</b> matter in relation to <i>teruma</i> and will have different <i>halakhot</i>, so one cannot learn from divorce that one can appoint an agent to separate <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: The verse states with regard to <i>teruma</i>: “So you also shall set apart a gift unto the Lord of all your tithes” (Numbers 18:28). Once the <b>verse states “you,”</b> the addition of the word “also” in the term <b>“you also”</b> serves <b>to include an agent.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And let the Merciful One write in</b> the passage concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> that one can appoint an agent, <b>and</b> the <i>halakha</i> that one can appoint an agent to act on his behalf in <b>these</b> other areas matters, i.e., divorce and betrothal, <b>can come and be derived from it.</b> The Gemara answers: Agency in these matters cannot be derived in this manner <b>because</b> the derivation <b>can be refuted:</b> Separating <i>teruma</i> is different, in <b>that it is</b> able to be separated <b>by</b> mere <b>thought.</b> It is enough for one to decide that a certain portion of his produce shall be <i>teruma</i> to have that status take effect. Just as there is this leniency unique to separating <i>teruma</i>, perhaps the leniency that enables one to appoint an agent is also unique to separating <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara further clarifies the source for agency: Generally, the Paschal offering was brought by a group of people together. <b>But</b> there is <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Pesaḥim</i> 98b): In the case of <b>a group whose Paschal offering was lost</b> before it was sacrificed, <b>and they said to one</b> member of the group: <b>Go and search</b> for our Paschal offering, <b>and</b> when you find it, <b>slaughter</b> it <b>on our</b> behalf; <b>and</b> this person <b>went and found</b> the lost animal <b>and slaughtered</b> it on behalf of the entire group, <b>but</b> meanwhile, despairing of his return, <b>they took</b> a different animal <b>and slaughtered</b> it as a Paschal offering, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: <b>If his</b> Paschal offering <b>was slaughtered first, he eats from his</b> offering, <b>and they eat and drink with him.</b> This demonstrates that one can act as an agent to slaughter the Paschal offering.

### Part 4
<b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>, that one can appoint an agent to slaughter an offering? <b>And if you would say that</b> it <b>is derived from these</b> other instances of agency, i.e., divorce and <i>teruma</i>, one could refute this derivation by saying: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about these is that they are</b> considered <b>non-sacred</b> matters <b>relative to offerings,</b> and perhaps offerings have their own set of <i>halakhot</i>.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> that <b>which Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa</b> says, <b>as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the legal status of <b>a person’s agent is like</b> that of <b>himself? As it is stated</b> with regard to the Paschal offering: <b>“And the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall slaughter it in the afternoon”</b> (Exodus 12:6). <b>Is it so</b> that <b>the whole assembly slaughters</b> the offering? <b>But only one</b> person from each group <b>slaughters</b> it. <b>Rather,</b> it can be derived <b>from here that</b> the legal status of <b>a person’s agent is like</b> that of <b>himself.</b>

### Part 6
In light of that exposition, the Gemara asks: <b>Let the Merciful One write</b> in the Torah the <i>halakha</i> of an agent <b>with regard to offerings, and these,</b> i.e., agency in the cases of betrothal, divorce, and <i>teruma</i>, <b>can come and be derived from it.</b> The Gemara answers: Agency in these matters cannot be derived in this manner <b>because</b> the derivation <b>can be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about offerings</b> is that the <b>majority of their actions</b> are performed <b>by</b> means of <b>an agent.</b> Since most of the sacrificial service is performed by priests, who serve as the agents of those bringing the offerings, the general <i>halakha</i> of agency cannot be derived from there.

### Part 7
The Gemara continues to ask: For the reasons stated, the <i>halakha</i> of agency <b>cannot be derived</b> for any <b>one</b> of these <b>from</b> any other <b>one</b> of them. Still, <b>derive one</b> of these <b>from</b> the other <b>two.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Which</b> of them will be <b>derived</b> from the others?

### Part 8
If you say: <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the <i>halakha</i> of agency <b>with regard to offerings and derive</b> agency with regard to offerings <b>from these,</b> i.e., divorce and <i>teruma</i>, that derivation can be refuted: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about these is that they are</b> considered <b>non-sacred</b> matters <b>relative to offerings,</b> as even <i>teruma</i> is not sacred compared to offerings, and sacred procedures such as offerings may have their own <i>halakhot</i>. If you say: <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the <i>halakha</i> of agency <b>with regard to divorce, and derive</b> agency with regard to divorce <b>from these,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> and offerings, this too can be refuted: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about these is they can be</b> designated <b>by means of thought,</b> and therefore may be easier to effect than divorce.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it is the third derivation that is possible: <b>Let the Merciful One not write</b> the <i>halakha</i> of agency <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i>, and derive</b> agency <b>from these,</b> i.e., offerings and divorce. Although <i>teruma</i> is sacred, offerings are more sacred, and yet the <i>halakha</i> of agency applies to them. Although the separating of <i>teruma</i> can be accomplished by means of thought, as opposed to divorce, offerings can also be designated by means of thought. The Gemara answers: It is <b>indeed</b> so; this is the derivation for the applicability of agency to <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> then <b>why do I</b> need the derivation that once the verse states <b>“you,”</b> the addition of the word “also” in the term <b>“you also”</b> serves to include an agent? The Gemara answers: It <b>is necessary to</b> function as the source of <b>the</b> statement <b>of Rabbi Yannai, as Rabbi Yannai says</b> that from the term <b>“you also,”</b> the following is derived: <b>Just as you,</b> those who appoint agents, <b>are members of the covenant,</b> i.e., Jews, <b>so too, your agents</b> must be <b>members of the covenant.</b> A gentile cannot separate <i>teruma</i> even if appointed as an agent by a Jew.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>a verse</b> to teach <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>? <b>It</b> is <b>derived from that</b> which <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba</b> says that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says, as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: A slave cannot become an agent to receive a bill of divorce from the hand of a woman’s husband</b> on her behalf <b>because he is not</b> included <b>in the laws of bills of divorce and betrothal.</b> This indicates that there is a principle that if certain matters do not apply to a person, he cannot act as an agent with regard to those matters. Therefore, since gentiles are not commanded to separate <i>teruma</i>, they cannot be agents for its separation.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: It <b>was</b> nevertheless <b>necessary</b> to derive this <i>halakha</i> for the case of <i>teruma</i>, because it cannot be derived from the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan. This is as it might <b>enter your mind to say:</b> It is <b>a slave</b> who cannot serve as an agent to receive a bill of divorce, <b>since he cannot release</b> a woman by divorce <b>at all; but a gentile, since he is included in his own <i>teruma</i>, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 3:9): <b>A gentile or a Samaritan who separated <i>teruma</i></b> from their own produce, <b>their <i>teruma</i> is considered <i>teruma</i>,</b> despite the fact that they are not obligated to do so, <b>I will say</b> that he can <b>also be</b> appointed as an <b>agent.</b> To counter this argument, the term “you also” <b>teaches us</b> that only members of the covenant can act as agents for separating <i>teruma</i>; gentiles cannot.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to Rabbi Shimon, who exempts</b> one from paying an additional penalty for the <i>teruma</i> of a gentile, this explanation cannot be stated. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 3:9): If <b>the <i>teruma</i> of a gentile</b> gets mixed with regular produce, it is considered to be <b>a mixture of</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>and non-sacred</b> produce, <b>and</b> if a non-priest eats this mixture unwittingly <b>he is liable</b> to pay <b>for it</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> beyond its value, just as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to one who unwittingly eats <i>teruma</i>. <b>But Rabbi Shimon exempts</b> him from paying the additional one-fifth, as he holds that the <i>teruma</i> of a gentile possesses no sanctity and is considered a mere gift to a priest. If so, if there is no need to learn the additional <i>halakha</i> that a gentile cannot act as an agent with regard to the separating of <i>teruma</i>, <b>why do I</b> need the derivation from <b>“you”</b> and <b>“you also”?</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary</b> to state this additional term, as it might <b>enter your mind to say: Since the Master says</b> that the word “you” is interpreted as a limitation, it means that <b>“you,” but not sharecroppers,</b> can separate <i>teruma</i>, as a sharecropper cannot separate <i>teruma</i> from the produce of the owner of the field; <b>“you”</b> can separate <i>teruma</i> <b>but not partners</b> from shared property without the consent of the other; <b>“you”</b> can separate <i>teruma</i> <b>but not a steward [<i>apotropos</i>]</b> from the estate that he is administering; and <b>“you”</b> can separate <i>teruma</i> <b>but not one who separates</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> produce <b>that is not his,</b> you might <b>also say: “You”</b> can separate <i>teruma</i> <b>and not your agents.</b> The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that “you also” indicates that one can appoint an agent to separate <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 15
The Gemara poses a question with regard to the basic derivation of the <i>halakha</i> of agency: <b>This works out well</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa,</b> who explains that the verse: “And the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall slaughter it in the afternoon” (Exodus 12:6), teaches the <i>halakha</i> of agency with regard to offerings. <b>But</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yonatan, who derives a different exposition from this verse, from where do we</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> of agency with regard to offerings? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: From where do we</b> derive that <b>all of the Jews can fulfill</b> their obligations

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC