
### Part 1
then <b>even</b> if he betrothed <b>a menstruating woman as well,</b> his betrothal should not be effective and the offspring should be a <i>mamzer</i>, as a menstruating woman is included in the list in that chapter of those with whom sexual intercourse is forbidden. If so, <b>why</b> did <b>Abaye say: All concede with regard to one who engages in intercourse with a menstruating woman or with a <i>sota</i>,</b> a woman forbidden to her husband on suspicion of being unfaithful to him, <b>that the offspring is not a <i>mamzer</i>? Ḥizkiyya said:</b> In the case of a menstruating woman, <b>the verse states: “And her impurity be [<i>ut’hi</i>] upon him”</b> (Leviticus 15:24), from which it is derived that <b>even at the time of her impurity,</b> the type of <b>becoming [<i>havaya</i>]</b> stated with regard to betrothal (see Deuteronomy 24:2) <b>should</b> apply <b>to her.</b> The Gemara is interpreting the connection between the words <i>ut’hi</i> and <i>havaya</i>, as both share the same Hebrew root.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>After all, there is</b> the possibility <b>of juxtaposing</b> all other forbidden relatives <b>to a menstruating woman, and there is</b> also the possibility <b>of juxtaposing</b> them <b>to a wife’s sister. What did you see that you juxtaposed them to a wife’s sister?</b> Why not <b>juxtapose them</b> instead <b>to a menstruating woman?</b> The Gemara answers: When there is an option of juxtaposing a case in a manner that leads to <b>a leniency, or</b> juxtaposing it to a <i>halakha</i> that entails <b>a stringency, we juxtapose</b> it in a fashion that leads <b>to a stringency.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that there is a different source for the <i>halakha</i> that betrothal is ineffective with forbidden relatives: This principle <b>is derived by</b> means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the case of <b>a <i>yevama</i>: Just as a <i>yevama</i>,</b> before she is released from the <i>yavam</i> through <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>is</b> forbidden <b>by</b> a mere <b>prohibition,</b> which entails lashes, and yet <b>betrothal is not effective with her,</b> with regard to <b>those</b> people with whom sexual intercourse renders one <b>liable to</b> receive the <b>death</b> penalty <b>or liable to</b> be punished with <b><i>karet</i>,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> the case that betrothal should not be effective in these cases? The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> meaning that this is the source, one should <b>also</b> derive that betrothal is ineffective with any <b>other</b> people with whom one <b>is</b> only <b>liable</b> for violating <b>a prohibition</b> of engaging in intercourse, by means of the same analogy.

### Part 4
Rav Pappa says: It <b>is written explicitly</b> in the Torah that a man can betroth women <b>with whom he is liable</b> for violating ordinary <b>prohibitions</b> of intercourse. The Torah states in a different context: <b>“If a man has two wives, the one beloved and the one hated”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:15). Rav Pappa asks rhetorically: <b>But is there one who is hated before the Omnipresent and one who is beloved before the Omnipresent? Rather, “beloved”</b> means <b>beloved in her marriage,</b> i.e., her marriage is permitted; <b>“hated”</b> means <b>hated in her marriage,</b> i.e., her marriage involves the violation of a prohibition. <b>And</b> despite the fact that the latter marriage is between a man and a woman who are forbidden to one another, their union still has the status of a marriage, as <b>the Merciful One states: “If a man has</b> two wives,” i.e., he is married to both of them.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: Betrothal does not take effect</b> even <b>with</b> those women with whom one <b>is</b> only <b>liable</b> for violating <b>a prohibition</b> of engaging in intercourse, <b>with regard to what</b> case <b>does he establish</b> the verse: <b>“If a man has</b> two wives”? The Gemara answers: He explains that this verse is referring <b>to a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Simai.</b>

### Part 6
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Simai says: From all</b> relationships that involve prohibitions, <b>Rabbi Akiva would render</b> the offspring <b>a <i>mamzer</i>, except for</b> the marriage of <b>a widow to a High Priest, as the Torah said: “And he shall not profane [<i>yeḥallel</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 21:15), which teaches that <b>he renders them profane [<i>ḥillulim</i>],</b> i.e., his children from this marriage are <i>ḥalalim</i>, <b>but he does not render</b> them labeled with <b><i>mamzer</i> status.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what can be said <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yeshevav, who says: Come, let us shout at Akiva ben Yosef, who would say:</b> In <b>every</b> case where <b>a Jew may not engage in intercourse</b> with a particular woman, and he does so, <b>the offspring</b> that results from this union <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> even the child of a widow and a High Priest? <b>This works out well</b> even <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yeshevav if he comes to exclude the reason of Rabbi Simai,</b> i.e., if he means to take issue with the ruling of Rabbi Akiva in the specific case mentioned by Rabbi Simai, that of a widow married to a High Priest, then Rabbi Yeshevav too concedes that according to the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, betrothal does take effect in a case where a positive mitzva is violated by the betrothal. Accordingly, one can establish the phrase “and the one hated” (Deuteronomy 21:15) as referring to those whose marriage entailed the violation of a positive mitzva.

### Part 8
<b>But if</b> he states <b>a reasoning of his own,</b> i.e., he states an independent statement critical of Rabbi Akiva’s ruling that the child of any illicit union is a <i>mamzer</i>, <b>and</b> it is a categorical statement that applies to all illicit unions, <b>even those liable</b> for violating <b>a positive mitzva,</b> i.e., Rabbi Akiva holds that even the offspring of this relationship is a <i>mamzer</i>, <b>with regard to what</b> case <b>does he interpret</b> the “hated” woman of the above verse?

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yeshevav would say that the verse is referring <b>to a non-virgin</b> married <b>to a High Priest,</b> as there is a positive mitzva that a High Priest should marry a virgin. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from</b> the previous ones? If Rabbi Yeshevav holds that a child born of any act of intercourse prohibited by a positive mitzva is a <i>mamzer</i>, the marriage of a non-virgin to a High Priest likewise involves the violation of a positive mitzva. The Gemara answers: <b>Because it is a positive mitzva that is not equally applicable to all,</b> and since this command applies only to a High Priest and not to other Jews, its violation is considered less severe than that of other positive mitzvot.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Akiva’s opinion, <b>rather than establishing</b> the verse: “If a man has two wives, the one beloved and the one hated” (Deuteronomy 21:15), as referring <b>to</b> those who are <b>liable for</b> violating <b>prohibitions, let them establish it</b> as referring <b>to those liable for</b> violating <b>a positive mitzva.</b> In other words, betrothal should not be effective if it involves the violation of a prohibition. And as for the “hated” woman whose marriage is nevertheless valid, mentioned in that verse, this is referring to one whose engaging in sexual intercourse violates a positive mitzva.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds: <b>These</b> cases where they are <b>liable</b> for violating <b>a positive mitzva, what are they? If</b> you say that <b>both</b> wives are <b>Egyptian</b> converts, <b>they are both hated,</b> as both marriages are prohibited. <b>If</b> you claim that <b>one is an Egyptian woman and the other a Jewish woman</b> of unflawed lineage, this cannot be the case, as <b>we require “two wives” from the same nation,</b> since the Torah equates the two women. <b>If</b> the hated one is <b>a non-virgin</b> married <b>to a High Priest,</b> this too is problematic, as, <b>is it written: If a priest has</b> two wives? The verse merely says: “If a man has two wives.” Consequently, the verse cannot be interpreted as referring to those who are liable for violating a positive mitzva.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> that betrothal that involves a prohibition does not take effect, this verse can be referring only to a non-virgin who marries a High Priest, or marriage to a female Egyptian convert, which involve the violation of positive mitzvot. Can the verse really be interpreted as concerning such unlikely cases? The Gemara answers: <b>You are forced to leave this verse</b> aside, <b>as it establishes itself as</b> dealing with <b>a difficult</b> case. In other words, as Rabbi Akiva claims that betrothal is ineffective if any prohibition is involved, he has no choice but to explain the verse that says: “If a man has two wives,” in this forced manner.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> a woman <b>cannot</b> join in betrothal <b>with him</b> or with others, the offspring is like her. This ruling refers specifically to a Canaanite maidservant or a gentile woman. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that betrothal with <b>a Canaanite maidservant</b> is ineffective? <b>Rav Huna says: The verse states</b> that Abraham commanded his slaves: <b>“You abide here with [<i>im</i>] the donkey”</b> (Genesis 22:5), which alludes to the fact that his slaves belong to <b>a nation [<i>am</i>] similar to a donkey;</b> just as betrothal is ineffective with animals, it is likewise ineffective with Canaanite maidservants. The Gemara comments: <b>We have found that betrothal is ineffective with</b> a Canaanite maidservant;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC