
### Part 1
<b>let us derive</b> a principle from misuse of consecrated property, that an agent can be appointed to perform a transgression. The Gemara answers: This is not done, <b>because misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>and</b> the <b>slaughter or sale</b> of a stolen cow or sheep <b>are two verses that come as one, and any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> their common aspect to apply to other cases. The Gemara clarifies: The verse pertaining to <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property is <b>that which we said,</b> but <b>what is</b> the verse with regard to <b>slaughter or sale? The verse states: “And he slaughters it or sells it”</b> (Exodus 21:37), juxtaposing selling to slaughtering: <b>Just as a sale</b> is necessarily performed <b>by means of another,</b> since every transaction involves two parties, <b>so too slaughter</b> can likewise be performed <b>by means of another,</b> and the thief is liable even if the act of slaughtering is performed by his agent.

### Part 2
The Gemara quotes two other explanations. <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that the word <b>“or”</b> in the verse “and he slaughters it or sells it,” serves <b>to include an agent. The school of Ḥizkiyya taught:</b> When the verse states with regard to sale or slaughter: “He shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep” (Exodus 21:37), repetition of the word <b>“for”</b> is superfluous and serves <b>to include an agent.</b> It teaches that the one who appointed the agent is liable for the action of the agent.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who said</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent that applies to other cases, <b>but according to the one who said</b> that two verses do <b>teach</b> a precedent, <b>what can be said?</b> Why not derive from the case of misuse of consecrated property and that of slaughter or sale that an agent can be appointed to perform a transgression? The Gemara answers: <b>The Merciful One reveals</b> in the Torah that an agent cannot be appointed to perform a transgression <b>in</b> the case of an offering <b>slaughtered outside</b> the Temple, as it states: <b>“It shall be considered blood for that [<i>hahu</i>] man; he has spilled blood”</b> (Leviticus 17:4). The emphasis of “that man” teaches that <b>he</b> is liable for his actions, <b>but</b> he is <b>not</b> liable for the actions of <b>his agent.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for the <i>halakha</i> that an agent cannot be appointed to perform a transgression <b>with regard to</b> the prohibition of offerings <b>slaughtered outside. From where do we</b> derive that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>to the entire Torah?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>derived</b> as a principle <b>from</b> the case of offerings <b>slaughtered outside,</b> by means of analogy.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: But <b>before deriving</b> that an agent cannot be appointed to perform a transgression <b>from</b> the case of offerings <b>slaughtered outside, let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>from these</b> other cases, i.e., misuse of consecrated property and slaughter or sale, where the <i>halakha</i> is that an agent can be appointed to perform a transgression. The Gemara answers: <b>The Merciful One again writes</b> in that same verse in connection to the prohibition of slaughtering offerings outside the Temple: <b>“And that [<i>hahu</i>] man shall be cut off</b> from among his people” (Leviticus 17:4). <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> derived from the emphasis of the word <i>hahu</i> written in this part of the verse <b>is not needed for</b> this <b>matter itself,</b> since the verse already taught that he is liable only for his own act and not for that of his agent, <b>apply it to the matter of the entire Torah,</b> so that one is held liable only for one’s own actions and not for those of an agent.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent, and there is no reason to learn from the misuse of consecrated property and slaughter or sale that one can appoint an agent to perform a transgression, <b>what does he interpret those</b> terms: <b>“That</b> man” and: <b>“That</b> man” to be teaching? Since he does not need to counter a derivation from the two verses, he should not require them to teach that one cannot appoint an agent to perform a transgression. The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> of them serves <b>to exclude</b> from liability the case of <b>two who hold a knife and slaughter</b> an offering outside together. <b>And</b> the other <b>one</b> emphasizes: <b>“That</b> man” is liable, <b>but not one</b> who is <b>compelled</b> to slaughter the animal; <b>“that</b> man” is liable, <b>but not</b> one who does so <b>unwittingly;</b> and <b>“that</b> man” is liable, <b>and not</b> one who <b>was mistaken,</b> e.g., one who did not know that the animal was an offering. In order to be liable one must have acted with full awareness and completely willingly.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>the other</b> opinion, i.e., the one who holds that two verses that come as one do teach a precedent, which derives from the word “that [<i>hahu</i>]” that an agent cannot be appointed to perform a transgression, derive these <i>halakhot</i>? The Gemara answers: He derives them from the fact that the pronoun “<i>hahu</i>” is composed of two parts, the article <i>ha</i>, meaning: The, and the pronoun <i>hu</i>, meaning: He. He derives <i>halakhot</i> both <b>from “<i>hu</i>”</b> and from the additional article in <b>“<i>hahu</i>.”</b> Therefore, he is able to derive both the principle that an agent cannot be appointed to perform a transgression and the <i>halakhot</i> of two that slaughter and one who acts without full awareness. <b>And the other</b> opinion, i.e., the one who holds that two verses that come as one do not teach a precedent, which derives these <i>halakhot</i> from the entire word “<i>hahu</i>,” <b>does not interpret</b> the variation from <b>“<i>hu</i>”</b> to <b>“<i>hahu</i>.”</b> He holds that one cannot derive separate <i>halakhot</i> from each part of this word.

### Part 8
The Gemara questions the statement that there is no agency for transgressions: <b>But</b> there is <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who says to his agent: Go kill a person, he,</b> the killer, <b>is liable</b> if he kills, <b>and the one who appointed him is exempt. Shammai the Elder says in the name of Haggai the prophet: The one who appointed him is liable, as it stated</b> with regard to David, who directed Joab to kill Uriah: <b>“Him you have slain with the sword of the children of Ammon”</b> (II Samuel 12:9). David was held responsible for the death of Uriah.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of Shammai the Elder?</b> How can he say that there is agency for transgression? The Gemara answers: <b>He holds</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do teach</b> a precedent, and therefore he learns from the two cases of misuse of consecrated property and slaughter or sale that there is agency for transgression. <b>And</b> as for the derivation from one who slaughters an offering outside the Temple, which teaches that there is no agent for transgression, Shammai <b>does not interpret</b> the variation from <b>“<i>hu</i>”</b> to <b>“<i>hahu</i>.” And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Actually</b> it is possible that he does <b>interpret</b> the variation, and he agrees that there is no agent for transgression. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of Shammai’s statement that the one who appoints him is <b>liable?</b> It means he is <b>liable according to the laws of Heaven,</b> although he cannot be punished by a human court.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>By inference,</b> does this mean <b>that the first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>he is exempt even according to the laws of Heaven?</b> The one who appointed him must bear some responsibility. <b>Rather,</b> the first <i>tanna</i> also agrees that the one who appointed the killer is liable according to the laws of Heaven, and <b>the</b> difference <b>between them</b> pertains to <b>a great judgment and a small judgment.</b> According to Shammai, his liability is great, to the extent that Heaven considers him fully responsible, whereas the first <i>tanna</i> holds that his liability is of a lesser degree.

### Part 11
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: Everyone agrees that there is no agent for transgression. Nevertheless, Shammai holds that <b>there,</b> with regard to killing, it <b>is different, since the Merciful One reveals: “Him you have slain with the sword of the children of Ammon,”</b> explicitly rendering David accountable for this transgression and indicating that killing is different from all other transgressions.

### Part 12
<b>And the other</b> opinion, i.e., the first <i>tanna</i>, who holds that the one who appoints the killer is exempt, explains the verse as follows: <b>Behold</b> this killing is <b>for you like the sword of Ammon. Just as you are not punished</b> for those killed by <b>the sword of Ammon</b> in the course of the war, <b>so too you are not punished for</b> the death of <b>Uriah the Hittite,</b> not even according to the laws of Heaven. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? Uriah <b>was a rebel against the monarchy</b> and was consequently liable to the death penalty, <b>as he said to</b> King David: <b>“And my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open field”</b> (II Samuel 11:11). By referring to Joab as his lord in front of the king, he indicated that he answered to Joab rather than to the king, which is tantamount to rebellion.

### Part 13
<b>Rava said: If you say</b> that <b>Shammai holds</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do teach</b> a precedent, <b>and he does not interpret</b> the variation from <b>“<i>hu</i>”</b> to <b>“<i>hahu</i>,”</b> the combination of which would result in him holding that there is agency for transgression in all cases, even he <b>concedes with regard to one who says to his agent: Go and engage in sexual intercourse with a forbidden relative,</b> or: Go <b>and eat</b> forbidden <b>fat, that</b> the agent <b>is liable and the one who appointed him is exempt, as we have not found in the entire Torah</b> a case where <b>this</b> person physically <b>benefits</b> from the transgression <b>but that</b> one <b>becomes liable.</b>

### Part 14
§ <b>It was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> engaged in a dispute concerning the following issue: <b>Rav says: An agent can become a witness.</b> If one was appointed as an agent to perform a certain task, he can then serve as a witness that the action was performed. <b>In the school of Rabbi Sheila they say: An agent cannot become a witness.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of the school of Rabbi Sheila? If we say</b> it is <b>because</b> the one who appointed him <b>did not say to</b> the agent: <b>Be a witness for me,</b> and appointed him only as an agent; <b>if that is so,</b> if one <b>betrothed a woman in the presence of two</b> people <b>and did not say to them: You are my witnesses, so too</b> would they hold <b>that it is not a betrothal?</b> It is not necessary to explicitly appoint witnesses.

### Part 15
<b>Rather,</b> the dispute is as follows. <b>Rav says: An agent can become a witness,</b> since <b>we strengthen his words</b> of testimony because he attests to a matter of which he is certain, as he is the one that performed the action. <b>In the school of Rabbi Sheila they say: An agent cannot become a witness. Since the Master said</b> that the legal status of <b>a person’s agent is like</b> that of <b>himself,</b> the agent <b>is considered like</b> the one who appointed him <b>himself.</b> Just as one cannot testify with regard to a matter that concerns himself, the same applies to one’s agent.

### Part 16
<b>The Gemara raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i> to the statement of Rav: If one <b>said to three</b> people: <b>Go out and betroth the woman for me,</b> then <b>one</b> of them is the <b>agent</b> for the betrothal <b>and two</b> of them serve as <b>witnesses;</b> this is <b>the statement of Beit Shammai. And Beit Hillel say: They are all</b> potential <b>agents, and</b> as <b>an agent cannot become a witness</b> none of them can be witnesses. Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel <b>disagree only with regard to</b> a case where one said this to <b>three</b> people. <b>But with regard to two</b> people, <b>all agree</b> that agents are <b>not</b> able to serve as witnesses.

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: It was <b>he,</b> Rav, <b>who said</b> his ruling <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that <i>tanna</i>,</b> i.e., the version of Beit Shammai as presented by Rabbi Natan. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Natan says: Beit Shammai say</b> that <b>the agent and one witness</b> are sufficient to carry out the agency and testify, <b>and Beit Hillel say: The agent and two witnesses</b> are needed. The Gemara questions this explanation: <b>And</b> would <b>Rav</b> rule <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Reverse</b> the opinions, so that it is Beit Hillel who said that the agent and one witness suffice. <b>And Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, taught</b> the dispute of the <i>amora’im</i> in the <b>opposite</b> manner. <b>Rav says: An agent cannot become a witness,</b> and <b>in the school of Rabbi Sheila they say: An agent can become a witness.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>an agent can become a witness.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rava says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> It follows that if one <b>said to two</b> people: <b>Go and betroth the woman for me, the very same</b> people who are <b>his agents</b> for the betrothal <b>are his witnesses. And a similar</b> <i>halakha</i> is true <b>with regard to divorce:</b> If a man sent a bill of divorce to his wife with two people, they serve both as agents of delivery and as witnesses to the divorce.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC