
### Part 1
The Sages <b>taught</b> that the children’s attachment to her proves that she is their mother <b>only with regard to the consecrated</b> items of <b>the border,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i>, meaning that if she is the wife of a priest, her children may partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>But with regard to lineage,</b> this proof is <b>not</b> relied upon, and her daughters may not marry priests. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If the children cling to her they are considered hers in all regards, <b>even with regard to lineage.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara comments: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan follows his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The court <b>flogs</b> one about whom witnesses testify that he violated a prohibition <b>on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status,</b> even if there is no testimony to definitively establish that the person violated a prohibition, as will be explained. Similarly, the court <b>stones or burns</b> one about whom witnesses testify that he violated a prohibition resulting in court-imposed capital punishment <b>on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status. But one does not burn <i>teruma</i> on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status</b> unless there is testimony that it became ritually impure.

### Part 3
How so? The court <b>flogs</b> one about whom witnesses testify that he violated a prohibition <b>on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yehuda. As Rav Yehuda says:</b> If a woman <b>had</b> among <b>her neighbors the presumptive status of a menstruating woman,</b> and witnesses testified that <b>her husband</b> engaged in sexual intercourse with her, he <b>is flogged due to</b> her status as <b>a menstruating woman,</b> and there is no need for testimony that she was a menstruating woman.

### Part 4
The court <b>stones or burns</b> one about whom witnesses testify that he violated a prohibition resulting in court-imposed capital punishment <b>on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status, in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabba bar Rav Huna. As Rabba bar Rav Huna says:</b> With regard to <b>a man and a woman</b> and <b>a boy and a girl who grew up</b> together <b>in</b> one <b>home</b> as a single family, the presumption is that they are related, even absent witness testimony to that effect. Therefore, <b>they are stoned due to</b> engaging in intercourse with <b>each other</b> if the male child, now an adult, engages in intercourse with the woman, as it is considered incestuous sexual intercourse. <b>And they are burned due to</b> engaging in intercourse with <b>each other</b> if the man engages in intercourse with the female child, now an adult, since she is considered his wife’s daughter.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites a related incident: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says in the name of bar Kappara: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving a woman who came to Jerusalem with a child riding on her shoulders,</b> in the manner of a mother and a son, <b>and she raised him, and he</b> eventually <b>engaged in intercourse with her. And they brought them to court and stoned them</b> for violating the prohibition against a mother and son engaging in intercourse. This was <b>not because he</b> was <b>definitely her son,</b> as they had no testimony to that effect, <b>but because he clung to her,</b> and he therefore had the presumptive status of being her son.

### Part 6
Rabbi Yoḥanan stated: <b>But one does not burn <i>teruma</i> on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status. As Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says: One burns</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>on the</b> basis of <b>presumptive status, and Rabbi Yoḥanan says: One does not burn</b> <i>teruma</i> in this case. The Gemara comments: <b>And they follow their</b> standard lines of <b>reasoning</b> in this matter, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Teharot</i> 3:8): If a ritually impure <b>child is found alongside</b> ritually pure <b>started dough, and</b> he has <b>risen dough in his hand</b> that may have been removed from the larger portion of started dough, <b>Rabbi Meir deems</b> the started dough <b>pure,</b> since there is no proof the child touched it, as he might have been given the piece by someone else. <b>And the Rabbis deem it impure,</b> as they assume that he touched the started dough. The child is presumed to be impure <b>because it is the manner of a child to handle [<i>letappe’aḥ</i>]</b> items.

### Part 7
<b>And we discussed</b> that case: <b>What is the reasoning of Rabbi Meir? He holds</b> that <b>a majority of children handle</b> items, in this case the dough, that are within reach, <b>and a minority do not handle</b> items within reach, <b>and</b> the <b>dough</b> itself <b>retains a presumptive status of purity,</b> since its impurity has not been definitively determined. <b>And</b> if one <b>appends</b> the <b>minority</b> of children who do not handle items within reach <b>to the presumptive status</b> of purity of the dough, the force of the <b>majority</b> of children who handle items within reach <b>is weakened.</b> Therefore, the dough is considered pure. <b>And the Rabbis</b> contend that in a case where the majority is followed, <b>the minority is considered like it does not exist.</b> Consequently, there is a conflict between the determining factors of <b>the majority</b> of impure children who handle items within reach <b>and the presumptive status of purity</b> of the dough. In that case, <b>the majority takes precedence.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Reish Lakish says in the name of Rabbi Oshaya: This</b> <i>halakha</i> of a child <b>is</b> an example of a presumption, i.e., that children handle items within reach, <b>that one burns <i>teruma</i> based on it,</b> since the Rabbis hold that it is sufficiently established that the dough has become impure to allow it to be burned. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This is not the presumption that one burns <i>teruma</i> based on it.</b> Rather, the dough is set aside and may be neither eaten nor burned.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, what is the presumption that one burns <i>teruma</i> based on it?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>started dough is in the house, and creeping animals,</b> which impart impurity when dead, <b>and frogs,</b> which do not impart impurity, <b>are</b> also <b>present there, and pieces</b> of an unidentified creature <b>were found in the started dough, if the majority</b> of creatures in the house <b>are creep-ing animals,</b> the dough <b>is impure,</b> since the presumption is that the pieces are from a creeping animal. <b>If the majority are frogs, it is pure.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> There is a principle that when a possible case of impurity cannot be verified, even if it occurred in a private domain, where generally cases of uncertain impurity are deemed impure, it is deemed pure. <b>Two things do not have the capacity to be questioned,</b> i.e., one cannot verify what happened through investigation. Yet in these two cases, <b>the Sages deemed them as things that have the capacity to be questioned</b> and rendered them impure in cases of uncertainty in a private domain. The two cases are that of <b>a child and an additional</b> <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 11
The case of <b>a child</b> is <b>that which we said</b> concerning a child holding some dough discovered alongside a larger piece of dough. All of the dough is deemed impure, since the child cannot be asked whether or not he rendered the dough impure. <b>And what is the additional</b> one? If pure, <b>started dough</b> was located <b>inside the house, and chickens and impure liquids</b> were present <b>there, and there were found</b> to be

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC