
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse serves <b>to establish</b> that redeeming him is <b>an obligation. And even according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> who says that there is no requirement to redeem land, this case is different, as it is proper to redeem him to prevent him from being assimilated by gentiles.

### Part 2
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “May redeem him,” “may redeem him,”</b> and <b>“may redeem him”</b> (Leviticus 25:48–49), <b>three times?</b> This serves <b>to include all redemptions,</b> and <b>that they are redeemed in this order. What, is it not</b> correct to say that this inclusion is referring both to <b>houses of walled cities and a Hebrew slave sold to a Jew,</b> that they can be redeemed by relatives? The Gemara rejects this interpretation: <b>No,</b> it includes <b>houses in open areas and an ancestral field.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Concerning houses in open areas and an ancestral field, it is written explicitly: “Shall be reckoned with the field of the country”</b> (Leviticus 25:31). <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> This teaches that <b>the closer</b> of a relative one is to the seller, the <b>earlier</b> one is in the order of redeeming the house or the field. This is the context of Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak’s statement.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara returns to the mishna, which teaches: <b>And</b> a Hebrew slave <b>who is pierced</b> after serving six years <b>is acquired</b> as a slave for a longer period <b>through piercing his ear with an awl.</b> The Gemara explains that this is <b>as it is written: “And his master shall pierce his ear with an awl,</b> and he shall serve him forever” (Exodus 21:6).

### Part 4
The mishna further teaches that a pierced slave <b>acquires himself through</b> the advent of <b>the Jubilee</b> Year <b>and through the master’s death.</b> The Gemara explains that this is <b>as it is written: “And he shall serve him</b> forever” (Exodus 21:6). This term indicates that he serves only the master, <b>but not the son and not the daughter.</b> The term <b>“forever”</b> is referring <b>to</b> the <b>forever</b> represented <b>by the Jubilee</b> Year. The word “forever” does not mean for eternity, but refers to the end of the cycle of the Jubilee Year.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught:</b> From the term <b>“an awl” I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a master can pierce the ear of a Hebrew slave <b>with an awl. From where</b> do I derive that <b>a sharp thorn [<i>sol</i>], a thorn [<i>sira</i>], a needle, an auger, and a stylus</b> used to engrave in wax may be used? <b>The verse states: “And you shall take</b> the awl” (Deuteronomy 15:17). This term “and you shall take” serves <b>to include any implement that can be taken in the</b> master’s <b>hand.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> Not all of these utensils may be used for piercing. <b>Just as an awl is unique</b> in that it is made <b>of metal, so too any</b> tool made <b>of metal</b> can be used; one may not pierce a slave’s ear with non-metal implements. <b>Alternatively,</b> the verse states: “And you shall take <b>the awl,” to include the large awl</b> for piercing.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: Yudan the Distinguished would teach</b> as follows: <b>When they pierce, they pierce only the earlobe. And the Rabbis say:</b> The piercing is not performed on the earlobe, as the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>a Hebrew slave</b> who is <b>a priest is not pierced</b> at all <b>because</b> the piercing <b>renders him blemished</b> and unfit to serve in the Temple. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>they pierce</b> a slave’s <b>earlobe, how does a Hebrew slave</b> who is <b>a priest become blemished</b> through piercing? A pierced earlobe is not considered a blemish. This indicates that <b>he is pierced only on the upper part of the ear</b> through the cartilage. The Gemara inquires: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>disagree?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>expounds</b> the verses by means of the hermeneutical principle of reading the verse as consisting of <b>generalizations and details.</b> Accordingly, he maintains that the term <b>“and you shall take”</b> is <b>a generalization</b> that indicates piercing may be performed with any implement. <b>“An awl”</b> is <b>a detail,</b> and when the verse states: <b>“Through his ear and into the door”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:17), <b>it then generalized</b> again. When the verse writes <b>a generalization and a detail and a generalization, you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail: Just as the explicit detail</b> mentions an awl, which is made <b>of metal, so too, any</b> utensil used for piercing must be made <b>of metal.</b>

### Part 9
By contrast, <b>Rabbi Yosei expounds</b> the verses by means of the hermeneutical principle of reading the verse as consisting of <b>amplifications and restrictions.</b> Accordingly, he learns that the term <b>“and you shall take” amplifies,</b> i.e., it includes any item that can be taken in one’s hand. The term <b>“an awl” restricts.</b> When the verse states <b>“through his ear and into the door,” it then amplifies again.</b> When the verse <b>amplifies, restricts, and amplifies, it has amplified</b> the <i>halakha</i> to include <b>everything</b> except one item.

### Part 10
<b>What has it amplified,</b> i.e., included beyond an awl? <b>It has amplified</b> the category to include <b>everything</b> that can pierce an ear. <b>What has it restricted</b> from inclusion in the category? It excludes only the method that is most dissimilar to the use of an awl, which is <b>a corrosive substance.</b> Producing a hole in the slave’s ear with a substance of this kind is not a valid form of piercing.

### Part 11
<b>The Master said</b> above: <b>“The awl,”</b> this serves <b>to include the large awl</b> for piercing. The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred</b> that this expression is referring to a large awl? The Gemara answers that this is <b>as Rava said</b> with regard to the verse: “The sinew of the thigh vein which is upon the hollow of <b>the thigh”</b> (Genesis 32:33), that this is referring to <b>the most important [<i>meyummenet</i>]</b> part of <b>the thigh.</b> The definite article indicates something clear and obvious. <b>Here too,</b> the term <b>“the awl”</b> is referring to <b>a special awl.</b>

### Part 12
It was further stated in the above <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: Yudan the Distinguished would teach: When they pierce</b> a slave <b>they pierce only the earlobe. And the Rabbis say: A Hebrew slave</b> who is <b>a priest is not pierced</b> at all, <b>because</b> piercing <b>renders him blemished.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> let him be pierced and <b>be rendered blemished</b> and disqualified for Temple service. Why is it prohibited to do this? <b>Rabba bar Rav Sheila says: The verse states</b> concerning a Hebrew slave at the end of his servitude: <b>“And he shall return to his own family”</b> (Leviticus 25:41), i.e., <b>to his status in his family.</b> He must be able to return to the position he had as a member of his family. If he was rendered a blemished priest while a slave, once he is emancipated he can no longer return to his status as a priest who can perform the Temple service.

### Part 13
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>a Hebrew slave</b> who is <b>a priest, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning the permissibility <b>for his master to provide him</b> with <b>a Canaanite maidservant</b> with whom to engage in sexual intercourse? The Gemara analyzes the two sides of the dilemma: Does one say that the <i>halakha</i> permitting a Hebrew slave to engage in intercourse with a Canaanite maidservant <b>is</b> a halakhic <b>novelty,</b> as a Jew is generally prohibited from engaging in intercourse with a gentile, and in light of this novelty, <b>it is no different</b> in the case of <b>priests and no different</b> in the case of <b>an Israelite?</b>

### Part 14
<b>Or perhaps</b> the case of <b>priests is different</b> from Israelites, <b>since the Torah includes additional mitzvot for them,</b> which do not apply to all Jews. Therefore, it is prohibited for a priest to engage in sexual intercourse with a Canaanite maidservant, despite the fact she is permitted to a non-priest. The <i>amora’im</i> disagreed with regard to this issue. <b>Rav said: It is permitted</b> for the master to provide him with a Canaanite maidservant, <b>and Shmuel said it is prohibited.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Naḥman said to Rav Anan: When you were</b> studying <b>in the house of Mar Shmuel</b> did <b>you play with tokens [<i>iskumadri</i>]?</b> Didn’t you take your studies seriously? <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>you do not say</b> a proof <b>to him from that</b> which we learned: <b>And the Rabbis say: A Hebrew slave</b> who is <b>a priest is not pierced</b> at all <b>because</b> piercing <b>renders him blemished.</b>

### Part 16
Rav Naḥman explains the proof: <b>And if you say</b> that <b>if his master cannot provide him</b> with <b>a Canaanite maidservant,</b> it is not even relevant to suggest that a slave of priestly lineage could be pierced, as the fact that he cannot be pierced <b>could be derived</b> from another point, <b>as I require</b> the slave to say: <b>“I love my master, my wife, and my children”</b> (Exodus 21:5), <b>and</b> that declaration <b>cannot</b> be issued by a priest if his master may not provide him with a Canaanite maidservant. And <b>nothing more</b> can be answered to this proof. The reason given by the Rabbis proves that a Canaanite maidservant can be provided even to a priest.

### Part 17
Similarly, <b>a dilemma was raised before them: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the permissibility <b>for a priest</b> who goes to war to engage in intercourse <b>with a beautiful woman</b> captured in that war? Does one say that the case of a beautiful woman <b>is a novelty</b> in that the Torah permits a man to engage in intercourse with a gentile woman? Consequently, it <b>is no different</b> in the case of <b>a priest and no different</b> in the case of <b>an Israelite,</b> as both are permitted to engage in intercourse with this woman. <b>Or perhaps</b> the case of <b>priests is different, since</b> the Torah <b>includes additional mitzvot for them? Rav said:</b> It is <b>permitted, and Shmuel said:</b> It is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara comments: <b>With regard to the first act of sexual intercourse</b> between the soldier priest and the gentile woman, <b>everyone agrees that</b> it is permitted, <b>as the Torah spoke only in response to the evil inclination,</b> and the evil inclination of a priest is as strong as that of an Israelite. This passage serves to prevent intercourse performed in a prohibited manner, which is relevant to a priest as well.

### Part 19
<b>When they disagree</b> it is <b>with regard to the second act of sexual intercourse.</b> Is a priest permitted to bring the captive into his house, convert her, and marry her? <b>Rav said</b> it is <b>permitted, and Shmuel said</b> it is <b>prohibited.</b> Their reasoning is as follows: <b>Rav said</b> it is <b>permitted: Since</b> she was <b>permitted</b> to him once, she remains <b>permitted</b> to him. <b>And Shmuel said</b> it is <b>prohibited, as</b> ultimately <b>she is a convert, and a convert is not fit to</b> marry <b>a priest.</b>

### Part 20
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different version of this dispute. <b>With regard to the second act of intercourse everyone agrees that it is prohibited, as she is a convert,</b> and a priest may not marry a convert. <b>When they disagree</b> it is <b>with regard to the first act of intercourse. Rav said</b> it is <b>permitted, as the Torah spoke only in response to the evil inclination. And Shmuel said it is prohibited,</b> as <b>any</b> situation <b>that one can read with regard to it: “Then you shall bring her home to your house”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:12), <b>one</b> can also <b>read</b> and fulfill <b>with regard to</b> the earlier command of: <b>“And see among the captives</b> a beautiful woman, and you have a desire for her, and would take her to you as a wife” (Deuteronomy 21:11). Conversely, <b>any</b> situation <b>that one cannot read with regard to it: “Then you shall bring her home to your house,”</b> i.e., if the soldier may not marry her, <b>one does not read with regard to it: “And sees among the captives,”</b> and one may not engage in sexual intercourse with her.

### Part 21
<b>The Sages taught:</b> With regard to a beautiful captive, the verse states: <b>“And sees among the captives,”</b> teaching that this <i>halakha</i> applies only if he notices her <b>when she is a captive.</b> The expression <b>“a woman”</b> teaches that she is permitted <b>even</b> if she is <b>a married woman.</b> The phrase <b>“a beautiful woman”</b> indicates that <b>the Torah</b> here <b>spoke only in response to the evil inclination,</b> as it is due to her beauty that he desired her. And why does the Torah permit this? <b>It is preferable for Jews to eat the meat</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC