
### Part 1
<b>From where do I say</b> my claim that one does not rely on a lone witness in matters of forbidden relations? <b>As we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon said: An incident</b> occurred <b>with regard to</b> a water <b>reservoir of Diskim in Yavne, which had the presumptive status of</b> being <b>complete,</b> i.e., they thought it contained forty <i>se’a</i>, the requisite amount for a ritual bath, <b>and they measured it</b> after a time <b>and it was found to be deficient,</b> as it contained less than that amount.

### Part 2
With regard to <b>all</b> immersions of <b>ritual purification performed in</b> the reservoir before it was measured, <b>Rabbi Tarfon would render</b> them <b>ritually pure, and Rabbi Akiva</b> would <b>render</b> them <b>ritually impure.</b> The two Sages discussed the matter. <b>Rabbi Tarfon said: This ritual bath retained the presumptive status of</b> being <b>whole</b> throughout this period, and <b>you are coming to</b> declare it <b>deficient</b> in the past <b>out of uncertainty. Do not deem it deficient out of uncertainty. Rabbi Akiva said</b> in response: <b>This person</b> who immersed himself in that ritual bath <b>retained the presumptive status of</b> being <b>ritually impure</b> before he immersed. <b>You are coming to purify him out of uncertainty. Do not deem him ritually pure out of uncertainty.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Tarfon said</b> in response: There is <b>a parable</b> that illustrates this. A priest was <b>standing and sacrificing</b> offerings <b>on the altar, and it became known that he is the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i>.</b> The <i>halakha</i> is <b>that his</b> earlier <b>service</b> before this discovery remains <b>valid. Rabbi Akiva said:</b> A more accurate <b>parable</b> is that of a priest who was <b>standing and sacrificing on the altar, and it became known that he is blemished.</b> In this case, the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that his</b> earlier <b>service</b> is <b>disqualified.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Tarfon said: You compared</b> the case of a ritual bath found to be deficient <b>to</b> that of <b>a blemished</b> priest, <b>whereas I compared it to</b> the case of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i>. Let us see to which</b> case <b>it is similar. If</b> this case <b>is similar to</b> that of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i>, let us treat it like</b> the case of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i>; if it is similar to</b> the case of <b>a blemished</b> priest, <b>let us treat it like</b> that of <b>a blemished</b> priest.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Akiva began to analyze</b> the matter: <b>The disqualification of a ritual bath</b> is <b>by</b> the testimony of <b>an individual,</b> as witnesses are not required to establish that a ritual bath is deficient, <b>and</b> likewise <b>the disqualification of a blemished</b> priest with regard to performing the Temple service <b>is</b> by the testimony of <b>an individual. And do not let</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i> prove</b> otherwise, <b>as his disqualification is by</b> the testimony of <b>two</b> witnesses. Two witnesses are required to testify about one’s mother to disqualify him from performing the Temple service; one is insufficient.

### Part 6
<b>Alternatively,</b> one can say: <b>The disqualification of a ritual bath is due to</b> the bath <b>itself,</b> and similarly, <b>the disqualification of a blemished</b> priest is <b>due to</b> the priest <b>himself. And do not let</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i> prove</b> otherwise, <b>as his disqualification is due to others,</b> i.e., through his mother. <b>Rabbi Tarfon said to him: Akiva, anyone who separates from you, it is as though he has separated from life</b> itself. Rabbi Tarfon was impressed by Rabbi Akiva’s explanation and accepted it. This concludes the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara returns to the topic at hand: <b>What are the circumstances</b> with regard to <b>this blemished</b> priest <b>whose disqualification is by</b> means of <b>an individual</b> witness? <b>If</b> the priest <b>denies his</b> claim, maintaining that he is not blemished, <b>is</b> a lone witness <b>deemed credible? Rather,</b> it must be <b>that</b> the priest remains <b>silent</b> and therefore is considered to have admitted to the accusation.

### Part 8
<b>And similarly with regard to the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i>,</b> it must also be referring <b>to</b> one who is <b>silent, and</b> yet the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: The disqualification of a ritual bath</b> is <b>by</b> the testimony of <b>an individual, and</b> likewise <b>the disqualification of a blemished</b> priest with regard to performing the Temple service <b>is</b> by the testimony of <b>an individual. And do not let</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i> prove</b> otherwise, <b>as his disqualification is by</b> the testimony of <b>two</b> witnesses. This indicates that if the person under scrutiny himself remains silent, one witness is insufficient to disqualify him.

### Part 9
<b>And Abaye</b> could have <b>said</b> in response to this proof: <b>Actually,</b> both cases deal <b>with</b> an individual <b>who denies</b> the witness’s testimony, <b>and that which you said: Why is</b> the witness <b>deemed credible</b> when he says that this priest is blemished, it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the witness <b>said to him: Remove</b> your clothes and <b>show</b> us that you are not blemished. Since this is a matter that can be investigated, the witness is deemed credible, because if he were lying the priest could prove it. <b>And this</b> explanation <b>is</b> consistent with <b>that which the <i>baraita</i> teaches: The disqualification of a ritual bath is due to</b> the bath <b>itself,</b> and similarly, <b>the disqualification of a blemished</b> priest is <b>due to</b> the priest <b>himself,</b> as he himself can be examined. <b>And do not let</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i> prove</b> otherwise, <b>as his disqualification is due to others.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks a question with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that the service of the son of a divorced woman or the son of a <i>ḥalutza</i> is valid</b> after the fact? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: As the verse states</b> with regard to Pinehas the priest: <b>“And it shall be for him and his seed after him</b> the covenant of an everlasting priesthood” (Numbers 25:13), which includes <b>both fit seed and unfit seed.</b> This teaches that the service of a priest is valid after the fact even if he was disqualified.

### Part 11
<b>Shmuel’s father said</b> that the proof text is <b>from here:</b> It states in the blessing of the tribe of Levi: <b>“Bless, Lord, his substance [<i>ḥeilo</i>], and accept the work of his hands”</b> (Deuteronomy 33:11). The word <i>ḥeilo</i> is expounded as including <b>even</b> the service of <b>his profane ones [<i>ḥullin</i>],</b> which God will <b>accept</b> after the fact.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yannai said:</b> The source is <b>from here,</b> a verse stated with regard to first fruits: <b>“And you shall come to the priest who shall be in those days”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:3). <b>But can it enter your mind that a person can come to a priest who is not</b> alive <b>in his days?</b> What then is the meaning of the phrase “in those days”? <b>Rather, this</b> is referring to <b>a fit</b> priest <b>who</b> later <b>became</b> established as <b>a <i>ḥalal</i>.</b> All his previous days of service are considered those of a fit priest.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues its analysis of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>From where do we</b> derive <b>that the service of a blemished</b> priest <b>is</b> retroactively <b>invalid? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: As the verse states</b> with regard to Pinehas: <b>“Wherefore say: Behold, I give to him My covenant of peace [<i>shalom</i>]”</b> (Numbers 25:12), which means that he receives the covenant <b>when he is whole [<i>shalem</i>], but not when he is</b> blemished and <b>lacking</b> a limb. The Gemara comments: <b>But <i>shalom</i> is written,</b> rather than <i>shalem</i>. <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> The letter <b><i>vav</i></b> in the word <b><i>shalom</i> is severed.</b> According to tradition, this letter is written with a break in it, and therefore the word can be read as though the <i>vav</i> were missing.

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There is a principle with regard to the <i>hala-khot</i> of lineage: <b>Any case where there is betrothal,</b> i.e., where the betrothal takes effect, <b>and</b> the marriage involves <b>no transgression</b> by Torah law, the lineage of <b>the offspring follows the male,</b> his father. <b>And</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable? For example, <b>this</b> is the case with regard to <b>the daughter of a priest;</b> or <b>the daughter of a Levite; or the daughter of an Israelite, who married a priest, a Levite, or an Israelite.</b> In all these cases the child’s lineage is established by his father’s family.

### Part 15
<b>And any case where there is</b> a valid <b>betrothal and</b> yet <b>there is a transgression, the offspring follows the flawed</b> parent. <b>And</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable? For example, <b>this</b> is the case of <b>a widow</b> who is married <b>to a High Priest,</b> or <b>a divorced woman or a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> who is married <b>to a common priest,</b> or <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> who is married <b>to an Israelite,</b> or <b>an Israelite woman</b> who is married <b>to a <i>mamzer</i> or to a Gibeonite.</b> In these situations the child inherits the status of the blemished parent.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> a woman <b>cannot</b> join in <b>betrothal with</b> a particular man, as the betrothal does not take effect, <b>but she can</b> join in <b>betrothal with others,</b> i.e., the woman is considered a member of the Jewish people and can marry other Jews, in these cases <b>the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>. And</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable? <b>This is one who engages in intercourse with any one of those with whom relations are forbidden that are</b> written <b>in the Torah. And</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> a woman <b>cannot</b> join in <b>betrothal with him or with others, the offspring is like her.</b> He is not considered his father’s son at all, but has the same status as his mother. <b>And</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable? <b>This is the offspring of</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant or a gentile woman,</b> as her child is a slave or a gentile like her. If he converts, he is not a <i>mamzer</i>.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that <b>any case where there is betrothal</b> and the marriage involves no transgression, the lineage of the offspring follows the male. <b>Rabbi Shimon said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: Is</b> it an established <b>principle</b> that <b>any case where there is betrothal and there is no transgression the offspring</b> invariably <b>follows the male? But</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC