
### Part 1
<b>This is</b> what the mishna <b>is saying: All those</b> for <b>whom it is prohibited to enter into the congregation of the priesthood.</b> Rav Yehuda adds parenthetically: And <b>who are they?</b> Even a female who became <b>a convert</b> at <b>less than three years and one day</b> old, <b>and</b> this is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai,</b> who holds that such a girl is permitted to marry a priest. Rav Yehuda resumes his presentation of the statement of Rabbi Yehuda: They <b>are permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And let us establish</b> the mishna as referring <b>to</b> a girl who became a convert at <b>three years and one day</b> old or older, <b>and</b> then it will accord <b>even with Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai’s</b> opinion, as he agrees that this convert may not marry a priest. The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> the mishna <b>is broken,</b> i.e., contradicted, <b>from</b> within <b>itself,</b> as if the mishna states that even a female who converted when she was older than three years and a day may marry one with flawed lineage, one would make an incorrect inference, as follows.

### Part 3
<b>Rather, the reason</b> that she may marry one with flawed lineage is <b>that</b> she converted when she was already <b>three years and one day</b> old. <b>But</b> if she converted when she was <b>less than three years and one day</b> old, <b>as she is permitted to enter into the congregation of the priesthood,</b> is <b>she prohibited from marrying</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another?</b> This cannot be, <b>since according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai,</b> there is also the case of a female who converted when she was <b>less than three years and one day</b> old, <b>who is permitted to enter the congregation of the priesthood and</b> is also <b>permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another.</b> Consequently, the mishna cannot be explained to accord with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues to ask: <b>But is it</b> an established <b>principle</b> that <b>all those</b> for <b>whom it is prohibited to enter into the congregation of the priesthood are permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another? But a widow,</b> who may not marry a High Priest, <b>and a divorcée, and a woman disqualified from marrying a priest [<i>ḥalala</i>], and a woman who has engaged in sexual intercourse with a man forbidden to her by the Torah [<i>zona</i>], are prohibited to enter into the congregation of the priesthood and are</b> also <b>prohibited to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another. And furthermore,</b> can it be inferred: <b>But</b> one who <b>is permitted</b> to enter into the congregation of the priesthood is <b>prohibited</b> from marrying a man of flawed lineage? <b>But</b> there is the <b>convert,</b> who <b>is permitted to</b> marry <b>a daughter of a priest, and is</b> also <b>permitted to</b> marry <b>a <i>mamzeret</i>.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Rav Natan bar Hoshaya said: This is</b> what the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>is saying: Any</b> person about whom the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that a priest may not marry his daughter.</b> Rav Natan bar Hoshaya adds parenthetically: <b>And who is that? A convert who married a female convert, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> who prohibits the daughter of two converts to marry a priest. Rav Natan bar Hoshaya resumes his presentation of the statement of Rabbi Yehuda: People of that status <b>are permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another,</b> since converts are not in the category of “congregation.”

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But is it</b> an established <b>principle</b> that <b>anyone whose daughter a priest may not marry</b> is <b>permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another? But</b> there is the case of <b>a priest disqualified due to flawed lineage [<i>ḥalal</i>] who married a Jewish woman, as a priest may not marry his daughter,</b> since she is a <i>ḥalala</i>. <b>And</b> despite this, she is included among those who <b>are prohibited to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another.</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> since this mishna <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda,</b> who holds that the daughter of a <i>ḥalal</i> and a Jewish woman may marry a priest.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> there is the case of <b>a <i>ḥalal</i> who married a <i>ḥalala</i>, as a priest may not marry his daughter,</b> since she is a <i>ḥalala</i>. <b>And</b> despite this, she is included among those who <b>are prohibited to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another. And furthermore,</b> can it be inferred: One with regard to whom it is <b>permitted</b> for a priest to marry his daughter, is he <b>prohibited</b> from marrying Jews of flawed lineage? <b>But</b> there is the case of <b>a convert who married a Jewish woman, and a priest is permitted to marry his daughter. And</b> despite this, people of that status <b>are permitted to marry</b> into those families that are prohibited from entering into the congregation but are permitted to marry <b>one another.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said</b> a different explanation of the dispute between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yehuda: <b>Here,</b> the difference <b>between them</b> concerns <b>a <i>mamzer</i></b> resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between a man and <b>his sister, and a <i>mamzer</i></b> resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between <b>a married woman</b> and a man other than her husband.

### Part 9
The <b>first <i>tanna</i> holds: Even a <i>mamzer</i></b> resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between a man and <b>his sister is also</b> considered <b>a <i>mamzer</i>. And Rabbi Yehuda holds:</b> The offspring resulting <b>from</b> intercourse with <b>a married woman is a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> but offspring resulting <b>from</b> intercourse between a man and <b>his sister is not a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> According to this explanation, the dispute is that according to the first <i>tanna</i>, offspring resulting from intercourse between siblings may marry offspring resulting from intercourse with a married woman, while according to Rabbi Yehuda, the offspring resulting from intercourse between siblings is of unflawed lineage and may not marry a <i>mamzer</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaching us</b> with this? <b>We</b> already <b>learned</b> this in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 49a): <b>Who is a <i>mamzer</i>? Any</b> offspring <b>who is</b> born of a union prohibited by the verse: <b>“He shall not enter”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:2). In other words, if the union was a violation of any kind of prohibition, even that of a prohibition that is not subject to the punishment of <i>karet</i>, the child is a <i>mamzer</i>; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 11
The mishna continues: <b>Shimon HaTimni says: Any</b> offspring <b>who</b> is born of a union enjoined by a prohibition <b>for which one is liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> at the hand of Heaven, and the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with his statement. Rabbi Yehoshua says: Any</b> offspring <b>who</b> is born of a union enjoined by a prohibition <b>for which one is liable to</b> receive <b>court</b>-imposed <b>capital punishment.</b> This demonstrates that the question of whether <i>mamzer</i> status results from sexual intercourse between siblings, for which one is liable to receive <i>karet</i> rather than capital punishment, has already been addressed in a mishna. Therefore, Rav Naḥman’s explanation of this mishna must be rejected.

### Part 12
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The difference <b>between them</b> involves the <i>halakha</i> of a male <b>Ammonite and</b> a male <b>Moabite convert, and this is what</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: All those</b> for <b>whom it is prohibited to enter into the congregation.</b> Rava adds parenthetically: And <b>who are they?</b> A male <b>Ammonite and</b> a male <b>Moabite convert.</b> Rava resumes his presentation of the statement of Rabbi Yehuda: They <b>are permitted to marry one another.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what is</b> the reason of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> for <b>prohibiting</b> these marriages? Rabbi Yehuda should also permit an Ammonite convert to marry a <i>mamzeret</i>, as an Ammonite is not fit to enter the congregation. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: Although Rabbi Yehuda</b> generally <b>prohibits a convert from</b> marrying <b>a <i>mamzeret</i>, this matter</b> applies only to a regular <b>convert, who is fit to enter into the congregation. But</b> a male <b>Ammonite</b> convert <b>and</b> a male <b>Moabite convert, who are not fit to enter into the congregation,</b> are <b>not</b> prohibited from marrying a <i>mamzeret</i>, and there is no dispute between Rabbi Yehuda and the first <i>tanna</i>.

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Yevamot</i> 8:1): A boy <b>nine years and one day</b> old, whose sexual intercourse is considered an act of intercourse with regard to sexual transgressions, who was <b>an Ammonite or Moabite convert,</b> or <b>an Egyptian or Edomite</b> convert, or <b>a Samaritan, or a Gibeonite, a <i>ḥalal</i>, or a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> and <b>who engaged in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest, or the daughter of a Levite, or an Israelite woman, has</b> thereby <b>disqualified her from the priesthood. Rabbi Yosei says: Anyone whose offspring is unfit</b> to marry a priest <b>disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engages in intercourse from marrying a priest; <b>and anyone whose offspring is not unfit does not disqualify</b> her. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC