
### Part 1
And the phrase: <b>Any case, of the latter clause,</b> which is referring to betrothal with a transgression, serves <b>to include a convert who married a <i>mamzeret</i>. But if you say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> then granted the phrase: <b>Any case</b> where there is betrothal and no transgression, <b>of the first clause, is as we said,</b> i.e., it includes an Israelite who married a <i>ḥalala</i>; and the phrase: In <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable, <b>is as we said,</b> i.e., to the exclusion of Ravin or Rav Dimi, and the case of a convert who married a <i>mamzeret</i>. <b>But what</b> does the phrase: <b>Any case, of the latter clause,</b> serve <b>to add?</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> the same question applies <b>to Rabbi Yehuda</b> as well: <b>Why do I</b> need the phrase: In <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable, <b>of the latter clause? Rather,</b> you must say: <b>Since</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> its <b>first clause</b> using the phrase: In <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable, <b>it</b> also <b>taught</b> its <b>latter clause</b> using the phrase: In <b>which</b> case <b>is this</b> applicable, merely for the sake of stylistic consistency. <b>So too</b> here, with regard to Rabbi Yosei’s opinion, one can say: <b>Since</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> the <b>first clause</b> with the expression: <b>Any case, it</b> also <b>taught</b> its <b>latter clause</b> with: <b>Any case.</b>

### Part 3
§ The Gemara discusses <b>the</b> aforementioned matter <b>itself: When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: With regard to the nations,</b> if members of two different nations married when they were gentiles, <b>follow the male</b> to determine the status of their child. If <b>they converted</b> before marriage, <b>follow the flawed</b> lineage <b>of the two.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara analyzes this statement: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>With regard to the nations, follow the male? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to one</b> member <b>of the nations</b> outside Eretz Yisrael <b>who engaged in intercourse with a Canaanite woman and fathered a son</b> from her, <b>that you are permitted to purchase</b> the son <b>as a slave,</b> and he is not considered a member of the Canaanite nations, who are not allowed to live in Eretz Yisrael?

### Part 5
<b>The verse states: “And also of the children of the residents who sojourn with you, of them you may buy”</b> (Leviticus 25:45), which indicates that there is a way in which one may purchase slaves from the inhabitants of Canaan. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> with regard to a Canaanite <b>slave who engaged in intercourse with a maidservant from the</b> other <b>nations and fathered a son, that you are permitted to buy</b> the son <b>as a slave.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Which they have begotten in your land”</b> (Leviticus 25:45). This means that one may purchase <b>from those</b> who are merely <b>begotten in your land,</b> whose fathers are not from the Canaanite nations, <b>but not from those who reside in your land,</b> i.e., whose fathers are from the seven Canaanite nations.

### Part 6
The Gemara discusses the second clause of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement: If <b>they converted, follow the flawed</b> lineage <b>of the two. To which</b> case does this refer? <b>If we say</b> that it is referring <b>to an Egyptian man who married an Ammonite woman, what flawed</b> lineage <b>is there</b> here? The lineage of an Ammonite woman who converts is not flawed at all, as the Sages expounded that the verse: “An Ammonite…shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:4) is referring to <b>an Ammonite man but not an Ammonite woman,</b> which means that she can marry a Jew of unflawed lineage.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> it must be referring <b>to an Ammonite man who married an Egyptian woman, and</b> in that case <b>if</b> the child <b>is a male, cast him after</b> his father, and render him permanently prohibited from entering the congregation as an Ammonite male. <b>And if</b> the child born to them <b>is a female, cast her after</b> the mother, so that she is considered a second-generation Egyptian, who may not marry a Jew of unflawed lineage.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that in <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> a woman <b>cannot</b> join in <b>betrothal with him,</b> but she can join in betrothal with others, the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>. The Gemara explains: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says, and</b> some <b>determined</b> that <b>it</b> was said <b>in the name of Rabbi Yannai; and Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, determined</b> that <b>it</b> was said <b>in the name of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili: The verse states</b> with regard to a divorced woman: <b>“And she departs out of his house, and goes and becomes another man’s wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:2). This teaches that she can become the wife <b>of others, but not of relatives,</b> i.e., betrothal to forbidden relatives does not take effect.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Abba objects to this: But</b> one can <b>say</b> and explain that the term <b>“another”</b> in the verse indicates: <b>But not to</b> her husband’s <b>son,</b> i.e., betrothal is ineffective only in the case of a prohibition that warrants court-imposed capital punishment, not one that warrants <i>karet</i>. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>With regard to a son it is explicitly written: “A man shall not take his father’s wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:1), which means that betrothal is ineffective in this situation. If so, <b>why do I</b> need the emphasis of the term <b>“another”? Learn from</b> this term <b>that</b> she may marry <b>others but not relatives.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges this explanation: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that both <b>this</b> verse <b>and that</b> verse are referring <b>to a son</b> and yet both are necessary, as <b>this</b> verse: “Shall not take,” is referring to the <i>halakha <b>ab initio</b></i><b>.</b> It does not mean that betrothal is ineffective, but merely that one may not marry his father’s wife. <b>And that</b> verse: “And becomes another man’s wife,” teaches that even <b>after the fact,</b> if the son attempted to betroth his father’s wife, his act is of no consequence.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds: One learns that betrothal is ineffective in this case <b><i>ab initio</i></b> from a different source, as it is <b>derived from</b> the prohibition proscribing <b>a wife’s sister</b> by the following <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>If,</b> with regard to the prohibition proscribing <b>a wife’s sister,</b> whose transgression is punished <b>with <i>karet</i>, she cannot be betrothed</b> by her sister’s husband, in accordance with the verse: “And you shall not take a woman with her sister” (Leviticus 18:18), then with regard to cases that entail <b>liability to</b> receive <b>court-imposed capital punishment,</b> e.g., intercourse with one’s father’s wife, is it <b>not all the more so</b> the case that betrothal does not take effect?

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests another interpretation of the verses. <b>But</b> as the verse has already prohibited betrothal to a wife’s sister, one can <b>say</b> as follows: Both <b>this</b> verse: “You shall not take” (Leviticus 18:18), <b>and that</b> one: “Becomes another man’s wife” (Deuteronomy 24:2), are referring <b>to a wife’s sister,</b> as <b>this</b> one: “You shall not take,” prohibits this relationship <b><i>ab initio</i>,</b> whereas <b>that</b> verse: “Another man’s wife,” teaches that this betrothal is of no effect even <b>after the fact.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Yes, it is indeed so.</b> The verse should be interpreted in this manner.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for the prohibition proscribing <b>a wife’s sister; from where do we</b> derive that betrothal is also ineffective for the <b>other forbidden relations?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>We derive</b> it <b>from</b> the case of <b>a wife’s sister,</b> by means of the following analogy: <b>Just as</b> the prohibition with regard to <b>a wife’s sister,</b> which is <b>specified</b> by the Torah, <b>is</b> a prohibition of <b>a forbidden relative</b> that is punished with <b><i>karet</i> for its intentional</b> transgression <b>and</b> requires <b>a sin-offering for its unwitting</b> transgression, <b>and betrothal is ineffective in</b> this case, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>any</b> prohibition <b>that</b> involves <b>a forbidden relative whose intentional</b> transgression is punished with <b><i>karet</i> and whose unwitting</b> transgression renders one liable to bring <b>a sin-offering, betrothal is</b> likewise <b>ineffective in</b> those cases.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> virtually <b>all</b> other forbidden relatives can be <b>derived</b> in this manner. <b>But</b> the cases of <b>a married woman and a brother’s wife</b> are exceptions, and the analogy in these cases <b>can be refuted</b> as follows. <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a wife’s sister is that she is not permitted in the case of a mitzva,</b> as even where the mitzva of levirate marriage would apply, one still may not marry one’s wife’s sister. <b>Will you say</b> the same <b>with regard to a brother’s wife, who is permitted in the case of</b> the <b>mitzva</b> of levirate marriage?

### Part 15
With regard to <b>a married woman</b> the interpretation <b>can likewise be refuted: What</b> is unique <b>about these</b> cases of a wife’s sister and a brother’s wife is <b>that they cannot be permitted during the lives of those whose</b> existence <b>renders them prohibited,</b> as neither a wife’s sister nor a brother’s wife can be permitted while the person who causes the prohibition is alive. This caveat is added because one’s wife’s sister does become permitted once his wife has died. <b>Will you say</b> the same <b>with regard to a married woman, who</b> can become <b>permitted during the life of the one who renders her forbidden,</b> by means of a divorce?

### Part 16
<b>Rather,</b> this <i>halakha</i>, that betrothal is ineffective for other forbidden relatives, is derived from a different source, as <b>Rabbi Yona says, and some say</b> this was taught by <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua: The verse states</b> explicitly in the chapter dealing with forbidden relatives: <b>“Whoever shall do any of these abominations shall be cut off”</b> (Leviticus 18:29). In this verse <b>all those with whom relations are forbidden are juxtaposed</b> to one another, and therefore also <b>to a wife’s sister: Just as betrothal is not effective</b> in the case of <b>a wife’s sister, so too, betrothal is not effective with regard to all those with whom relations are forbidden.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is derived from here,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC