
### Part 1
In <b>this</b> case, where Rav Naḥman ruled that their transaction is void, in accordance with the Rabbis, the court <b>erred</b> by one-sixth. But in <b>that</b> case, where Rav Naḥman ruled that the orphans cannot protest when they grow up, <b>they did not err</b> by one-sixth. The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> Rav Naḥman’s ruling that the orphans cannot protest is referring to a case <b>where they did not err</b> by one-sixth, <b>why</b> did Shmuel say that <b>they can</b> later <b>protest;</b> what is the nature of their protest? The Gemara answers: <b>They can protest with regard to</b> the <b>locations.</b> One of the orphans can contend that he prefers property in a different location than he was given.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> With regard to <b>brothers who divided</b> property received as an inheritance, <b>they are</b> considered <b>like</b> they are <b>purchasers</b> from each other, and the <i>halakhot</i> of fraud are like those for regular transactions: If there was an error of <b>less than one-sixth</b> in the distribution, the <b>transaction is acquired,</b> i.e., valid. If it was <b>more than one-sixth,</b> the <b>transaction is void.</b> If the error was precisely <b>one-sixth,</b> it is <b>acquired, and</b> the one who received more than his fair share <b>must return</b> the amount of the <b>fraud.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rava says: That which we said,</b> that with regard to <b>less than one-sixth</b> the <b>transaction</b> is valid and the item <b>is acquired, we said only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the brother receiving a smaller share <b>did not appoint an agent</b> to deal with the distribution on his behalf. <b>But if</b> the brother receiving a smaller share <b>appointed an agent,</b> this <i>halakha</i> does not apply, as the one who appointed the agent can <b>say: I sent you to</b> act for <b>my benefit and not to my detriment.</b> The agent’s right to act in this capacity did not extend to a case where it was to the detriment of the one who appointed him.

### Part 4
Rava continues: <b>And that which we said,</b> that if the brothers erred by <b>more than one-sixth</b> the <b>transaction is void, we said only when</b> the brother receiving a smaller share <b>did not say: Let us divide</b> the estate <b>by an appraisal of the court. But</b> if <b>he said: Let us divide</b> it <b>by an appraisal of the court, the transaction is valid, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 99b): This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the appraisal</b> of an article’s value in order to sell it, as done by <b>the judges:</b> In a case <b>where they decreased</b> the price by <b>one-sixth</b> of its market value <b>or added one-sixth</b> to its market value, <b>their sale is void. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Their sale is valid.</b>

### Part 5
Rava continues: <b>And that which we said,</b> that if the brothers erred by <b>one-sixth</b> the one receiving a larger share <b>acquired</b> it <b>and he must return</b> the amount of the <b>fraud, we said only with regard to movable property. But with regard to land,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>there is no fraud with regard to land. And with regard to land, we said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of fraud does not apply <b>only when they divided</b> it <b>according to the value</b> of the land. <b>But</b> if <b>they divided</b> it <b>by measure</b> and erred in the measurement, we do <b>not</b> say that there is no fraud. This is in accordance <b>with</b> the statement <b>of Rabba, as Rabba said: Any matter that is according to measure, or according to weight, or according to number,</b> if it turned out to be in error, <b>even</b> if the error was <b>less than the amount</b> that constitutes <b>fraud,</b> it <b>is also returned.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara returns to discuss various aspects of agency. <b>And</b> there is a difficulty from <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 59b): In the case of <b>one who sends</b> an item that causes <b>a fire in the hands of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, or a minor,</b> the one who sent it <b>is exempt according to human laws but liable according to the laws of Heaven.</b> If <b>he sent</b> it <b>in the hands of</b> a halakhically <b>competent person,</b> only <b>the</b> halakhically <b>competent person is liable.</b>

### Part 7
<b>But why</b> is the halakhically competent person liable? <b>Let us say</b> that the legal status of <b>a person’s agent is like</b> that of <b>himself.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>There</b> it <b>is different, as there is no agency for transgression, as we say:</b> When there is a conflict between <b>the words of the Master,</b> i.e., God, <b>and the words of</b> the <b>student,</b> i.e., a human being, <b>whose words</b> should be <b>listened to?</b> Consequently, the agent is considered to have acted of his own accord, and the one who sent him bears no responsibility.

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> there is a difficulty from <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of misuse of consecrated property: In the case of <b>an agent who did not perform his agency</b> but deviated from the instructions of the one who appointed him and made use of consecrated property, the <b>agent has misused</b> consecrated property and is liable to bring the guilt-offering for that sin. In the case of an agent who <b>performed his agency, the owner has misused</b> consecrated property and is liable to bring the offering. The Gemara asks: The <i>baraita</i> states that <b>when</b> the agent <b>performed the agency of the owner, the owner</b> has <b>in any event misused</b> consecrated property. <b>Why? Let us say</b> that <b>there is no agency for transgression.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: The case of <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>is different, as</b> it <b>is derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy of <b>“sin”</b> in this case and <b>“sin” from <i>teruma</i>,</b> as the verse states: “And sin through error” (Leviticus 5:15), with regard to misuse of consecrated property, and it states: “Lest they bear sin for it” (Leviticus 22:9) with regard to <i>teruma</i>: <b>Just as</b> with <b><i>teruma</i></b> one can <b>appoint an agent, so too</b> with <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property one can <b>appoint an agent,</b> although the latter is a transgression.

### Part 10
The Gemara suggests: <b>And let us derive</b> a principle <b>from</b> misuse of consecrated property, that one can appoint an agent even to perform a transgression. The Gemara explains: This is not done <b>because misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>and misappropriation</b> of a deposit, i.e., a bailee using an item that was deposited with him, <b>are two verses that come as one,</b> i.e., they teach the same matter, that an agent can be appointed to perform a transgression. <b>And any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> their common aspect to apply to other cases. The Gemara clarifies this statement: The verse pertaining to <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>is that which we said,</b> but <b>what is</b> the verse pertaining to <b>misappropriation?</b>

### Part 11
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah uses the inclusive term “every” with regard to one suspected of misappropriating a deposit: <b>“For every matter of trespass”</b> (Exodus 22:8). <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> This inclusive term “every” serves <b>to render</b> one <b>liable for</b> speech and <b>thought,</b> i.e., intent to misappropriate, <b>like action. And Beit Hillel say: One is liable only if he</b> actually <b>misappropriates it, as</b> it <b>is stated: “Whether he has not put his hand</b> unto his neighbor’s goods” (Exodus 22:7).

### Part 12
<b>Beit Shammai said to Beit Hillel: But isn’t it stated: “For every matter of trespass,”</b> which indicates that one is liable without actually misappropriating the deposit? <b>Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: But isn’t it stated: “Whether he has not put his hand unto his neighbor’s goods”? Beit Shammai said to Beit Hillel: If so,</b> if one is liable only for actual misappropriation, <b>why do I</b> need: <b>“For every matter of trespass”?</b> Beit Hillel replied: It is necessary, <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>I have</b> derived liability <b>only</b> if <b>he</b> himself misappropriated it; <b>from where</b> do I derive that he is liable also if he <b>told his slave or his agent</b> to do so? <b>The verse states: “For every matter of trespass,”</b> to teach that the bailee is liable if one acting on his behalf misappropriates the deposit.

### Part 13
The Gemara explains further: <b>This</b> answer, that misuse of consecrated property and misappropriation are two verses that come to teach the same matter, <b>works out well</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel. But</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, who establish this verse</b> as rendering one liable <b>for thought like action</b> and do not learn from here that the bailee is liable if one acting on his behalf misappropriates the deposit,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC