
### Part 1
<b>sandals [<i>mesulayim</i>] that have no heels,</b> which do not qualify as shoes. The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> that the term is stated only for that purpose, <b>let the verse write “shoe.” What</b> is the meaning of <b>“the shoe”? Learn</b> the <b>two</b> previously stated conclusions <b>from it.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A Hebrew slave</b> can be <b>acquired</b> by his master <b>through money or through a document, and</b> he can <b>acquire himself,</b> i.e., he is emancipated, <b>through years,</b> i.e., when he completes his six years of labor, <b>or through the</b> advent of the <b>Jubilee</b> Year, <b>or through the deduction of money.</b> The slave can redeem himself during the six years by paying for his remaining years of slavery. <b>A Hebrew maidservant</b> has one mode of emancipation <b>more than him, as she acquires herself through signs</b> indicating puberty. A slave <b>who is pierced</b> after serving six years is <b>acquired</b> as a slave for a longer period <b>through piercing</b> his ear with an awl, <b>and</b> he <b>acquires himself through the</b> advent of the <b>Jubilee</b> Year <b>or through</b> the <b>death of the master.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that <b>a Hebrew slave</b> can be <b>acquired through money.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that the <b>verse states: “Out of the money that he was bought for”</b> (Leviticus 25:51), which <b>teaches</b> that he can be <b>acquired through money.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> that <b>a Hebrew slave who is sold to a gentile</b> is acquired with money, which is the case discussed in that verse, but this proves nothing with regard to a Jew sold to a Jew. One could argue that <b>since all of the acquisitions</b> of a gentile are performed only <b>with money,</b> he can likewise purchase a Hebrew slave with money.

### Part 4
But <b>from where do we</b> derive that a Hebrew slave can be <b>sold to a Jew</b> with money? The Gemara explains that with regard to a Hebrew maidservant, the <b>verse states:</b> “Then he shall let her <b>be redeemed”</b> (Exodus 21:8), which <b>teaches</b> that if she acquires money and wishes to be emancipated before her time is complete, she <b>deducts</b> a sum <b>from her redemption.</b> The maidservant can deduct the value of time served from her purchase price and pay the remaining amount, and she then <b>is emancipated.</b> This teaches that a Hebrew maidservant is acquired through money, a <i>halakha</i> that applies to a male slave as well.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: Although <b>we found</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a Hebrew maidservant,</b> one cannot extrapolate from there to this case, as it is possible that it applies only to a female. The reason for this is that <b>since</b> she is ordinarily <b>betrothed through money,</b> she can also be <b>acquired</b> as a maidservant <b>through money. From where do we</b> derive that <b>a Hebrew slave</b> can likewise be acquired through money? The Gemara answers that the <b>verse states: “If your brother, a Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman is sold to you, and he shall serve you six years”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:12). This verse <b>juxtaposes a Hebrew man to a Hebrew woman,</b> indicating that the modes through which they are acquired are the same.

### Part 6
The Gemara further asks: <b>We found</b> a source in this verse for <b>a slave who is sold by the court.</b> This verse is referring to a thief who is unable to repay the value of his theft and is sold as a slave so that he can repay his debt. One can therefore argue that this case is unique, <b>since</b> he is <b>sold against his will. From where do we</b> derive that one who <b>sells himself</b> can be sold through money?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: One <b>derives</b> this through a verbal analogy between the terms <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker.”</b> This term appears both with regard to one who sells himself: “As a hired worker and as a settler he shall be with you” (Leviticus 25:40), and with regard to one who is sold by the court: “For double of the hire of a hired worker he has served you” (Deuteronomy 15:18). The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who</b> derives this verbal analogy between the terms <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker.” But according to the one who does not derive</b> the verbal analogy between <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker,” what can be said?</b> From where does he derive that one who sells himself may be purchased with money?

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: The <b>verse states</b> at the start of the passage dealing with one sold to a gentile: <b>“And if</b> a stranger who is a settler with you <b>becomes rich”</b> (Leviticus 25:47). The conjunction “and” serves to <b>add to the first matter,</b> i.e., the passage discussing one who sells himself to a Jew, as it joins the two issues. And therefore <b>let the above case</b> of one who sells himself to a Jew <b>be derived from the case below</b> of one who is sold to a gentile: Just as one who is sold to a gentile can be acquired with money, so too, one who sells himself to a Jew can be acquired with money.

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: <b>And who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> <b>who does not derive</b> the verbal analogy between <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker”? It is this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught in</b> a <i>baraita</i>: One who <b>sells himself</b> as a slave <b>is sold for six</b> years, <b>and</b> if he wishes he can be sold for <b>more than six</b> years, whereas one who is <b>sold by the court is sold only for six</b> years, but no more.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> adds that there are additional differences between these two slaves: <b>One who sells himself may not be pierced</b> with an awl, whereas one who is <b>sold by the court may be pierced</b> with an awl. One who <b>sells himself is not granted</b> a severance gift by his master when he is emancipated, whereas one who is <b>sold by the court is granted</b> a severance gift. With regard to <b>one who sells himself, his master may not provide him</b> with <b>a Canaanite maidservant</b> as a wife to produce slave children, whereas with regard to one <b>sold by the court, his master may provide him</b> with <b>a Canaanite maidservant.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Elazar says</b> that there is no difference between these two types of slaves. Rather, both <b>this</b> slave <b>and that</b> slave may be <b>sold for only six</b> years; both <b>this and that</b> one may be <b>pierced</b> with an awl, both <b>this and that</b> one <b>are granted</b> a severance gift, and in both <b>this</b> case <b>and that</b> case <b>his master may provide him</b> with <b>a Canaanite maidservant. What, is it not</b> the case that <b>they disagree with regard to this, that the first <i>tanna</i> does not derive</b> the verbal analogy between <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker,” and Rabbi Elazar derives</b> the verbal analogy between <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker”?</b> If one holds that the two cases are juxtaposed, one will equate the <i>halakhot</i> of both slaves. This is the opinion of Rabbi Elazar, in contrast to the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i>, who holds that the <i>halakhot</i> of each type of slave are discrete.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Tavyumei said in the name of Abaye:</b> That is not so; rather, <b>everyone derives</b> the verbal analogy between <b>“hired worker”</b> and <b>“hired worker,” and here,</b> in the dispute in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>they disagree about this</b> following <b>verse. What is the reasoning</b> of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>, who says</b> that one who <b>sells himself is sold for six</b> years <b>and more than six</b> years? He maintains that with regard to one <b>sold by the court, the Merciful One excludes</b> a certain case by the verse: “If your brother, a Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman, is sold to you, <b>and he shall serve you six years”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:12). That teaches that only <b>this</b> type of slave serves for six years and no more, but the same does <b>not</b> apply to one who <b>sells himself.</b> If he so stipulates, he may serve for more than six years.

### Part 13
The Gemara explains: <b>And the other,</b> Rabbi Elazar, learns a different <i>halakha</i> from this verse. <b>“And he shall serve you”</b> means that he works <b>for you and not for an heir</b> other than a son. If a master has no sons, his slave is not transferred as an inheritance to a daughter or to a brother like his other property. If he does have sons, they inherit a Hebrew slave.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, from where does he derive that a slave is not transferred as an inheritance? The Gemara answers that the phrase, <b>“And he shall serve you,”</b> is <b>written another</b> time, and he derives this <i>halakha</i> from there. The Gemara asks: <b>And the other,</b> Rabbi Elazar, what does he do with that other verse? The Gemara answers: In his opinion <b>that</b> verse <b>comes to appease the master.</b> The verse emphasizes that the servitude is of limited duration to encourage the master to free the slave without hesitation.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the first <i>tanna</i>, who says</b> that one who <b>sells himself is not pierced</b> with an awl? The Gemara answers: He derives this <b>from</b> the fact that <b>with regard to one sold by the court, the Merciful One excludes</b> a certain case by the verse: <b>“And his master shall pierce his ear with an awl”</b> (Exodus 21:6), which teaches: <b>His ear,</b> of this slave, <b>and not the ear of</b> a slave who <b>sells himself.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC