
### Part 1
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: This <b>cannot enter your mind,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> of deduction must be <b>similar</b> to the <i>halakha</i> of <b>designation,</b> i.e., the process by which a master designates his Hebrew maidservant as a wife for him or his son (Exodus 21:8–9). <b>Just as</b> with <b>designation, although</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>if he desires, he may designate</b> her <b>and if he does not desire, he</b> is <b>not</b> required to <b>designate</b> her, nevertheless <b>anywhere that he cannot designate</b> her, e.g., in a case where they are related and she is therefore forbidden to him, <b>her sale is not</b> a valid <b>sale, so too</b> here, with regard to her redemption, <b>anywhere that she cannot deduct</b> an amount from her purchase price, <b>her sale is not</b> a valid <b>sale.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara notes: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai</b> the mode of <b>betrothal of a woman</b> by money <b>is derived from</b> the case of <b>a Hebrew maidservant,</b> as follows: <b>Just as a Hebrew maidservant cannot be acquired with one <i>peruta</i>, so too a woman cannot be betrothed with one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: Even if Beit Shammai derive their opinion from here, how does this prove that a woman can be betrothed only with a minimum of one dinar? <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> she can be betrothed with <b>half a dinar, or say</b> that she can be betrothed with <b>two <i>perutot</i>,</b> as it is possible to fulfill the redemption of a Hebrew maidservant if her sale was for either of these amounts? The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> this comparison <b>excludes</b> betrothal <b>with one <i>peruta</i>,</b> as it indicates that a woman can be betrothed only with money of significant value, the Sages <b>established</b> the minimum amount <b>at one dinar,</b> which is a coin of substantial value.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said</b> a different explanation: <b>This is the reasoning of Beit Shammai,</b> who hold that a woman can be betrothed only with a minimum of one dinar: <b>The daughters of Israel should not be</b> treated <b>like ownerless</b> property. Allowing women to be betrothed with such a small amount as one <i>peruta</i> is disrespectful to them.

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And Beit Hillel say</b> that a woman can be betrothed <b>with one <i>peruta</i>,</b> or with any item that is worth one <i>peruta</i>. <b>Rav Yosef thought to say: One <i>peruta</i></b> means <b>any amount.</b> There is no defined value, as a woman may be betrothed with one <i>peruta</i> regardless of its value at the time. <b>Abaye said to him: But isn’t it taught with regard to</b> this in the mishna itself: <b>How much is one <i>peruta</i>?</b> It is <b>one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>.</b> This shows there is a defined value for one <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say: This statement</b> applies <b>only to the generation of Moses,</b> i.e., this was the value of one <i>peruta</i> in the time of the Torah, <b>but now,</b> at any later time, its value is determined by <b>that which people consider</b> one <i>peruta</i>, that claim cannot be correct. <b>As when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael <b>he said: Rabbi Simai estimated in his generation: How much is one <i>peruta</i>?</b> It is <b>one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. And when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Dostai and Rabbi Yannai and Rabbi Oshaya estimated: How much is one <i>peruta</i>?</b> It is <b>one-sixth of the Italian <i>issar</i>.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yosef said to</b> Abaye: <b>If so,</b> then <b>this is</b> in conflict with that <b>which we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Go and calculate how many <i>perutot</i> there are in two <i>sela</i>: More than two thousand. Now there are not</b> even <b>two thousand, and you call them: More than two thousand?</b> Rather, the <i>peruta</i> is certainly worth less than one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. <b>A certain old man said to them: I teach this</b> <i>baraita</i> as saying: <b>Close to two thousand.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Ultimately,</b> according to the calculation of one-eighth of an <i>issar</i>, the number of <i>perutot</i> in two <i>sela</i> <b>is 1,536,</b> which is nowhere near two thousand. The Gemara answers: <b>Since it passes half</b> of the second thousand <b>it is called: Close to two thousand.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara discusses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself. When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael <b>he said: Rabbi Simai estimated in his generation: How much is one <i>peruta</i>?</b> It is <b>one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. And when Ravin came he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Dostai and Rabbi Yannai and Rabbi Oshaya estimated: How much is one <i>peruta</i>?</b> It is <b>one-sixth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. Abaye said to Rav Dimi: Shall we say</b> that <b>you and Ravin disagree with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between these <i>tanna’im</i>.</b>

### Part 9
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b><i>peruta</i> mentioned by the Sages</b> is <b>one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. Six silver <i>ma’a</i></b> are one <b>dinar,</b> and one <b><i>ma’a</i></b> is worth <b>two <i>pundeyon</i>.</b> In <b>a <i>pundeyon</i></b> there are <b>two <i>issar</i>,</b> and <b>an <i>issar</i></b> is <b>two <i>masmas</i>. A <i>masmas</i></b> is worth <b>two <i>konterank</i>,</b> and a <b><i>konterank</i></b> is <b>two <i>perutot</i>.</b> By this calculation, one <b>finds</b> that <b>one <i>peruta</i></b> is <b>one-eighth of the Italian <i>issar</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> This is not the case; rather, there are <b>three <i>hadreis</i> to a <i>ma’a</i>, two <i>henetz</i> to a <i>hadreis</i>, two <i>shamin</i> to a <i>henetz</i>,</b> and <b>two <i>perutot</i> to a <i>shamin</i>.</b> Consequently, one <b>finds</b> that one <b><i>peruta</i></b> is <b>one-sixth of the Italian <i>issar</i>. Shall we say that</b> one <b>Master agrees with the first <i>tanna</i>, and Ravin, who said</b> his ruling in the name of Rabbi Dostai and Rabbi Yannai and Rabbi Oshaya, <b>agrees with Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel?</b>

### Part 11
Rav Dimi <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Both my</b> statement <b>and</b> that of <b>Ravin</b> are <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>, and it</b> is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement of mine is referring to <b>when</b> the <b><i>issar</i> increased in value</b> in relation to silver coins, and <b>this</b> statement of Ravin is referring to <b>when</b> the <b><i>issar</i> decreased in value.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>When</b> the <b><i>issar</i> increased in value, twenty-four</b> <i>issar</i> <b>stood at one dinar; when</b> they <b>decreased in value, thirty-two</b> <i>issar</i> <b>stood at one dinar.</b> If so, there is a set ratio between the value of a <i>peruta</i> and the value of silver, and there are 192 <i>perutot</i> in one dinar. By contrast, the ratio between the value of a copper <i>issar</i> and silver dinars fluctuates, so that sometimes an <i>issar</i> will be worth eight <i>perutot</i> while at other times it is worth only six.

### Part 12
§ <b>Shmuel says:</b> If man <b>betrothed</b> a woman <b>with a date, she is betrothed even</b> if <b>a <i>kor</i> of dates is worth one dinar,</b> which would mean that one date is worth much less than one <i>peruta</i>. The reason is that although a date has little value here, <b>we are concerned that perhaps it is worth one <i>peruta</i> in Media</b> or in some other distant place where dates are expensive. Therefore, she is betrothed in this location as well.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the <b>mishna</b> that <b>Beit Hillel say: With one <i>peruta</i> or with</b> an item <b>worth one <i>peruta</i>,</b> but not less? The Gemara explains: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement in the mishna is referring <b>to betrothal</b> whose status is <b>certain.</b> Betrothal with one <i>peruta</i> or an item worth one <i>peruta</i> is certainly valid. Conversely, <b>this</b> case stated by Shmuel is referring <b>to betrothal</b> whose status is <b>uncertain.</b> Although the item is not worth one <i>peruta</i> here, there is a concern that the betrothal might nevertheless be valid.

### Part 14
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who betrothed</b> a woman <b>with a bundle of rags [<i>zavda de’urdei</i>]. Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya sat before Rav and examined</b> the bundle to see <b>if it had the value of one <i>peruta</i>.</b> If it was worth one <i>peruta</i>, <b>yes,</b> she was betrothed, <b>and if not, no,</b> she was not betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>And if it does not have the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> is she <b>not</b> betrothed? <b>But didn’t Shmuel say</b> that <b>we are concerned</b> that the item might be worth one <i>peruta</i> in Media? The Gemara explains: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> ruling of Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya is referring <b>to betrothal</b> whose status is <b>certain,</b> whereas <b>this</b> statement of Shmuel is referring <b>to betrothal</b> whose status is <b>uncertain.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara further relates: There was <b>a certain man who betrothed</b> a woman <b>with a blue marble stone. Rav Ḥisda sat and estimated</b> whether <b>it</b> was worth one <i>peruta</i>. <b>If it was worth one <i>peruta</i>, yes,</b> she was betrothed, <b>and if not, no,</b> she was not betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>And if it does not have the value of one <i>peruta</i>,</b> is she <b>not</b> betrothed? <b>But didn’t Shmuel say</b> that <b>we are concerned</b> that the item might be worth one <i>peruta</i> in Media? The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Ḥisda does not hold</b> in accordance with <b>that</b> opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> as he holds that if the item is not worth one <i>peruta</i> in the place where the betrothal occurred, the betrothal is invalid.

### Part 16
<b>The mother of</b> the man who offered the betrothal <b>said to</b> Rav Ḥisda: <b>But on that day that he betrothed her it was worth one <i>peruta</i>. He said to</b> the mother: <b>It is not in your</b> power <b>to render her forbidden to a later</b> man. If another comes and betroths her, his betrothal is not dismissed due to this earlier act. Since the marble stone is not worth one <i>peruta</i> now, the betrothal of the second man may be valid.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC