
### Part 1
<b>And conclude from it</b> that <b>generally, money</b> that was given for a betrothal that did not take effect is <b>returned.</b> It is not viewed as a gift, but as a loan that must be repaid. This is evident from the fact that all the dates except the last one are considered a loan that must be repaid.

### Part 2
§ <b>It was stated:</b> In the case of <b>one who betroths his sister</b> by giving her money, <b>Rav says: The money</b> of the betrothal must be <b>returned</b> by his sister, as this betrothal does not take effect. <b>And Shmuel says:</b> This <b>money</b> is considered to be <b>a gift</b> that she may keep. The Gemara clarifies their respective opinions. <b>Rav says: The money</b> must be <b>returned,</b> since <b>a person knows that betrothal does not take effect with his sister, and he decided to give</b> the money to her <b>for the sake of a deposit.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>And let him</b> explicitly <b>say to her</b> that he is giving her the money <b>for the sake of a deposit.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He thought she would not accept</b> it from him.

### Part 3
<b>And Shmuel maintains:</b> The <b>money</b> is considered to be <b>a gift,</b> because <b>a person knows that betrothal does not take effect with his sister, and he decided to give</b> the money to her <b>for the sake of a gift.</b> The Gemara again raises a difficulty: <b>And let him</b> explicitly <b>say to her</b> that he is giving it to her <b>for the sake of a gift.</b> The Gemara answers: He <b>thought it would be embarrassing to her</b> and she would refuse to accept the money. He therefore attempted to give it her by an alternative method.

### Part 4
<b>Ravina raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Ḥalla</i> 2:5): In the case of <b>one who separates his <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> the portion of dough that must be given to a priest, from <b>flour,</b> before it has been made into dough, the portion he has separated <b>is not <i>ḥalla</i>.</b> Since the Torah states: “Of the first of your dough you shall set apart” (Numbers 15:20), <i>ḥalla</i> can be separated only from dough. <b>And</b> if the priest fails to return the flour it is considered <b>stolen property in the priest’s possession.</b> Ravina asks: <b>And why</b> is it <b>stolen property in the priest’s possession?</b> In this case too, <b>let us say</b> as Shmuel does: <b>A person knows that one cannot separate <i>ḥalla</i></b> from <b>flour, and he gave</b> the flour <b>for the sake of a gift.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>There it is different.</b> The priest must return the flour <b>because</b> otherwise a <b>ruinous</b> situation may <b>emerge from it.</b> How so? <b>Sometimes the priest has,</b> on his own, <b>less than five-fourths</b> of a <i>kav</i> of <b>flour,</b> i.e., he has less than the amount necessitating the separation of <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>and</b> he also has <b>this</b> flour, which gives him a total of more than five-fourths of a <i>kav</i>, the amount necessitating the separation of <i>ḥalla</i>. <b>He will knead</b> all <b>this</b> flour <b>together and</b> will <b>think his dough has been made ready</b> with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>, since he did not have enough of his own flour to require the separation of <i>ḥalla</i> and he had added flour that had been separated as <i>ḥalla</i> to it. <b>And he will</b> then <b>come to eat it in its untithed</b> state, as the flour he received was not in fact <i>ḥalla</i>. Therefore, the Sages required him to return the flour.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say</b> that <b>a person knows that one may not separate <i>ḥalla</i></b> from <b>flour?</b> How can the priest make such an error? The Gemara answers: <b>He knows</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>but he does not know</b> the reason for the <i>halakha</i>. <b>He knows that one cannot separate <i>ḥalla</i></b> from <b>flour, but he does not know</b> the reason, <b>as he thinks: What</b> is <b>the reason</b> one may not separate <i>ḥalla</i> from flour? <b>Due to the labor of the priest,</b> i.e., to prevent the priest from having to knead it himself. And as far as <b>the labor of the priest</b> goes, he thinks: <b>I have relinquished</b> the right to have the non-priest knead it for me.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks a question based on a comparison to a similar case: <b>But</b> why must the priest go to the effort of returning the flour to its owner? <b>Let</b> the separated flour <b>be</b> considered <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> i.e., <i>ḥalla</i>, by rabbinic law, <b>and it should not be eaten</b> by the priest <b>until he removes <i>ḥalla</i> for it from somewhere else,</b> in order to make it ready to be eaten. <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 5:10): If one separated <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> produce grown in <b>a perforated</b> pot, which is obligated in <i>terumot</i> and tithes by Torah law, <b>for</b> produce that had grown in <b>a non-perforated</b> pot, which is not obligated in <i>terumot</i> and tithes according to Torah law; although the separating of <i>teruma</i> did not take effect, and the putative <i>teruma</i> is still untithed produce, it is considered to be <b><i>teruma</i></b> and remains in the possession of the priest, <b>and it may not be eaten until he removes <i>teruma</i> and tithes for it from somewhere else.</b> The same <i>halakha</i> should apply in the case of the <i>ḥalla</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: With regard to things that are <b>in two</b> separate <b>containers,</b> the priest <b>will listen.</b> Since the priest is well aware of the difference between a perforated and a non-perforated pot, he will accept the ruling of the Sages to separate <i>teruma</i> an additional time. With regard to something that is <b>in one container, he will not listen.</b> He does not see any difference between receiving flour or dough, and he will not accept the ruling of the Sages to separate <i>ḥalla</i> an additional time. Consequently, they required him to return the flour.

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> that the <i>tanna</i> has a different concern: <b>Actually, a priest will listen</b> even with regard to something in a single container, <b>and</b> the concern is that the prior <b>owner</b> of the flour <b>will think</b> that <b>his dough has been made ready</b> to eat <b>and</b> he <b>will come to eat</b> it <b>in</b> its <b>untithed</b> state.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say</b> that <b>a person knows that one may not separate <i>ḥalla</i></b> from <b>flour?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He knows</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>but he does not know</b> the reason for the <i>halakha</i>. <b>He knows that one cannot separate <i>ḥalla</i></b> from <b>flour, but he does not know</b> the reason, <b>as he thinks: What</b> is <b>the reason</b> one may not separate <i>ḥalla</i> from flour? It is <b>due to the labor of the priest.</b> And as far as <b>the labor of the priest</b> goes, he thinks: The priest <b>has accepted</b> that task upon <b>himself.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara makes a suggestion based on a comparison to a similar case: <b>But let it be <i>teruma</i>,</b> i.e., <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>and he should separate <i>teruma</i> again. Didn’t we learn</b> a similar idea in a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 5:10): If one separated <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> produce grown in <b>a non-perforated</b> pot <b>for</b> the produce of <b>a perforated</b> pot, it is <b><i>teruma</i></b> by rabbinic law, <b>but he must separate <i>teruma</i> again</b> to render the produce grown in the perforated pot ready to eat. The Gemara answers: <b>We have</b> already <b>established</b> that with regard to things that are <b>in two</b> separate <b>containers,</b> one <b>will listen,</b> but with regard to something that is <b>in one container, one will not listen.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara questions this assumption: <b>And will</b> one <b>not listen</b> to a ruling to separate <i>teruma</i> a second time from a single container? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 3:1): In the case of <b>one who separated a cucumber</b> as <b><i>teruma</i></b> to give to a priest, <b>and</b> that cucumber <b>was found</b> to be so <b>bitter</b> that it was inedible, or if he separated <b>a melon and it was found</b> to be <b>spoiled,</b> his separation is still <b><i>teruma</i>, but he must separate <i>teruma</i> again?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>There it is different, as it is full-fledged <i>teruma</i> by Torah law,</b> and even if he does not listen and separate <i>teruma</i> again, no Torah law will be violated.

### Part 13
What is the source from which it is extrapolated that it is full-fledged <i>teruma</i> by Torah law? It is <b>from</b> a statement <b>of Rabbi Ilai, for Rabbi Ilai says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that one who separates <i>teruma</i> from poor-quality</b> produce <b>for superior-quality</b> produce, i.e., in order to fulfill the obligation of separating <i>teruma</i> from the high-quality produce, <b>that his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>? As it is stated</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>: <b>“And you shall bear no sin by reason of it, seeing that you have set apart from it the best thereof”</b> (Numbers 18:32). The verse is saying to give the best part as <i>teruma</i>, and one who gives a bad portion has committed a transgression. Nevertheless, the verse indicates that the separated produce is <i>teruma</i>; <b>if it were not sacred</b> as <i>teruma</i> <b>why</b> would one <b>bear a sin?</b> If one’s action were to no effect, he has not sinned. <b>From here</b> it is derived <b>that</b> if <b>one separates <i>teruma</i> from poor-quality</b> produce <b>for superior-quality</b> produce, <b>his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC