
### Part 1
<b>They counted</b> the opinions among the Sages, <b>and they concluded:</b> With regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with his portion</b> of the offerings, <b>whether</b> he did so with <b>offerings of the most sacred order or whether</b> he used the <b>offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> he <b>has not betrothed</b> her, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei. <b>And Rav says: It is still a</b> matter of <b>dispute</b> and they did not reach that conclusion. <b>Abaye said: It is reasonable</b> to rule <b>in accordance with</b> the report <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> who says that the <i>halakha</i> was decided in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei.

### Part 2
Abaye quotes an extended <i>baraita</i> indicating that even Rabbi Yehuda accepted that the <i>halakha</i> was decided in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> priests <b>may not receive a share</b> of <b>meal-offerings in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings,</b> i.e., they may not exchange their portion of a meal-offering for the meat of an animal sacrifice of which they did not receive a portion? <b>The verse states: “And every meal-offering that is baked in the oven…shall all the sons of Aaron have”</b> (Leviticus 7:9–10). This verse emphasizes that the sons of Aaron must divide the meal-offering equally among themselves, without exchanging it for a portion of any other offering.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>meal-offerings in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings since they do not substitute for them in</b> the case of <b>poverty.</b> Even one who is too poor to afford to bring an animal offering, e.g., in the case of a sin-offering determined on a sliding scale, does not bring a meal-offering in its stead. Since meal-offerings can never be brought in place of animal offerings, there is clearly no connection between them. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of <b>meal-offerings in exchange for</b> portions of <b>bird</b>-offerings, <b>since they do substitute for them in</b> the case of <b>poverty.</b> If one is so destitute that he cannot afford to bring a bird-offering he brings a meal-offering. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “And all that is prepared in the deep pan…shall all the sons of Aaron have,”</b> again stressing that all must have an equal share in that meal-offering.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>meal-offerings in exchange for</b> portions of <b>bird</b>-offerings <b>since these,</b> bird-offerings, <b>are types of</b> offer-ings that involve <b>blood</b> sprinkled on the altar, <b>and those,</b> meal-offerings, <b>are types</b> of offerings made <b>of flour. But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of portions of <b>bird</b>-offerings <b>in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings, since both</b> categories are <b>types of</b> offerings that involve <b>blood</b> sprinkled on the altar. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “And on a griddle,”</b> a seemingly superfluous phrase, which teaches that one may not receive a share even of bird-offerings in exchange for portions of animal offerings.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>bird</b>-offerings <b>in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings because the actions,</b> i.e., killing, of <b>these</b> birds is <b>by hand,</b> by pinching the neck, <b>and the actions,</b> i.e., killing, of <b>those</b> animals is <b>with a utensil,</b> by slaughtering with a knife. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of <b>meal-offerings in exchange for</b> portions of other <b>meal-offerings, since the actions with</b> both <b>these and those</b> are <b>by hand.</b> Therefore, <b>the</b> next <b>verse states: “And every meal-offering mingled with oil…shall all the sons of Aaron</b> have” (Leviticus 7:10).

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of a meal-offering prepared on <b>a griddle in exchange for</b> portions of a meal<b>-</b>offering prepared in <b>a deep pan, or</b> portions of a meal-offering prepared in <b>a deep pan in exchange for</b> portions of a meal<b>-</b>offering prepared on <b>a griddle, since the actions</b> with <b>this</b> deep pan result in <b>a soft</b> product, <b>and the actions</b> with <b>that</b> griddle result in <b>a hard</b> product. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of a meal-offering prepared on <b>a griddle in exchange for</b> the portions of a meal-offering prepared on <b>a griddle, or</b> a share of a meal-offering prepared in <b>a deep pan in exchange for</b> portions of a meal-offering prepared in <b>a deep pan, since the actions</b> with both <b>these and those</b> result in <b>a hard</b> product, in the case of a griddle, or <b>alternatively,</b> with regard to a deep pan, <b>the actions</b> result in <b>a soft</b> product. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “Or dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have”</b> (Leviticus 7:10).

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that they <b>may not receive a share of offerings of the most sacred order,</b> e.g., meal-offerings, in exchange for a portion of another similar offering, <b>but they may receive a share of offerings of lesser sanctity</b> in exchange for a portion of another similar offering. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states</b> with regard to meal-offerings: “Shall all the sons of Aaron have, <b>one as well as another”</b> (Leviticus 7:10), <b>and near it</b> appears the verse: <b>“If</b> he offers it <b>for a thanks-offering”</b> (Leviticus 7:12), from which is derived: <b>Just as one may not receive a share</b> of one offering in exchange for a portion of another similar offering in the case <b>of offerings of the most sacred order, so too, one may not receive a share</b> of one offering in exchange for a portion of another similar offering in the case <b>of offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> e.g., a thanks-offering.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> expounds this verse further: It states: <b>“One</b> as well as another [<b><i>ish</i></b> <i>ke’aḥiv</i>],” which teaches that with regard to priests, <b>a man [<i>ish</i>]</b> who is an adult <b>receives a share even</b> if he is <b>blemished, but</b> a priest who is <b>a minor may not receive a share even</b> if he is <b>unblemished.</b> This <i>baraita</i> is found in the <i>Sifra</i>, a collection of halakhic <i>midrashim</i> on the book of Leviticus. And <b>who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> to whom <b>unattributed</b> statements in the <b><i>Sifra</i></b> are assigned? It is <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and</b> here <b>he says that no law of receiving a share</b> applies <b>to it at all,</b> which means that priests cannot exchange one portion of any type of offering for another portion, so they cannot use it to betroth a woman. <b>Conclude from it</b> that Rabbi Yehuda retracted his opinion and subscribes to the opinion that a priest does not own the portion of the offerings he receives.

### Part 9
<b>Rava said: But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Sota</i> 13:7): When the priests receive their portion of the shewbread each week, <b>the modest ones withdraw their hands</b> and do not take it, <b>and the gluttons receive</b> all the <b>shares</b> of the bread. This indicates that offerings may be apportioned according to the priests’ wishes. The Gemara rejects this: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>receive</b> the <b>shares?</b> It does not mean that they exchange one portion for another with halakhic sanction; it means that <b>they</b> would <b>snatch</b> their colleagues’ portions, <b>as it teaches</b> in the <b>latter clause</b> of that same <i>baraita</i>: <b>An incident</b> occurred <b>involving one who snatched his share and his colleague’s share, and they called him ben Ḥamtzan,</b> son of the snatcher, <b>until the day he died.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabba bar Rav Sheila said: What is the verse</b> from which is derived that <i>ḥamtzan</i> means one who snatches? The verse states: <b>“My God, rescue me out of the hand of the wicked, out of the grasp of the unrighteous and grasping man [<i>ḥometz</i>]”</b> (Psalms 71:4). <b>Rabba said:</b> It is derived <b>from here: “Learn to do well; seek justice, relieve the oppressed [<i>ḥamotz</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 1:17), i.e., restore property stolen from victims of theft.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: One who betroths a woman with <b>second tithe, whether unwittingly</b> or <b>intentionally, has not betrothed</b> her; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If he did so <b>unwittingly he has not betrothed</b> her, but if he did so <b>intentionally he has betrothed</b> her. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? From where does Rabbi Meir derive that second tithe cannot be used for betrothal? <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, says in the name of tradition:</b> The verse states: <b>“And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord’s; it is holy to the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 27:30). This verse indicates that <b>it is for the Lord, but not for betrothing a woman with it.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara questions this derivation from several instances where similar wording is employed in a different verse, yet one may use those items for betrothal. But <b>there is <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> about <b>which it is written: “So you also shall set apart a gift of the Lord</b> of all your tithes” (Numbers 18:28)? <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna (58a): With regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with <i>teruma</i>, she is betrothed.</b> The Gemara answers: <i>Teruma</i> of the tithe is different, <b>as “to the Lord” is not written with regard to it,</b> indicating that it can be used for betrothal.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But there is <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> the portion of dough that one must separate and give to a priest, <b>about which it is written:</b> “Of the first of your dough <b>you shall give to the Lord”</b> (Numbers 15:21)? <b>And we</b> also <b>learned</b> in that same mishna: With regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with <i>terumot</i>,</b> of which <i>ḥalla</i> is one type, <b>she is betrothed.</b> The Gemara answers: Although the verse does write “to the Lord,” <i>ḥalla</i> is different, <b>as</b> the word <b>“holy” was not written with regard to it.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But there is</b> produce of the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>about which it is written: “It is a Jubilee, it shall be holy to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:12)? <b>And we learned</b> by inferring from a mishna (50b) that in the case of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with produce of the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>she is betrothed.</b> The Gemara answers: With regard to produce of the Sabbatical Year, the verse writes “holy,” <b>but “to the Lord” is not written with regard to it.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But there is <i>teruma</i>,</b> about <b>which it is written: “The Jewish people are the Lord’s holy portion, His first fruits of the increase”</b> (Jeremiah 2:3)? <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna (58a) that in the case of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with <i>teruma</i>, she is betrothed.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse <b>was written with regard to the Jewish people,</b> who are called the Lord’s holy portion, but not with regard to <i>teruma</i> itself.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC