
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>concedes with regard to</b> the <b>fine</b> of a rapist and a seducer <b>that they all pay</b> this fine, and they are not exempt merely because their acts of intercourse were with a non-virgin. The Gemara asks: In <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from</b> the <b>death</b> penalty? With respect to the death penalty they are punished as though they engaged in intercourse with a betrothed non-virgin, and yet concerning the fine, they pay as though they engaged in intercourse with a virgin. The Gemara answers: It <b>is different there,</b> with regard to capital punishment, <b>as the verse states: “Then the man only who lay with her shall die”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:25), which indicates that only one man is executed for having sexual intercourse with a virgin, and no more.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis, what do they do with this</b> term <b>“only”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They require it for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>. The verse states: <b>“Then they shall both of them die”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:22). This indicates that this is not the case <b>unless</b> the two of them <b>are equal,</b> i.e., both deserve punishment. But if one of them cannot be punished, e.g., if he is a minor, the other is not executed either. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Oshaya. Rabbi Yonatan says</b> that the verse: <b>“Then the man only who lay with her shall die,”</b> indicates that in some cases only one of them is liable to receive the death penalty.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan, from where does he</b> derive <b>this conclusion</b> that only a woman’s husband can render her a non-virgin through intercourse in an atypical manner, if he uses this verse to derive the mode of betrothal by means of sexual intercourse? The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> that this verse is teaching only one <i>halakha</i>, <b>let the verse write:</b> If a man be found lying with <b>a <i>beulat ish</i>,</b> literally, a woman who engaged in sexual intercourse with a man. <b>What</b> is indicated by the term <b>“<i>beulat ba’al</i>,”</b> literally, who engaged in sexual intercourse with a husband? <b>Learn two</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>from it:</b> First, that one can betroth a woman through intercourse, and second, that only a woman’s husband can render her a non-virgin by intercourse in an atypical manner.

### Part 4
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Since intercourse is not a momentary act but has different stages, does <b>the beginning of intercourse effect acquisition or</b> does <b>the end of intercourse effect acquisition?</b> When exactly is the moment of betrothal? The Gemara comments: The <b>practical difference</b> resulting from this question is in a case <b>where</b> one <b>engaged in</b> only <b>the initial stage of intercourse with her and</b> in the meantime <b>she reached her hand out and accepted betrothal from another</b> man. If the beginning of sexual intercourse effects acquisition, the other man’s betrothal is meaningless. If the end of sexual intercourse effects acquisition, she is betrothed to the other man.

### Part 5
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is a difference with regard <b>to a High Priest who acquires a virgin through sexual intercourse.</b> If only the end of intercourse effects acquisition, she is no longer a virgin at the time of the betrothal, which would mean that a High Priest cannot acquire a woman through intercourse, as it is prohibited for him to marry a non-virgin (Leviticus 21:14). <b>What,</b> then, is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Ameimar said in the name of Rava: Anyone who engages in sexual intercourse has the completion of</b> the act of <b>intercourse in mind,</b> not the beginning. Therefore, the acquisition is complete only when the act has been completed.

### Part 6
Additionally, <b>a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Does the <b>sexual intercourse</b> that is performed to effect betrothal <b>effect marriage</b> at the same time that it effects betrothal, <b>or</b> does it <b>effect</b> only <b>betrothal? The practical difference</b> that arises from this question concerns all cases where it matters whether a woman is betrothed or married. For example, one issue is whether the act allows him <b>to inherit</b> property from <b>her.</b> If he betroths her through intercourse, does he inherit her property when she dies as he would if they were married?

### Part 7
<b>And</b> if he is a priest, is he required <b>to become ritually impure to</b> bury <b>her,</b> as he must do for his wife? <b>And</b> similarly, does a betrothal through intercourse allow him <b>to nullify her vows</b> by himself, without her father’s participation? <b>If you say</b> that intercourse <b>effects marriage, he inherits</b> property from <b>her, and he becomes impure to</b> bury <b>her, and he nullifies her vows</b> alone. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>it effects</b> only <b>betrothal, he does not inherit</b> property from <b>her, and he does not become ritually impure to</b> bury <b>her, and he cannot nullify her vows</b> alone. <b>What,</b> then, is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from the following mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 46b): <b>A father has authority</b> over <b>his daughter with regard to her betrothal,</b> whether it is <b>through money, through a document, or through sexual intercourse.</b> Likewise, a father <b>has a right to items she</b> has <b>found, and to her earnings, and to</b> effect <b>the nullification of her vows,</b> i.e., a father may nullify his daughter’s vows. <b>And he accepts her bill of divorce</b> on her behalf if she is divorced from betrothal before she becomes a grown woman. <b>And</b> although he inherits her property when she dies, e.g., property she inherited from her mother’s family, <b>he does not enjoy the profits</b> of her property <b>during her lifetime.</b> If the daughter <b>married, the husband has more</b> rights and obligations <b>than</b> her father had before the marriage, <b>as he enjoys the profits</b> of her property <b>during her lifetime.</b>

### Part 9
The mishna <b>teaches</b> that a man has rights to his daughter’s betrothal through <b>sexual intercourse, and</b> it subsequently <b>teaches:</b> If the daughter <b>married.</b> This indicates that intercourse effects only betrothal. The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>When it teaches:</b> If the daughter <b>married,</b> that is referring <b>to the other</b> modes mentioned here, i.e., betrothal by means of money or a document. In these cases there is a difference between betrothal and marriage, while it is possible that betrothal through intercourse effects marriage as well.

### Part 10
<b>Rava said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from a <i>baraita</i>: A girl who is <b>three years and one day old can be betrothed through intercourse, and if</b> her <b><i>yavam</i> engaged in intercourse with her, he has acquired her. And</b> if she is married, <b>one is liable</b> if he engages in intercourse <b>with her, due to</b> her status as <b>a married woman. And</b> if she is impure as a menstruating woman, <b>she renders one who engages in intercourse with her ritually impure</b> for seven days.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC