
### Part 1
<b>And they agree that he can sell her to a High Priest</b> even if she is <b>a widow,</b> or <b>to a common priest</b> even if she is <b>a divorcée or</b> is <b>a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>].</b> Although such marriages are prohibited, they do take effect. The Gemara analyzes this: <b>What are the circumstances of this widow</b> who can be sold as a maidservant by her father? <b>If we say</b> that <b>her father betrothed her</b> and her husband subsequently died while she was still a minor, <b>is he able to sell her</b> after her betrothal? <b>A person cannot sell his daughter into servitude after</b> he has <b>betrothed</b> her. <b>Rather, isn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> referring to a case <b>when she betrothed herself</b> as a minor, <b>and</b> yet it <b>calls her a widow,</b> indicating that such a betrothal is effective, contrary to the opinion of Ulla.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Amram said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Here</b> it deals with a minor girl widowed <b>from a betrothal of designation,</b> i.e., her father sold her as a Hebrew maidservant, and the master designated her as his wife but died before he married her. <b>And</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who says: The original money</b> of the sale of the maidservant <b>was not given for</b> the purpose of <b>betrothal.</b> Rather, her betrothal goes into effect when her master relinquishes his rights to have her serve as a Hebrew maidservant. Since this betrothal was not accepted by the father, he is later permitted to sell her as a maidservant again.

### Part 3
§ <b>It was stated:</b> If a man who betrothed a minor without her father’s consent <b>died, and she happened before his brothers for levirate marriage, Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> She <b>performs refusal for his levirate betrothal,</b> i.e., if the <i>yavam</i> performed levirate betrothal with her, divorce is effected only by means of refusal in addition to a bill of divorce, <b>but she</b> does not <b>perform refusal for his</b> levirate <b>bond</b> to her. If he did not perform levirate betrothal, she does not require refusal as well as <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>How so?</b> If <b>he performed levirate betrothal with her, she requires a bill of divorce, and she requires <i>ḥalitza</i>, and she requires refusal.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: <b>She requires a bill of divorce,</b> as <b>perhaps the father desired the betrothal of</b> only <b>the second</b> man. Levirate betrothal is performed in the same manner as standard betrothal, i.e., by giving money. If the father did not desire the first betrothal she is not a <i>yevama</i>, and the second betrothal goes into effect, requiring a bill of divorce to end the betrothal. She <b>requires <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> as <b>perhaps the father desired the betrothal of the first</b> man, in which case she is a regular <i>yevama</i>, who requires <i>ḥalitza</i> to be released from the <i>yavam</i>. <b>She requires refusal,</b> as <b>perhaps the father did not desire either the betrothal of the first</b> man <b>or the betrothal of the second</b> man. If she receives a bill of divorce and performs <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>and</b> the second man proceeds to betroth her sister, people <b>will say</b> that the <b>betrothal does not take effect with her sister,</b> as they will think that the first betrothal was fully valid.

### Part 5
If <b>he did not perform levirate betrothal with her, she requires only <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>If you say</b> that <b>she should require refusal as well, lest</b> people <b>say</b> that <b>betrothal does not take effect with her sister,</b> that is unnecessary. <b>Everyone knows</b> that <b>a sister of</b> one’s <b><i>ḥalutza</i></b> is forbidden <b>by rabbinic law</b> only; therefore, they also know that betrothal with the sister would be effective, and they would not permit the sister to marry others without receiving a bill of divorce. This is <b>as Reish Lakish said</b> with regard to the wording of a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 41a): <b>Here Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi incidentally <b>taught</b> that <b>a sister of</b> one’s <b>divorcée</b> is forbidden to him <b>by Torah law,</b> whereas <b>a sister of</b> one’s <b><i>ḥalutza</i></b> is forbidden to him <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara relates: There were <b>these two</b> people <b>that were</b> sitting and <b>drinking wine under poplar trees [<i>tzifei</i>] in Babylonia. One of them took a cup of wine</b> and <b>gave it to his friend. He said: Betroth for me your daughter to my son</b> by receiving this cup of wine. <b>Ravina says: Even according to the one who says</b> that in the case of a minor girl who became betrothed without her father’s consent, <b>we are concerned</b> that <b>perhaps the father desired</b> the betrothal,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC