
### Part 1
the cases of an animal <b>set aside</b> as an offering to an idol, <b>and</b> an animal that was itself <b>worshipped</b> as an idol, <b>which are living creatures and</b> yet <b>are</b> permanently <b>forbidden.</b> The Gemara answers: There is a difference, as <b>when</b> they are <b>forbidden,</b> they are forbidden only to be used <b>for the Most High,</b> i.e., to be used as offerings in the Temple service, but it is permitted <b>for a common</b> Jew to derive benefit from them.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya objects to</b> the explanation of Rabbi Yoḥanan: <b>But</b> an animal that <b>copulated</b> with a woman, and an animal that <b>copulated</b> with a man, <b>in</b> the presence of <b>witnesses, they are living creatures and</b> yet they <b>are</b> permanently <b>forbidden,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> is that these animals are killed, and one is prohibited from deriving benefit from them once they have been sentenced. <b>Rather,</b> the above explanation should be emended to say: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: We have not found most</b> kosher <b>living creatures that are</b> permanently <b>forbidden</b> while they are still alive, and it can be assumed that the inclusion of the verse is referring to that which is generally forbidden, even if there are exceptions.

### Part 3
The Gemara offers another answer to the question of how the <i>baraita</i> knew which bird the verse is permitting. <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: The verse states: “And shall let go</b> the living bird <b>into the open field”</b> (Leviticus 14:7), which indicates that the bird is <b>like a field: Just as a field is permitted, so too, this</b> bird <b>is also permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: Is <b>that</b> word <b>“field” coming to</b> teach <b>this? That</b> word <b>is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The word <b>“field”</b> teaches <b>that one may not stand in Jaffa and throw</b> the bird that is set free <b>to the sea,</b> or stand <b>in Gevat and throw it to the desert, and that he may not stand outside the city and throw it inside the city. Rather, any</b> manner in <b>which he is standing in the city and throws it outside the wall</b> to the field is valid. The word “field” teaches that one must set it free only to the field and nowhere else, not to teach that the bird is permitted.

### Part 4
<b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, the school of Rabbi Yishmael, who derives that one is permitted to derive benefit from the bird based on the word “field,” replies: <b>If so,</b> that this was the only <i>halakha</i> the word is teaching, <b>let the Torah write “field”; what</b> is the significance of <b>“the field”? Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from it,</b> i.e., both the place to throw the bird and the permission to derive benefit.

### Part 5
<b>Rava says</b> a different answer to the question of how the <i>baraita</i> knew which bird the verse is permitting: <b>The Torah did not say “let go” for</b> it to serve as a <b>stumbling block.</b> If the bird sent free was forbidden, the Torah would not have commanded him to send it away, since people might eat it unwittingly.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that if a man betroths a woman <b>with a nazirite’s hair,</b> she is not betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from a nazirite’s hair? The Gemara answers: <b>As the verse states</b> with regard to a nazirite: <b>“He shall be holy [<i>kadosh</i>], he shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long”</b> (Numbers 6:5), which teaches: <b>His</b> hair <b>growth shall be holy.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the hair of a nazirite can be compared to consecrated property by use of the term “holy,” then <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>consecrated</b> property, it <b>transfers</b> its sanctity to the <b>money</b> with which <b>it</b> is redeemed <b>and</b> it <b>becomes desacralized, so too, a nazirite’s hair should transfer</b> its sanctity to the <b>money</b> with which <b>it</b> is redeemed <b>and</b> the hair itself should become <b>desacralized.</b> This is not the <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>Do we read holy [<i>kodesh</i>]</b> in this verse, which is the term the verse uses for a consecrated item (see Leviticus 22:14)? <b>We read “holy [<i>kadosh</i>].”</b> Since a different conjugation of the term is used, the <i>halakhot</i> of the hair of a nazirite are not derived from those of consecrated property.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that if a man betroths a woman <b>with a firstborn donkey,</b> she is not betrothed. The Gemara suggests: <b>Shall we say the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a firstborn donkey,</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from it <b>is prohibited;</b>this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And Rabbi Shimon permits</b> it. <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said:</b> The mishna can be referring to one who betrothed a woman with a firstborn donkey <b>after</b> it has had its <b>neck broken, and everyone agrees</b> that it is prohibited to derive benefit from the donkey once its neck is broken.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that if a man betroths a woman with <b>meat</b> cooked <b>in milk,</b> she is not betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from meat cooked in milk? <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> The Torah states <b>three times: “You shall not cook a kid in its mother’s milk”</b> (Exodus 23:19; Exodus 34:26; Deuteronomy 14:21). <b>One</b> verse serves to teach <b>the prohibition</b> against <b>eating</b> meat cooked in milk, <b>and one</b> verse serves to teach <b>the prohibition</b> against deriving <b>benefit</b> from meat cooked in milk, <b>and one</b> verse serves to teach <b>the prohibition</b> against <b>cooking</b> meat in milk.

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>prohibited to eat meat</b> cooked <b>in milk but</b> one is <b>permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from it, <b>as</b> it <b>is stated: “For you are a holy people to the Lord your God. You shall not cook a kid in its mother’s milk”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:21), <b>and it states there</b> with regard to the prohibition of an unslaughtered animal carcass: <b>“And you shall be holy men to Me”</b> (Exodus 22:30). Since both verses employ the term “holy” he derives: <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of an animal carcass, it is <b>prohibited to eat</b> it <b>but</b> one is <b>permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from it, as the Torah explicitly states that it may be sold to a gentile, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to meat cooked in milk, it is <b>prohibited to eat</b> it <b>but</b> one is <b>permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from it.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that if a man betroths a woman with the items it enumerated, <b>or</b> with <b>non-sacred</b> animals <b>that were slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard,</b> she is not betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters,</b> i.e., that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from a non-sacred animal that was slaughtered in the Temple courtyard, derived? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Meir: The Torah said: Slaughter for Me,</b> i.e., for offerings to God, <b>in My</b> place, inside the Temple courtyard, <b>and your</b> non-sacred animals that are intended for eating should be slaughtered <b>in your</b> place, outside the Temple courtyard. <b>Just as</b> one is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit from <b>My</b> consecrated animals if they were slaughtered <b>in your</b> place, as one is prohibited from deriving benefit from a consecrated animal slaughtered outside the Temple, <b>so too,</b> one is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit from <b>your</b> non-sacred animals if they were slaughtered <b>in My</b> place.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> so, <b>just as</b> the act of slaughtering <b>My</b> consecrated animals <b>in your</b> place is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>, so too,</b> to the act of slaughtering <b>your</b> non-sacred animals <b>in My</b> place should be <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>.</b> To counter this logic, <b>the verse states:</b> “If a man from the house of Israel slaughters an ox or lamb…<b>and has not brought it to the door of the Tent of Meeting to sacrifice an offering to the Lord…and that man shall be cut off”</b> (Leviticus 17:3–4). This teaches that it is only <b>for an offering</b> that one slaughtered outside the Tent of Meeting of the Tabernacle, or the Temple courtyard, that <b>he is punishable with <i>karet</i>,</b> but <b>for non-sacred</b> animals that one slaughtered <b>in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard he is not punishable with <i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: In light of the above difference in <i>halakha</i> between these two cases, the entire comparison <b>can be refuted</b> in the following manner: <b>What</b> is an aspect unique <b>to</b> slaughtering <b>your</b> non-sacred animals <b>in My</b> place? It <b>is</b> that it is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>,</b> and is therefore a severe prohibition, which could explain the <i>halakha</i> that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from them. The prohibition against slaughtering a non-sacred animal in the Temple courtyard, which is not punishable by <i>karet</i>, could be regarded as a less severe prohibition, and perhaps in this case it is permitted to derive benefit from the slaughtered animal. Therefore, the <i>halakha</i> that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from a non-sacred animal that was slaughtered in the Temple courtyard still does not have a source.

### Part 14
Abaye quotes a lengthy <i>baraita</i> that serves as a source for the <i>halakha</i> that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from a non-sacred animal slaughtered in the Temple courtyard. <b>Rather, Abaye said</b> it is derived <b>from here:</b> The Torah states <b>three verses that</b> have <b>a superfluous</b> element with regard to the various species from which one may bring a peace-offering: The verse <b>“and he slaughters it”</b> (Leviticus 3:2), the verse <b>“and he shall slaughter it”</b> (Leviticus 3:8), and the verse <b>“and he shall slaughter it”</b> (Leviticus 3:13). The Torah could simply have stated: “And he shall slaughter,” without adding: “It.” <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state</b> the term “it” these three times?

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The source for the <i>halakha</i> is <b>because it is stated</b> with regard to the ritual slaughter of animals for meat consumption: <b>“If the place</b> which the Lord your God shall choose to put His name there <b>be too far from you, then you shall slaughter</b> of your herd and of your flock” (Deuteronomy 12:21), from which it is derived: <b>When</b> you are <b>far from the place,</b> i.e., the Temple, <b>you may slaughter</b> non-sacred animals for meat consumption, <b>but you may not slaughter</b> non-sacred animals <b>in a near place,</b> i.e., in the Temple. The verse serves to <b>exclude non-sacred</b> animals, thereby teaching <b>that they may not be slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard.</b>

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And I have</b> derived the prohibition against slaughtering a non-sacred animal in the Temple courtyard <b>only</b> with regard to <b>unblemished</b> animals, <b>which are fit to be sacrificed. From where</b> do I know <b>to include</b> even <b>blemished</b> animals, which are not fit to be sacrificed, in this prohibition? <b>I include blemished</b> animals <b>since</b> they are at least of <b>the type that is fit</b> to be sacrificed. <b>From where</b> do I know <b>to include the undomesticated animal,</b> which is never sacrificed as an offering, in this prohibition? <b>I include the undomesticated animal since it</b> is rendered fit for consumption <b>by</b> means of <b>slaughtering, like a domesticated animal. From where</b> do I know <b>to include fowl,</b> as the Torah does not mention slaughter with regard to fowl, in this prohibition? <b>The verse states: “And he slaughters it,” “and he shall slaughter it,”</b> as well as <b>“and he shall slaughter it,”</b> employing the addition term “it” each time. These three verses teach that one may not slaughter any non-sacred animal in the Temple courtyard.

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>one may not slaughter</b> <i>ab initio</i> <b>but if he did slaughter it would be permitted for him</b> to eat it. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “If the place</b> which the Lord your God shall choose to put His name there <b>be too far from you, then you shall slaughter</b> of your herd and of your flock, which the Lord has given you, as I have commanded you, <b>and you shall eat</b> within your gates, after all the desire of your soul” (Deuteronomy 12:21), which is expounded as follows: <b>That which you slaughter in a far place,</b> outside the Temple, <b>you may eat, but you may not eat that which you slaughter in a near place,</b> which <b>excludes non-sacred</b> animals <b>that were slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard.</b> Therefore, it is prohibited to eat a non-sacred animal slaughtered in the Temple courtyard even after the fact.

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that the prohibition against eating the meat after the fact applies to <b>unblemished</b> animals,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC