
### Part 1
In <b>an ordinary document, its witnesses</b> are to sign <b>inside it,</b> i.e., on the written side of the paper. In a folded and <b>tied</b> document, <b>its witnesses</b> are to sign <b>on the back of it.</b> With regard to <b>an ordinary</b> document <b>whose witnesses wrote</b> their signatures <b>on the back of it, or a tied</b> document <b>whose witnesses wrote</b> their signatures <b>inside of it, both of these</b> are <b>not valid. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel says: A tied</b> document <b>whose witnesses wrote</b> their signatures <b>inside of it</b> is <b>valid, because one can transform it into an ordinary</b> document by untying it. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Everything</b> is <b>in accordance with regional custom.</b> If an ordinary document is generally used and one wrote a bound one, or vice versa, the document is invalid.

### Part 2
<b>And we discussed it: And does the first <i>tanna</i> not accept</b> that one should follow the <b>regional custom?</b> It is not reasonable that he should take issue with such a basic concept. <b>And Rav Ashi says</b> that they have a dispute in a case where one instructed a scribe to write a document for him: If they are <b>in a place where the custom is</b> to write <b>an ordinary</b> document, <b>and he made a tied one for him; alternatively,</b> if they are <b>in a place where the custom is</b> to write <b>a tied</b> document, <b>and he made an ordinary</b> one <b>for him;</b> in both of these cases, <b>everyone agrees that</b> he was <b>certainly particular</b> in his instructions to the agent that he should follow the regional custom, and if the latter deviated from the custom the document is invalid.

### Part 3
The situation <b>in which they disagree</b> is where they are <b>in a place where the custom is</b> to use <b>either an ordinary</b> document <b>or a tied</b> one, <b>and</b> the one requesting the document <b>said to</b> the scribe: <b>Make an ordinary</b> document <b>for me, and</b> the scribe <b>went and made a tied</b> document <b>for him.</b> In such a case, one <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that the one requesting the document was <b>particular</b> about wanting an ordinary document, and since the scribe wrote a tied document, it is considered to have been written without his consent. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, <b>holds</b> that the one requesting the document merely <b>indicating</b> his <b>position to</b> the scribe, stating that if the scribe wanted to save himself the trouble of writing a tied document there would no objection.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Elazar</b> also holds that when one instructs an agent in such a manner he is merely indicating his position to him, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Gittin</i> 65a): If there was <b>a woman who said</b> to her agent: <b>Receive my bill of divorce for me</b> from my husband <b>in such and such a place, and he received her bill of divorce for her elsewhere, it is invalid. And Rabbi Elazar deems it valid. Apparently, he holds</b> that <b>she is</b> merely <b>indicating a place to him</b> where he can receive the bill of divorce, but she does not insist that he accept it in that particular spot.

### Part 5
§ <b>Ulla says:</b> The <b>dispute</b> in the mishna between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Shimon is only where he misled her <b>with enhanced monetary</b> value, i.e., he gave her something worth more than the item he had stipulated. <b>But</b> where he misled her <b>with enhanced lineage,</b> so that she was under the impression that his genealogy was less impressive than it in fact is, <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>she is not betrothed. What is the reason</b> for this? A woman says: <b>I do not desire a shoe that is larger than my foot.</b> She does not wish to marry a man whose social standing is far greater than her own. <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:6): <b>Rabbi Shimon concedes</b> that <b>if he misled her with enhanced lineage, she is not betrothed.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi says:</b> The wording of <b>the mishna is also precise, as</b> the following mishna (49b) <b>teaches:</b> If one betroths a woman and states that the betrothal is: <b>On the condition that I am a priest, and he was found</b> to be <b>a Levite;</b> or: On the condition that I am <b>a Levite, and he was found</b> to be <b>a priest;</b> or: On the condition that I am <b>a Gibeonite,</b> a people prohibited by rabbinic law from marrying into the congregation, i.e., from marrying a Jew of fit lineage, <b>and he was found</b> to be <b>a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> who is prohibited by Torah law from marrying into the congregation; or: On the condition that I am <b>a <i>mamzer</i>, and he was found</b> to be <b>a Gibeonite,</b> in all of these cases she is not betrothed. <b>And Rabbi Shimon does not disagree</b> with these rulings. This indicates that if one misled a woman with regard to his lineage, Rabbi Shimon concedes that she is not betrothed.

### Part 7
<b>Mar bar Rav Ashi objects to this</b> inference: <b>But</b> what about <b>that</b> which <b>is taught</b> in the same mishna: If one betroths a woman and states that the betrothal is: <b>On the condition that I have a grown daughter or maidservant, and he does not have</b> one; or if one betroths a woman <b>on the condition that he does not have</b> a grown daughter or maidservant <b>and he does have</b> one, the latter of <b>which is</b> an issue of <b>enhanced monetary</b> value, as the difference between one who has a maidservant and one who does not impacts how hard the woman will have to work in the home; in these cases will you <b>also</b> say <b>that</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>does not disagree</b> simply because the mishna does not mention his opinion in that case?

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>he disagrees in the first clause</b> of the mishna with regard to enhanced monetary value, <b>and the same is true with regard to the latter clause,</b> i.e., he also disagrees in that clause, and it was not necessary to state his dispute another time. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to lineage, <b>he disagrees in the first clause, and the same is true with regard to the latter clause.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> where <b>both this</b> case <b>and that</b> case involve an inaccuracy <b>of enhanced monetary</b> value, it is possible that <b>he disagreed in the first clause and the same is true in the last clause,</b> and the mishna did not need to restate his opinion. But <b>here,</b> where it <b>is</b> a case <b>of enhanced lineage,</b> which is a different issue, <b>if it is so that</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>disagrees, let him teach</b> that explicitly. The fact that no dispute is recorded in the case of enhanced lineage is proof that he concedes in that case.

### Part 10
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Here too,</b> the issue of a daughter or maidservant involves <b>enhanced lineage,</b> not enhanced monetary value. His statement should be understood differently. <b>Do you maintain</b> that <b>what</b> is the meaning of his statement that he has <b>a grown</b> daughter or maidservant; that she is <b>actually grown</b> up, so that she can be of help to his wife? That is not the meaning of his statement. Rather, <b>what</b> is the meaning of: <b>Grown?</b> That she <b>grows</b> and plaits hair, i.e., he has a daughter or maidservant who is a hairdresser. Why might the potential bride view this as a drawback? <b>Because she</b> can <b>say:</b> It is <b>not satisfactory for me</b> to live in the house with a hairdresser, <b>as she will take words</b> she hears <b>from me and will go pass</b> them <b>before my neighbors,</b> meaning she will gossip about me to others. This concern is more akin to a matter of lineage than a matter of monetary value.

### Part 11
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If one said to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am literate</b> with regard to the Torah, <b>once he has read three verses in the synagogue she is betrothed. Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that she is not betrothed <b>until he reads and translates</b> the verses. The Gemara asks: Does Rabbi Yehuda mean that <b>one translates</b> according to <b>his own understanding? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Megilla</i> 3:21) that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One who translates a verse literally is a liar,</b> since he distorts the meaning of the text, <b>and</b> conversely, <b>one who adds</b> his own translation <b>is</b> tantamount to one who <b>curses and blasphemes</b> God? <b>Rather,</b> to <b>which translation</b> is Rabbi Yehuda referring? He is referring to <b>our</b> accepted <b>translation.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And this statement applies</b> only <b>if he said to her: I am literate, but</b> if <b>he said to her: I am a reader,</b> this indicates that he is an expert in the reading of the Torah, and she is not betrothed <b>unless</b> he knows how <b>to read the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings with precision.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara discusses a similar case: If one said to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I study [<i>shoneh</i>], Ḥizkiyya says</b> it means that he studies <b><i>halakhot</i>, and Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> it means that he studies <b>Torah,</b> i.e., the written Torah.

### Part 14
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to Rabbi Yoḥanan from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>Mishna? Rabbi Meir says <i>halakhot</i>, Rabbi Yehuda says homiletics.</b> Neither of them, however, says that it refers to the written Torah.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC