
### Part 1
<b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Torah,</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan said? It is <b>homiletic</b> interpretation <b>of the Torah. And this statement applies</b> only <b>if he said to her: I study [<i>taneina</i>]. But</b> if <b>he says to her: I am a <i>tanna</i> [<i>tanna ana</i>],</b> she is not betrothed <b>unless he studies <i>halakha</i>,</b> i.e., Mishna, <b><i>Sifra</i> and <i>Sifrei</i>, and <i>Tosefta</i>.</b>

### Part 2
If a man says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am a student</b> of Torah, <b>one does not say</b> that he must be a student who is scholarly <b>like Shimon ben Azzai or like Shimon ben Zoma,</b> who were called students despite their great knowledge, as they were never ordained. <b>Rather,</b> it means <b>anyone who,</b> when <b>he is asked one matter in any topic of his studies,</b> responds appropriately <b>and can say</b> what he has learned, <b>and</b> this suffices <b>even</b> if his statement was <b>in</b> the <b>tractate of <i>Kalla</i>.</b> Similarly, if a man says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am a scholar, one does not say</b> that he must be <b>like the scholars of Yavne, like Rabbi Akiva and his colleagues. Rather,</b> it is referring to <b>anyone who,</b> when <b>he is asked</b> about <b>a matter of wisdom on any topic</b> related to the Torah, responds appropriately <b>and can say</b> what he has learned.

### Part 3
If a man says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am strong, one does not say</b> that he must be as strong <b>as Abner ben Ner,</b> King Saul’s cousin and general, <b>or</b> as strong <b>as Joab ben Zeruiah,</b> King David’s nephew and general. <b>Rather,</b> it means <b>anyone of whom others are afraid due to his strength.</b> If a man says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am wealthy, one does not say</b> he must be as wealthy <b>as Rabbi Elazar ben Ḥarsom or</b> as wealthy <b>as Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya, but</b> rather it can refer to <b>anyone who is honored by the members of his town due to his wealth.</b>

### Part 4
If one says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am</b> a <b>righteous man,</b> then <b>even if</b> he was <b>a completely wicked man she is betrothed,</b> as <b>perhaps</b> in the meantime <b>he had thoughts of repentance in his mind</b> and is now righteous. Similarly, if one says to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am a wicked man,</b> then <b>even</b> if he was <b>a completely righteous man she is betrothed,</b> as <b>perhaps he had thoughts of idol worship in his mind,</b> a serious sin that would earn him the label of wicked.

### Part 5
§ Apropos the discussion with regard to various attributes, the Gemara cites a related statement: <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>wisdom descended to the world; Eretz Yisrael took nine</b> of them <b>and all</b> the rest of <b>the world</b> took <b>one. Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>beauty descended to the world; Jerusalem took nine and all</b> the rest of <b>the world in its entirety</b> took <b>one. Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>wealth descended to the world; Rome took nine and all</b> the rest of <b>the world in its entirety</b> took <b>one. Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>poverty descended to the world; Babylonia took nine and all</b> the rest of <b>the world in its entirety</b> took <b>one. Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>arrogance descended to the world; Eilam took nine and all</b> the rest of <b>the world in its entirety</b> took <b>one.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But did arrogance not descend to Babylonia? But isn’t it written: “Then I lifted my eyes and saw, and behold there came forth two women, and the wind was in their wings, for they had wings like the wings of a stork. And they lifted up the measure between the earth and the heaven. Then I said to the angel that spoke with me: ‘To where do they take the measure?’ And he said to me: ‘To build her a house in the land of Shinar’”</b> (Zechariah 5:9–11). <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This</b> refers to <b>flattery and arrogance that descended to Babylonia,</b> i.e., Shinar. This indicates that arrogance reached Babylonia as well.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it descended to here,</b> to Babylonia, <b>and it made its way to there,</b> to Eilam. The language of the verse <b>is also precise, as it teaches: “To build her a house,”</b> which indicates that the original intention was to build a house in Babylonia, but it was not built there. The Gemara comments: <b>Conclude from it</b> that arrogance did not remain in Babylonia.

### Part 8
The Gemara further asks: <b>Is that so? But didn’t the Master say: A sign of arrogance</b> is <b>poverty, and there is poverty in Babylonia,</b> and not in Eilam. The Gemara answers: To <b>what</b> kind of <b>poverty</b> is this referring? It is <b>poverty with regard to Torah,</b> which was characteristic of Eilam. <b>As it is written: “We have a little sister, and she has no breasts”</b> (Song of Songs 8:8), <b>and Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This</b> refers to <b>Eilam, whose</b> inhabitants <b>merited to learn but did not merit to teach.</b> They did not produce Torah scholars capable of imparting their wisdom to others.

### Part 9
The Gemara returns to its list of endowments of various groups: <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>strength descended to the world; the Persians took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>lice descended to the world; Media took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>witchcraft descended to the world; Egypt took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>plagues descended to the world; pigs,</b> which carry disease, <b>took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>licentiousness descended to the world; Arabia took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one.

### Part 10
<b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>brazenness descended to the world; Meishan,</b> near Babylonia, <b>took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>conversation descended to the world; women took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>drunkenness descended to the world; the Kushites took nine</b> and the rest of the world took one. <b>Ten <i>kav</i></b> of <b>sleep descended to the world; slaves took nine and all</b> the rest of <b>the world in its entirety took one.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one said to a woman: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that I am a priest, and he was found</b> to be <b>a Levite;</b> or if he said: <b>A Levite, and he was found</b> to be <b>a priest;</b> or if he said: Be betrothed to me on the condition that I am <b>a Gibeonite,</b> a people prohibited by rabbinic law from marrying into the congregation, i.e., from marrying a Jew of fit lineage, <b>and he was found</b> to be <b>a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> who is prohibited by Torah law to marry into the congregation; or he said: <b>A <i>mamzer</i>, and he was found</b> to be <b>a Gibeonite;</b> or if he said: Be betrothed to me on the condition that I am <b>a resident of</b> a small <b>town, and he was found</b> to be <b>a resident of</b> a large <b>city;</b> or he said: <b>A resident of a city, and he was found</b> to be <b>a resident of a town;</b> or if he said: Be betrothed to me <b>on the condition that my house is close to the bathhouse, and it was found</b> to be <b>far;</b> or he said: <b>Far</b> from the bathhouse, <b>and it was found</b> to be <b>close,</b> she is not betrothed.

### Part 12
Or if he said that she is betrothed to him <b>on the condition that he has a grown daughter or a maidservant, and he does not have</b> one, <b>or on the condition that he does not have</b> one <b>and he has</b> one; or <b>on the condition that he has no sons, and he has</b> sons, <b>or on the condition that he has</b> sons <b>and he does not have</b> sons, then she is not betrothed. <b>And in all these</b> cases, <b>despite</b> the fact <b>that she</b> later <b>stated: I intended to become betrothed to him nevertheless,</b> whether or not he fulfilled the condition, <b>she is not betrothed. And similarly,</b> if it was <b>she who misled him</b> by making the betrothal conditional upon a statement of hers that turned out to be incorrect, the betrothal will not take effect.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who sold his property with the intention of ascending to Eretz Yisrael, but at the time that he sold</b> the property <b>he did not say anything</b> with regard to his intention. Ultimately, he did not ascend to Eretz Yisrael, and he wished to renege on the sale. <b>Rava said:</b> Since he did not explicitly state that he was selling his property on the condition that he ascend to Eretz Yisrael, <b>that is</b> an unspoken <b>matter that</b> remained <b>in the heart, and</b> unspoken <b>matters that</b> remain <b>in the heart are not</b> significant <b>matters.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where does Rava</b> learn <b>this</b> principle? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>from that which we learn</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC