
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, who says</b> that <b>with regard to both of them,</b> men and women, the verse <b>states: “And God blessed them,</b> and God said to them: <b>Be fruitful and multiply,</b> replenish the earth and conquer it” (Genesis 1:28), <b>what can be said?</b> According to his opinion, women are exempt from only one positive mitzva that is not time bound, Torah study; why not derive other mitzvot from this case? The Gemara answers: The reason this is not a difficulty is <b>because Torah study and the redemption of the firstborn son,</b> from which women are also exempt, <b>are two verses that come as one, and any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka as well, let procreation,</b> which he maintains applies to women, <b>and fear</b> of one’s mother and father <b>be</b> considered <b>two verses that come as one and</b> they should <b>not teach</b> a precedent. The Gemara answers: Both cases <b>are necessary. As, if the Merciful One had written</b> only that women are obligated in <b>fear</b> of their parents, <b>and had not written</b> that they are obligated in <b>procreation, I would say</b> that as <b>the Merciful One states:</b> “Be fruitful and multiply, replenish the earth <b>and conquer it”</b> (Genesis 1:28), this leads to the conclusion that women are exempt from procreation, by the following reasoning: <b>As</b> it is <b>the manner of a man</b> to go to war and <b>to conquer, yes,</b> he is obligated in procreation, but <b>as it is not the manner of a woman to conquer,</b> she is <b>not</b> obligated in procreation.

### Part 3
<b>And if</b> the Merciful One <b>had written</b> only that women are obligated in the mitzva of <b>procreation, and had not written</b> that they are obligated to <b>fear</b> their parents, <b>I would say:</b> With regard to <b>a man, as</b> it is <b>in his power to perform</b> this mitzva, <b>yes,</b> he is obligated to fear his mother and father, but with regard to <b>a woman, as</b> it is <b>not in her power to perform</b> this mitzva when she is married, since her obligations to her husband may prevent her from doing so, she is <b>not</b> obligated. <b>And as</b> it is <b>not in her power to perform</b> this mitzva when she is married, perhaps women <b>should not be obligated at all</b> and there should be no difference between a married and an unmarried woman. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> for the Torah to state that women are obligated in both procreation and the fear of parents, and these are not considered two verses that come as one.

### Part 4
The Gemara notes that the earlier question remains difficult: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that two verses that come as one <b>do teach</b> a precedent, <b>what can be said?</b> According to this opinion it can be derived that women are obligated in positive, time-bound mitzvot from <i>matza</i> and assembly, and that they are exempt from positive mitzvot that are not time bound, from Torah study and the redemption of the firstborn son. <b>Rava said:</b> The Sages <b>of Pafunya know the reason for this matter.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>And who is</b> the scholar called by the nickname: The Sages of Paphunya? It is <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov,</b> who said as follows: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to phylacteries: <b>“And it shall be a sign for you on your arm and for a memorial between your eyes, that the Torah of the Lord may be in your mouth”</b> (Exodus 13:9). In this manner <b>the entire Torah is juxtaposed to phylacteries: Just as</b> donning <b>phylacteries is a positive, time-bound mitzva and women are exempt</b> from it, <b>so too are women exempt</b> from <b>every positive, time-bound mitzva</b> in the Torah. <b>And from the fact</b> that <b>women are exempt from</b> every <b>positive, time-bound mitzva,</b> one can learn <b>by inference</b> that <b>women are obligated in</b> every <b>positive mitzva that is not time bound.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that the mitzva of donning <b>phylacteries</b> is <b>a positive, time-bound mitzva. But according to the one who says</b> that donning <b>phylacteries</b> is <b>a positive mitzva that is not time bound,</b> as it is applicable the entire year, day and night, <b>what can be said?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Who did you hear who said</b> that donning <b>phylacteries</b> is <b>a positive mitzva that is not time bound?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Meir, and he holds</b> that <i>matza</i> and assembly are <b>verses that come as one, and</b> he further maintains that <b>any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that <b>two verses that come as one do teach</b> a precedent, <b>and</b> who also says that donning <b>phylacteries is a positive mitzva that is not time bound, what can be said?</b> The Gemara answers: It is not derived from here that women are obligated in positive, time-bound mitzvot <b>because</b> the verses that mention <b><i>matza</i>, rejoicing, and assembly are three verses that come as one, and</b> everyone agrees <b>three verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent.

### Part 8
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>all prohibitions,</b> whether or not they are time bound, both men and women are obligated to observe them. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says, and likewise the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: The verse states</b> with regard to a guilt-offering: <b>“When a man or woman shall commit any sin that a person commits”</b> (Numbers 5:6). <b>The verse equates a woman to a man with regard to all punishments in the Torah,</b> as a woman is also required to bring an offering for atonement.

### Part 9
<b>The school of Rabbi Eliezer taught</b> as follows. <b>The verse states:</b> “Now these are the ordinances <b>which you shall set before them”</b> (Exodus 21:1), stating “them” in the plural. This <b>verse equates a woman to a man</b> with regard <b>to all judgments in the Torah,</b> i.e., monetary cases and damages. <b>The school of Ḥizkiyya taught: The verse states,</b> with regard to the ransom one pays if his animal killed a person: <b>“And killed a man or woman”</b> (Exodus 21:29). Here too, <b>the verse equates a woman to a man,</b> with regard <b>to all deaths in the Torah,</b> i.e., the same <i>halakha</i> applies to an animal that kills either a man or a woman.

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state all three of these verses. <b>As, if</b> the Torah <b>had taught us</b> only <b>this first</b> case, with regard to a woman’s obligation to sacrifice guilt-offerings, I would say that <b>the Merciful One has pity on her due to atonement,</b> i.e., God gave her the possibility to atone for her sin through an offering. <b>But</b> with regard to monetary <b>judgments, I</b> would <b>say</b> that with regard to <b>a man, who</b> generally <b>conducts</b> business <b>negotiations, yes,</b> these <i>halakhot</i> apply to him, but in the case of <b>a woman,</b> who generally does not conduct business negotiations, <b>no,</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of monetary judgments do not apply to her.

### Part 11
<b>And</b> similarly <b>if</b> the Torah <b>had taught us</b> only <b>this</b> case of monetary judgments, I would say that these judgments apply to a woman, <b>because</b> there are circumstances where engaging in business <b>is her livelihood. But</b> with regard to the <b>ransom</b> that is paid when one’s animal killed someone, <b>I</b> would <b>say:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC