
### Part 1
This indicates that the verse is stated <b>with regard to a gentile who is under your authority,</b> i.e., one who is subject to Jewish rule. <b>Or</b> perhaps you will say that the verse is stated <b>only with regard to a gentile who is not under your authority.</b> This is not possible, as <b>you say: But what can be done to him</b> to compel him to obey the Torah’s commands? Consequently, <b>the verse must be speaking of nothing other</b> than <b>a gentile who is under your authority.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: A Hebrew slave can be acquired by his master through money <b>or through a document.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that he can be acquired through a document? <b>Ulla said: The verse states</b> with regard to a Hebrew maidservant: <b>“If he takes himself another wife”</b> (Exodus 21:10). <b>The verse</b> thereby <b>juxtaposes</b> a Hebrew maidservant <b>to another</b> woman who is betrothed: <b>Just as another</b> woman <b>can be acquired</b> by her husband <b>through a document</b> (see 2a), <b>so too, a Hebrew maidservant can be acquired through a document.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that the <b>master writes the document</b> of a <b>Hebrew maidservant,</b> just as a betrothal document is written by the husband. <b>But according the one who says</b> that the <b>father writes it,</b> in the manner of a document of sale, <b>what can be said?</b> According to that opinion, the document of a Hebrew maidservant is not similar to a betrothal document. <b>As it was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> disagreed about this matter: With regard to <b>the document</b> of <b>a Hebrew maidservant, who writes it? Rav Huna says:</b> The <b>master writes it. Rav Ḥisda says:</b> The <b>father writes it. This works out well according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, but according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Ḥisda, what can be said?</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is derived from a different source. <b>The verse states</b> with regard to a Hebrew maidservant: <b>“She shall not go out as the men slaves do”</b> (Exodus 21:7). One can infer: <b>But she can be acquired in</b> the manner of <b>the acquisition of</b> Canaanite <b>male slaves. And what is</b> this mode of acquisition? It is <b>a document.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that the inference should be a different one: <b>But she can be acquired in</b> the manner of <b>the acquisition of</b> Canaanite <b>male slaves, and what is</b> this mode of acquisition? It is <b>possession.</b> The Gemara answers that one cannot interpret that verse in this manner, as <b>the verse states</b> with regard to Canaanite slaves: <b>“And you shall bequeath them to your children after you”</b> (Leviticus 25:46), which indicates that you can acquire only <b>them,</b> i.e., Canaanite slaves, <b>through possession,</b> like an inherited tract of land, <b>but other</b> slaves <b>cannot</b> be acquired <b>through possession.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, one can equally <b>say</b> that <b>they,</b> Canaanite slaves, can be acquired <b>through a document, but others cannot</b> be acquired <b>through a document.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Isn’t it written: “She shall not go out as the men slaves do”</b> (Exodus 21:7), and this is explained to mean that she, like other slaves, can be acquired through a document. The Gemara asks: Since these two verses can be explained in either manner, <b>what did you see</b> that led you to compare a Hebrew maidservant to a Canaanite slave with regard to a document, and what led you to differentiate her from a Canaanite slave with regard to acquisition through possession? Perhaps the opposite should be the case, i.e., she is similar to a Canaanite slave with regard to possession and differs from him concerning acquisition through a document?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>a document should be included</b> in the acquisition of a slave, <b>as</b> a document is powerful in that it can <b>release a Jewish woman,</b> in the form of a bill of divorce. The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>On the contrary, possession should be included, as it can effect acquisition</b> in the case <b>of the property of a convert</b> who died without leaving heirs, whereas no other mode can be used to acquire such property. The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, <b>with regard to marriage, in any event, one does not find</b> acquisition by means of possession. <b>If you wish, say</b> another answer: It is <b>to that end,</b> i.e., to determine in which way to compare a Hebrew maidservant to a Canaanite slave, that the verse <b>“if</b> he takes <b>another,” is effective,</b> as it indicates that the acquisition of a Hebrew maidservant includes a mode of acquisition used in betrothal, i.e., a document.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rav Huna, what does he learn from this</b> verse: <b>“She shall not go out as the men slaves do”</b> (Exodus 21:7)? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires that</b> verse to teach <b>that she is not released on</b> account of an injury <b>to</b> the <b>extremities like</b> a Canaanite <b>slave.</b> If a master injures one of her limbs she is not emancipated, as explained in greater detail below. The Gemara asks: <b>And Rav Ḥisda,</b> from where does he derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> that it is teaching only one <i>halakha</i>, <b>let the verse write: She shall not go out as the men slaves. What</b> is the reason for the additional term <b>“as the men slaves do”? Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from it:</b> She is not freed due to injured limbs, and like a slave, she too can be acquired by means of a document.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> a Hebrew slave <b>can acquire himself after</b> six <b>years</b> of work. The Gemara cites the source for this <i>halakha</i>: <b>As it is written: “Six years he shall labor; and in the seventh</b> he shall go out free for nothing” (Exodus 21:2).

### Part 10
§ The mishna further states that a Hebrew slave is emancipated <b>in the Jubilee</b> Year. The Gemara explains that this is <b>as it is written: “He shall labor with you until the Jubilee Year”</b> (Leviticus 25:40).

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that a Hebrew slave can be freed <b>through the deduction of money. Ḥizkiyya says</b> that the reason is <b>that the verse states: “Then he shall let her be redeemed”</b> (Exodus 21:8), which <b>teaches that</b> if she acquires money and wishes to be emancipated before her time is complete, she <b>deducts</b> the value of the years that she has not yet worked from the cost of <b>her redemption, and is emancipated.</b> The same <i>halakha</i> applies to a slave. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught: And</b> a slave <b>can acquire himself with money, with</b> an item <b>worth money, and with a document.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted,</b> he can be acquired through <b>money, as it is written: “Out of the money that he was bought for”</b> (Leviticus 25:51). Likewise, it is <b>also</b> clear that he can be acquired with an item <b>worth money,</b> as <b>the Merciful One states: “He shall give back the price of his redemption”</b> (Leviticus 25:51), which serves <b>to include</b> an item of <b>monetary value,</b> which is considered <b>like money.</b> In other words, any item of value can be used to redeem a slave. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>this document</b> mentioned here, <b>what are the circumstances? If we say that</b> the slave <b>wrote</b> a promissory <b>note for his own money, that is</b> the same as <b>money.</b> What is the difference between the two cases?

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> this is referring to a document of <b>manumission</b> written by the master when the slave is emancipated. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>a document</b> for this purpose? <b>Let him say in the presence of two</b> witnesses: <b>Go</b> free. <b>Alternatively,</b> let him say <b>before a court: Go</b> free. <b>Rava says: That is to say</b> that <b>the body of a Hebrew slave is owned</b> by his master, and this is not merely a monetary debt. <b>And</b> in the case of <b>a master who relinquishes his deduction,</b> i.e., the money that the slave must return for the years he has not yet served, <b>his deduction is not relinquished.</b> Although one can relinquish a monetary debt verbally, this is insufficient to release a slave whose body is owned by his master. A document is required to effect his freedom.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that <b>a Hebrew maidservant has</b> one mode of emancipation <b>more than</b> a Hebrew slave, as she acquires herself through signs indicating puberty. <b>Reish Lakish says: A Hebrew maidservant acquires herself from the master’s authority through the death of</b> her <b>father.</b> This is derived <b>through an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If signs</b> indicating puberty, <b>which do not release her from</b> her <b>father’s authority,</b> as, although she develops signs of puberty she remains under her father’s authority with regard to certain matters, nevertheless <b>release her from the master’s authority, is it not logical that death, which releases her</b> entirely <b>from</b> her <b>father’s authority,</b> should <b>release her from</b> her <b>master’s authority?</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Hoshaya raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>A Hebrew maidservant has</b> one mode of emancipation <b>more than</b> a Hebrew slave, <b>as she acquires herself through signs</b> indicating puberty. <b>And if it is so</b> that she also acquires herself through her father’s death, as claimed by Reish Lakish, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach also</b> that she is released through <b>the death of the father.</b> The Gemara answers: The absence of an explicit statement is not proof, as the mishna <b>taught</b> one difference between a male slave and a maidservant <b>and omitted</b> others.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> else <b>did he omit that he omitted this?</b> The <i>tanna</i> would certainly not leave out only one <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>omitted the death of the master.</b> In the event of the master’s death, the Hebrew maidservant is emancipated and is not inherited by the master’s heirs. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If</b> it is <b>due to the death of the master, that is not an omission.</b> The reason is <b>that since there is also</b> a similar <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a man,</b> i.e., a pierced slave, the mishna <b>does not teach</b> this case.

### Part 17
<b>But</b> if so, the question remains: <b>Rather, let it teach</b> that she is emancipated through the death of her father. The Gemara answers: The <b><i>tanna</i></b> in the mishna <b>teaches a matter that has a set time,</b> and <b>he does not teach a matter that does not have a set time,</b> e.g., the death of her father.

### Part 18
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> there is the case of <b>signs</b> indicating puberty, <b>which do not have a set time,</b> as young women exhibit these signs of puberty at different ages, <b>and</b> yet <b>it teaches</b> this mode of emancipation anyway. <b>Rav Safra says:</b> Admittedly, these signs <b>have no maximum set time,</b> as once she reaches the age of twelve she is emancipated whenever she develops these signs, <b>but they do have a set time</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC