
### Part 1
<b>Sit properly</b> and do not act in a revolting manner. Satan then <b>said to him: Give me a cup. They gave him a cup. He coughed up his phlegm and spat it into</b> the cup. <b>They berated him</b> for acting this way, at which point Satan pretended to <b>sink</b> down <b>and die. They heard</b> people around them <b>saying: Peleimu killed a man! Peleimu killed a man!</b> Peleimu <b>fled and hid himself in the bathroom.</b> Satan <b>followed him</b> and <b>fell before him. Upon seeing that</b> Peleimu <b>was suffering, he revealed himself to him.</b> Satan <b>said to him: What is the reason that you spoke this way,</b> provoking me by saying: An arrow in the eye of Satan? He replied: <b>But what then should I say?</b> Satan <b>said to him: Let the Master,</b> i.e., Peleimu, <b>say:</b> Let <b>the Merciful One rebuke the Satan.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi was accustomed to say, whenever he would fall on his face</b> in prayer: <b>May the Merciful One save us from the evil inclination. One day his wife heard him</b> saying this prayer. <b>She said: After all, it has been several years since he has withdrawn from</b> engaging in intercourse with <b>me</b> due to his advanced years. <b>What is the reason that he says this</b> prayer, as there is no concern that he will engage in sinful sexual behavior?

### Part 3
<b>One day,</b> while <b>he was studying in his garden, she adorned herself and repeatedly walked past him. He said: Who are you? She said: I am Ḥaruta,</b> a well-known prostitute, <b>returning from my day</b> at work. <b>He propositioned her. She said to him: Give me that pomegranate from the top of the tree</b> as payment. <b>He leapt up, went,</b> and <b>brought it to her,</b> and they engaged in intercourse.

### Part 4
<b>When he came home, his wife was lighting</b> a fire in the <b>oven. He went and sat inside it. She said to him: What is this? He said to her: Such and such an incident</b> occurred; he told her that he engaged in intercourse with a prostitute. <b>She said to him: It was I. He paid no attention to her,</b> thinking she was merely trying to comfort him, <b>until she gave him signs</b> that it was indeed she. <b>He said to her: I, in any event, intended to transgress.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>All the days of that righteous man he would fast</b> for the transgression he intended to commit, <b>until he died by that death</b> in his misery.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the source that one who intended to transgress is punished even though he did not actually sin. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> concerning a husband who nullified the vow of his wife: <b>“Her husband has made them null; and the Lord will forgive her”</b> (Numbers 30:13). <b>With regard to what</b> case <b>is the verse speaking?</b> Why would the woman require forgiveness if her husband has nullified her vow? It is referring <b>to a woman who vowed</b> to <b>be a nazirite, and her husband heard and nullified her</b> vow. <b>And she did not know that her husband had nullified her</b> vow, <b>and she drank wine and contracted impurity from a corpse,</b> violating her presumed vow.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabbi Akiva came to this verse he would cry. He said: And if</b> with regard to <b>one who intended to eat pork, and</b> kosher <b>lamb came up in his hand,</b> like this woman who intended to violate her vow but in fact did not, <b>the Torah</b> nevertheless <b>says: She requires atonement and forgiveness, all the more so</b> does <b>one who intended to eat pork and pork came up in his hand</b> require atonement and forgiveness.

### Part 7
<b>In a similar manner, you</b> can <b>say</b> that the same lesson can be derived from the verse: <b>“Though he know it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity”</b> (Leviticus 5:17). <b>When Rabbi Akiva came to this verse he would cry.</b> He said: <b>And if</b> with regard to <b>one who intended to eat</b> permitted <b>fat, and</b> forbidden <b>fat</b> mistakenly <b>came up in his hand, the Torah states: “Though he know it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity,” all the more so</b> is this true for <b>one who intended to eat</b> forbidden <b>fat and</b> forbidden <b>fat came up in his hand. Isi ben Yehuda says</b> with regard to the verse <b>“Though he know it not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear his iniquity”: With regard to this matter all sufferers shall grieve,</b> since the verse teaches that one is punished even for sinning unawares.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that <b>a man may be secluded with his mother. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav Asi says: A man may be secluded with his sister, and live with his mother or with his daughter</b> in a permanent arrangement, without concern. <b>When he said this before Shmuel,</b> the latter <b>said: It is prohibited to be secluded with all those with whom relations are forbidden by the Torah, and even with an animal,</b> as it is prohibited to engage in intercourse with an animal as well.

### Part 9
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>A man may be secluded with his mother, and with his daughter, and sleep alongside them with bodily contact, and</b> this appears to be <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the statement of <b>Shmuel.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Shmuel</b> could have <b>said to you: And according to your reasoning,</b> how should one explain <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>his sister, and his mother-in-law, and all those with whom relations are forbidden,</b> including his mother and daughter, <b>one may be secluded with them only</b> in the presence <b>of witnesses,</b> from which it can be inferred: In the presence <b>of witnesses, yes; without</b> the presence <b>of witnesses, no.</b> This <i>baraita</i> supports the opinion of Shmuel that one may not be secluded with his mother or sister.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> it <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> as to whether one may be secluded with his mother or sister. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Meir said: Be careful with me because of my daughter,</b> i.e., make sure I am not left secluded with her. Similarly, <b>Rabbi Tarfon said: Be careful with me because of my daughter-in-law. A certain student mocked him</b> for being wary of the possibility of sinning with his daughter-in-law. <b>Rabbi Abbahu said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel: Not many days passed until that student stumbled</b> into sin <b>with his mother-in-law.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara stated that according to Shmuel it is prohibited for one to be alone <b>even with an animal.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Abaye removed</b> the animals <b>from the entire field</b> he was in. <b>Rav Sheshet transferred</b> the animals to the other side <b>of the fence. Rav Ḥanan from Neharde’a happened</b> to come <b>to Rav Kahana in Pum Nahara. He saw that</b> he <b>was sitting and studying, and an animal was standing before him.</b> Rav Ḥanan <b>said to him: Doesn’t the Master hold</b> that one may not be secluded <b>even with an animal?</b> Rav Kahana <b>said to him: It</b> did <b>not</b> enter <b>my mind</b> that an animal was before me.

### Part 12
<b>Rava says: A man may be secluded with two sisters-in-law and with two rival wives,</b> i.e., two women who share a husband; <b>with a woman and her mother-in-law;</b> and <b>with a woman and her husband’s daughter.</b> Since these women typically dislike each other, each fears that the other will publicize her sins, and they will be careful not to transgress. Similarly, a man may be secluded <b>with a woman and a girl who knows the meaning of sexual intercourse,</b> i.e., one who is old enough to understand the nature of intercourse, <b>but</b> is still young enough that <b>she does not submit herself to intercourse,</b> since she does not yet desire it. In such a situation, the woman is concerned that the child will reveal her behavior.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches that <b>when</b> one’s children <b>have grown up, this one sleeps in his garment</b> and that one sleeps in her garment, but they may share a bed. The Gemara asks: <b>And how</b> old must a child be to be considered grown up for the purposes of this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Adda bar Rav Azza says</b> that <b>Rav Asi says: A girl</b> must reach the <b>age</b> of <b>nine years and one day; a boy</b> must reach the <b>age</b> of <b>twelve years and one day. There are</b> those <b>who say: A girl</b> must reach the <b>age</b> of <b>twelve years and one day; a boy</b> must reach the <b>age</b> of <b>thirteen</b> years <b>and one day. And</b> according to <b>this and that,</b> according to both opinions, the girl is considered a child <b>until</b> she has reached the stage of: <b>“Your breasts were fashioned, and your hair was grown”</b> (Ezekiel 16:7), meaning the onset of puberty.

### Part 14
<b>Rafram bar Pappa says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says: They taught</b> that a man may sleep in close proximity to his minor daughter <b>only if she is not ashamed to stand naked before him, but</b> if she is <b>ashamed to stand naked before him, it is prohibited</b> for him to sleep close to her, regardless of her age. <b>What is the reason?</b> It is that the <b>inclination has a hold upon her,</b> as otherwise she would not be ashamed.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Aḥa bar Abba arrived at the house of Rav Ḥisda, his son-in-law. He took his daughter’s daughter and placed her on his lap.</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: Doesn’t the Master think that she</b> might already be <b>betrothed?</b> Rav Aḥa <b>said to him:</b> If that is true, <b>you have transgressed</b> the ruling <b>of Rav, as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says, and some say</b> it was said by <b>Rabbi Elazar: It is prohibited for a man to betroth his daughter when she is a minor, until she grows up and says: I want</b> to marry <b>so-and-so,</b> as otherwise she might reject the designated husband and ultimately sin by committing adultery. Rav Ḥisda replied: <b>The Master has likewise transgressed</b> the words <b>of Shmuel. As Shmuel says: One may not make use of a woman,</b> so how can you hold her on your lap? <b>He said to him: I hold in accordance with another</b> statement <b>of Shmuel, as Shmuel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC