
### Part 1
<b>is it not logical that</b> a wedding <b>canopy, which completes</b> the marriage, since it entirely removes a young woman from her father’s authority, <b>can effect acquisition</b> for betrothal on its own? The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about money is that</b> it can effect acquisition in many contexts, <b>as one can redeem with it consecrated</b> property <b>and second tithe.</b> This is not so with regard to a wedding canopy, which is ineffective in effecting any acquisition other than marriage. Therefore, in the case of betrothal, money can effect betrothal while a wedding canopy cannot. The Gemara counters: The <i>halakha</i> of <b>sexual intercourse proves</b> otherwise, as this act serves to effect acquisition of a woman despite the fact that it is not a valid mode of acquisition in any other case.

### Part 2
The Gemara counters: <b>What</b> is unique about <b>sexual intercourse</b> is <b>that it effects acquisition of a <i>yevama</i>,</b> whereas a <i>yavam</i> does not acquire her via a wedding canopy. The Gemara answers: <b>Money proves</b> otherwise, as money cannot be used to acquire a <i>yevama</i>, and yet it is a valid mode for acquiring a woman. <b>And the derivation has reverted</b> to its starting point: <b>The aspect of this</b> mode, money, <b>is not like the aspect of that</b> mode, intercourse, <b>and the aspect of that</b> mode, intercourse, <b>is not like the aspect of this</b> mode, money. <b>Their common denominator is that they generally effect acquisition, and they effect acquisition here,</b> with regard to betrothal. <b>Likewise, I will bring</b> the mode of a wedding <b>canopy, which generally effects acquisition,</b> rendering a woman as married, <b>and</b> therefore it should also <b>effect acquisition here.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this: <b>What</b> about the fact that <b>the common denominator of</b> money and intercourse is <b>that their benefit,</b> i.e., pleasure, <b>is great?</b> The Gemara says: The case of <b>a document proves</b> otherwise, as no great pleasure is derived from receiving a document, and yet it can be used to acquire a woman. The Gemara answers: <b>What</b> is unique about <b>a document is that it can release a Jewish woman</b> from her husband in the form of a bill of divorce. The Gemara answers: <b>Money and intercourse prove</b> otherwise, as they do not release a woman and yet they are valid modes of acquisition for betrothal.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> once again, <b>the derivation has reverted</b> to its starting point: <b>The aspect of this</b> mode <b>is not like the aspect of that</b> mode, <b>and the aspect of that</b> mode <b>is not like the aspect of this</b> mode. <b>Their common denominator is that they generally effect acquisition and they effect acquisition here,</b> with regard to betrothal. <b>Likewise, I will bring</b> the mode of a wedding <b>canopy, which generally effects acquisition, and</b> therefore it should also <b>effect acquisition here.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara again rejects this claim: <b>What</b> about the fact that <b>the common denominator of</b> all three modes of acquisition is <b>that they are</b> effective in certain situations <b>against her will?</b> A bill of divorce, sexual intercourse in the case of a <i>yevama</i>, and money with regard to a Hebrew maidservant all effect acquisition of a woman against her will. Therefore, the mode of a wedding canopy cannot be derived from these methods, as a wedding canopy is effective only when the woman enters it willingly. <b>And</b> in response to this claim <b>Rav Huna</b> would answer: <b>In any event, with regard to marriage, we have not found</b> a case in which a woman can be acquired through <b>money against her will.</b> Consequently, it is possible to learn from the modes of money, a document, and intercourse that a wedding canopy likewise effects betrothal.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said:</b> There are <b>two refutations of</b> this <b>matter,</b> i.e., it is possible to refute Rav Huna’s opinion in two ways. <b>One</b> opinion is <b>that we learned</b> in the mishna that a woman can be acquired through <b>three</b> modes of acquisition, <b>and we did not learn</b> that there are <b>four</b> modes. This indicates that there are no other ways to acquire a woman apart from the three listed in the mishna.

### Part 7
<b>And furthermore,</b> Rava disagrees with the main point of the proof, which was based on the fact that a wedding canopy completes a marriage: <b>Doesn’t</b> entering a wedding <b>canopy complete</b> a marriage <b>only by</b> means of an act of <b>betrothal,</b> which precedes the wedding canopy? <b>And can one derive</b> that entering a wedding <b>canopy</b> effects acquisition <b>without betrothal from</b> the case of entering a wedding <b>canopy that</b> effects acquisition <b>by</b> means of <b>betrothal?</b> Consequently, entering a wedding canopy alone cannot effect a betrothal.

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rava in response to his two claims: With regard to <b>that which you said,</b> that <b>we learned</b> in the mishna <b>three</b> modes <b>and we did not learn</b> that there are <b>four</b> modes, this is no proof, as the <b><i>tanna</i> teaches</b> only <b>a matter that is explicitly written</b> in the Torah, and <b>does not teach a matter that is not explicitly written</b> in the Torah, such as a wedding canopy.

### Part 9
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>that which you said: Doesn’t</b> entering a wedding <b>canopy complete</b> a marriage <b>only by</b> means of an act of <b>betrothal, this is also what Rav Huna is saying,</b> i.e., Rav Huna incorporates this claim into his reasoning: <b>If money, which does not complete</b> a marriage <b>after money,</b> i.e., after a woman has been betrothed through money an additional monetary gift cannot render her a fully married woman, <b>effects acquisition</b> of the woman in the form of betrothal, <b>is it not logical that</b> entering a wedding <b>canopy,</b> which is more powerful than money in that it <b>completes</b> a marriage <b>after money, should effect acquisition</b> and be used to perform betrothal by itself?

### Part 10
§ After discussing the sources for the modes of acquisition listed in the mishna, the Gemara analyzes these <i>halakhot</i> in greater detail. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 1:1): <b>How</b> is betrothal performed <b>through money?</b> If a man <b>gave</b> a woman <b>money or</b> an item <b>worth money, and</b> he <b>said to her: You are hereby betrothed [<i>mekuddeshet</i>] to me,</b> or: <b>You are hereby betrothed [<i>me’oreset</i>] to me,</b> or: <b>You are to me as a wife,</b> then <b>she is betrothed. But</b> if <b>she</b> is the one <b>who gave</b> the money to him, <b>and she said: I am hereby betrothed [<i>mekuddeshet</i>] to you,</b> or: <b>I am hereby betrothed [<i>me’oreset</i>] to you,</b> or: <b>I am hereby to you as a wife,</b> then <b>she is not betrothed.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa objects to this:</b> This <i>baraita</i> contains an internal contradiction. The first part of the <i>baraita</i> states: If a man gave a woman money and said to her: You are hereby betrothed to me, from which it may be inferred <b>that the reason</b> the woman is betrothed is that <b>he gave</b> her money <b>and he said</b> the appropriate formula. This leads to the conclusion that if <b>he gave</b> her money <b>and she said</b> the formula, <b>she is not betrothed.</b> Now <b>say the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>But</b> if <b>she</b> is the one <b>who gave</b> the money to him, <b>and she said:</b> I am hereby betrothed to you, then <b>it is not</b> a valid <b>betrothal.</b> Rav Pappa infers: <b>The reason</b> that it is not a valid betrothal is that <b>she gave</b> money to him <b>and she said</b> the appropriate formula, from which it may be inferred that if <b>he gave</b> money to her <b>and she said</b> the appropriate formula, then <b>this is</b> a valid <b>betrothal.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara explains: <b>The first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>exact,</b> and therefore it is correct to infer that which was not explicitly stated from this ruling. By contrast, <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> was <b>cited for no reason,</b> i.e., it was simply formulated in the opposite manner of the first clause, and the <i>baraita</i> is not exact in the wording of this case. Therefore, one should not analyze this clause too carefully and infer <i>halakhot</i> from it. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> would the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach</b> in <b>the latter clause a matter that contradicts the first clause?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara retracts the previous explanation in favor of the following. <b>This is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> If <b>he gave</b> the money <b>and he said</b> the formula, it <b>is obvious that it is</b> a valid <b>betrothal.</b> If <b>he gave</b> the money <b>and she said</b> the formula, <b>it is considered as though she gave</b> the money <b>and she said</b> the formula, <b>and</b> therefore <b>it is not</b> a valid <b>betrothal. And if you wish, say</b> a different explanation of the <i>baraita</i>: If <b>he gave</b> the money and <b>he said</b> the formula, <b>she is betrothed.</b> If <b>she gave</b> the money <b>and she said</b> the formula, <b>she is not betrothed</b> at all. If <b>he gave</b> the money <b>and she said</b> the formula, the ruling <b>is uncertain, and by rabbinic law we are concerned</b> that this might actually be a betrothal.

### Part 14
The Gemara continues to discuss the language of betrothal. <b>Shmuel says: With regard to betrothal,</b> if <b>he gave her money or</b> an item <b>worth money, and said to her: You are hereby betrothed [<i>mekuddeshet</i>],</b> or: <b>You are hereby betrothed [<i>me’oreset</i>],</b> or: <b>You are hereby as a wife,</b> then <b>she is betrothed.</b> If he said: <b>I am hereby your man,</b> or: <b>I am hereby your husband,</b> or: <b>I am hereby your betrothed,</b> then <b>there is no room for concern here.</b> In these cases there is no possibility that it might be a valid betrothal, as betrothal is effective only if its formulation defines the relationship in terms of the woman’s connection to the man, not the reverse.

### Part 15
<b>And similarly, with regard to divorce,</b> if a husband <b>gave</b> his wife a bill of divorce <b>and said to her: You are hereby sent away,</b> or: <b>You are hereby divorced,</b> or: <b>You are hereby permitted to</b> marry <b>any man,</b> then <b>she is divorced.</b> If he said: <b>I am not your man,</b> or: <b>I am not your husband,</b> or: <b>I am not your betrothed,</b> then <b>there is no room for concern,</b> as a bill of divorce is effective only if its formulation defines the relationship in terms of the woman’s connection to the man, not the reverse.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: Is this to say that Shmuel holds</b> that <b>ambiguous intimations,</b> i.e., incomplete expressions that can be understood only from their context, <b>are</b> considered like unambiguous <b>intimations?</b> In the cases listed by Shmuel, the woman is betrothed despite the fact that the man did not say: You are hereby betrothed to me, but merely: You are hereby betrothed. The statement itself does not include the detail that the speaker intends to betroth her to himself, and yet Shmuel maintains that the betrothal is valid.

### Part 17
Rav Pappa asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Nazir</i> 2a) that <b>one who says: I shall be, is a nazirite? And we discussed</b> this ruling: <b>But perhaps</b> he meant <b>to say: I will be in a fast? And Shmuel said</b> that <b>this</b> mishna <b>is</b> referring to a particular set of circumstances, that he said: I shall be, <b>when a nazirite was passing before him.</b> In that context it is clear the individual meant that he too will be a nazirite. Rav Pappa analyzes this statement: <b>The reason</b> that he is a nazirite is only due to the fact <b>that a nazirite passes before him.</b> But <b>if this</b> were <b>not</b> the case, <b>no,</b> his statement would not be considered a naziriteship vow. This indicates that according to Shmuel, ambiguous intimations are not considered like unambiguous intimations.

### Part 18
The Gemara rejects this: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> Shmuel is referring to a case <b>where he said</b> the formulation and added the phrase: <b>To me.</b> For example, he said to a woman: You are hereby betrothed to me. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what is</b> Shmuel <b>teaching us?</b> If the man stated the full formula it is obvious that she is betrothed, as he used the standard expression of betrothal. The Gemara answers: <b>These</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC