
### Part 1
<b>and what is different there,</b> in the previous chapter (50a), <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches:</b> With regard to <b>one who says to his agent,</b> go and betroth a certain woman for me in such and such a place, and he went and betrothed her in a different place, she is not betrothed? Why does the mishna there label him an agent, and here it labels him simply another?

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>Here</b> the mishna <b>teaches us a novel</b> element <b>and there</b> it <b>teaches us a novel</b> element, through its use of these terms. The Gemara elaborates: The mishna <b>here teaches us a novel</b> element, <b>as had it taught: His agent, I would say</b> that <b>it is his agent who is</b> considered <b>a scoundrel</b> in that case, <b>as</b> one who sends an agent <b>relies</b> upon him, <b>thinking:</b> He will <b>perform my agency for me,</b> since he was sent for that purpose. <b>But</b> with regard to the use of the term: <b>Another,</b> who was not appointed and <b>upon whom he does not rely,</b> as he is not his agent, you might <b>say</b> that he <b>should not</b> be considered <b>a scoundrel.</b>

### Part 3
Similarly, the mishna <b>there teaches us a novel</b> element, <b>as had it taught: One who says to another, I would say</b> that <b>it is</b> in the case of <b>another that she is not betrothed if he betrothed her in a different place, as he thinks</b> that this person would <b>not</b> go to the <b>trouble</b> of looking for her elsewhere, and therefore he authorized him to betroth the woman only in that particular place. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>his agent, who</b> is assumed to take special <b>trouble</b> to fulfill his agency, you might <b>say he is</b> merely <b>showing him</b> the <b>place</b> where she is likely to be found, and she is betrothed in any case. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that even when he appointed an agent she is not betrothed if he does not find her in the place the putative husband specified.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>Ravin the Pious</b> was appointed an agent and <b>went to betroth a woman to his son,</b> but in the end he <b>betrothed her to himself.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: <b>What he did is done, but he has treated him in a deceitful manner?</b> How could a pious individual act in this fashion? The Gemara answers: The woman’s family <b>would not give her to</b> the son, and agreed only to let her marry the father. The Gemara further asks: Even so, before betrothing her <b>he should have</b> first <b>informed</b> his son that they refuse to let her marry him. The Gemara explains that Ravin <b>thought: In the meantime,</b> while I am busy reporting back to my son, <b>someone else</b> will <b>come</b> and <b>betroth her.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates a similar story: <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana gave money to Rav</b> and <b>said: Purchase this land for me.</b> Rav <b>went and purchased it for himself.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> with regard to an agent who acts in this manner: <b>What he did is done, but he has treated him in a deceitful manner?</b> The Gemara answers: The land <b>was</b> located <b>in a valley</b> inhabited <b>by violent</b> men, who <b>treated Rav</b> with <b>respect</b> and were prepared to sell the land to him, but who <b>did not treat Rabba bar bar Ḥana</b> with <b>respect.</b> As in the case of Ravin, the Gemara questions this behavior: Nevertheless, Rav <b>should have informed him.</b> The Gemara responds that Rav <b>thought: In the meantime someone else will come</b> and <b>purchase</b> the land.

### Part 6
The Gemara further relates: <b>Rav Giddel was engaging in</b> the acquisition of <b>a certain</b> plot of <b>land.</b> In the meantime <b>Rabbi Abba went</b> and <b>purchased it. Rav Giddel went</b> and <b>complained about</b> Rabbi Abba <b>to Rabbi Zeira. Rabbi Zeira went and complained about</b> Rabbi Abba <b>to Rav Yitzḥak Nappaḥa.</b> Rav Yitzḥak Nappaḥa <b>said to him: Wait until</b> Rabbi Abba <b>ascends to</b> visit <b>us for the pilgrimage Festival,</b> when all come to hear the Festival sermon, on which occasion we can discuss this matter with him. <b>When</b> Rabbi Abba <b>ascended</b> Rav Yitzḥak Nappaḥa <b>found him</b> and <b>said to him:</b> If <b>a pauper is engaging in</b> the acquisition of <b>a loaf</b> of bread that he found, <b>and another came and took it from him, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 7
Rabbi Abba <b>said to him:</b> The one who took it away <b>is called wicked.</b> Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa replied: <b>But</b> if so, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>the Master acted this way?</b> Rav Giddel was negotiating the purchase of this land and you purchased it. Rabbi Abba <b>said to him: I did not know</b> that Rav Giddel was trying to acquire the land. Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa retorted: <b>Now too, the Master should give it to him,</b> since you have been made aware that he submitted the first offer. Rabbi Abba <b>said to him:</b> As for <b>selling, I will not sell it, as it is</b> the <b>first land</b> I have ever purchased, <b>and</b> this <b>matter</b> of selling one’s first acquisition <b>is not</b> a good <b>omen. If he wants</b> to accept it <b>as a gift, let him take it.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Giddel did not descend to</b> claim this plot of land, <b>as it is written: “But he who hates gifts shall live”</b> (Proverbs 15:27), and therefore he did not wish to accept the land as a gift. <b>Rabbi Abba</b> also <b>did not descend to it, because Rav Giddel</b> was already <b>engaging in</b> the acquisition of <b>it</b> when he acquired the land. In this manner, <b>this Sage did not descend to</b> take the plot of land, <b>and that Sage did not descend to</b> take care of <b>it, and it was called the land of the Sages.</b>

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And similarly,</b> with regard to <b>one who says to a woman: Be betrothed to me</b> after thirty days, and another came and betrothed her within this period, she is betrothed to the second man. The Gemara asks: In a case where <b>another did not come and betroth her within</b> the <b>thirty</b> days, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav and Shmuel both say: She is betrothed</b> after thirty days, <b>even if the money</b> he gave for her betrothal <b>has been used</b> before the end of this period, as the betrothal takes effect from when the money is given.

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is the reason</b> that she is betrothed despite the lack of money at the end of the thirty days? The Gemara explains that <b>these dinars</b> given for her betrothal are <b>not comparable to a loan, nor</b> are they <b>comparable to a deposit</b> that was transferred into her possession and subsequently lost. In both of these cases she would not be betrothed.

### Part 11
The Gemara elaborates: <b>They are not comparable to a deposit,</b> as <b>a deposit is used in its owner’s possession,</b> i.e., any loss is incurred by the owner, <b>whereas these are used in her own possession,</b> as he gave her the money to keep. These dinars <b>are also not comparable to a loan; a loan is given for spending</b> and therefore no money remains at the time of the betrothal, whereas <b>these</b> dinars <b>were given to her</b> from the outset <b>for the purpose of betrothal.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: If <b>another did not come and betroth her, and she retracted her</b> consent to the betrothal within thirty days, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: She can retract</b> her consent. Why? This <b>statement,</b> by which she changes her mind, <b>comes and nullifies</b> her previous <b>statement</b> when she agreed to the betrothal. <b>Reish Lakish said: She cannot retract</b> her consent, as her second <b>statement does not come and nullify</b> her previous <b>statement.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised an objection to Reish Lakish</b> from a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 3:4): In a case where someone appointed an agent to separate <i>teruma</i> from his produce on his behalf, and he subsequently <b>canceled</b> the agency, the <i>halakha</i> depends on the following: <b>If he canceled</b> the appointment <b>before</b> the agent <b>separated the <i>teruma</i>, his <i>teruma</i> is not <i>teruma</i>. And here it is</b> a case involving one <b>statement and</b> a second <b>statement,</b> as the owner of the produce appointed the agent and rescinded his appointment by speech. This shows that <b>a statement comes and nullifies</b> a previous <b>statement.</b> Reish Lakish replied: <b>Giving money to a woman is different, as it is considered like an action, and</b> a mere <b>statement does not come and nullify</b> the <b>action</b> of the transfer of money.

### Part 14
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>raised</b> a further <b>objection</b> to Reish Lakish: With regard to <b>one who sends a bill of divorce to his wife, and</b> later the husband <b>encountered the agent or sent</b> another <b>agent after him and</b> in this manner <b>said to him: The bill of divorce that I gave you is nullified, it is thereby nullified. And giving a bill of divorce to an agent is considered</b> to be <b>like giving money to a woman, and</b> yet this <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>it is nullified,</b> which indicates that speech can override even an action.

### Part 15
Reish Lakish answered: <b>There too, as long as the bill of divorce has not reached the woman’s hand it is</b> considered a case of one <b>statement and</b> a second <b>statement.</b> There is no halakhic significance to the transmitting of a bill of divorce to an agent, as only its delivery to the wife is considered an action. Therefore, the act of transferring the bill of divorce to the agent is of no consequence and in this particular case <b>a statement comes and nullifies</b> a previous <b>statement.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Reish Lakish raised an objection to Rabbi Yoḥanan: All vessels descend into their</b> state of contracting <b>ritual impurity by means of thought.</b> Although an unfinished vessel cannot become ritually impure, if the craftsman decided not to work on it any further, it immediately assumes the status of a completed vessel and can become ritually impure. <b>But they ascend from their</b> state of <b>ritual impurity only by means of a change</b> resulting from <b>an action.</b> A ritually impure vessel, once it undergoes physical change, is no longer ritually impure.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC