
### Part 1
The case here is <b>where</b> the seller <b>fled</b> with the money, and there is no way of voiding the sale and returning the money to the purchaser. The Gemara comments: <b>And the reason is that he fled, but had he not fled, we would penalize the seller</b> by requiring him to return the money. The Gemara asks: <b>And let us penalize the buyer</b> and require him to take an equivalent sum of money to Jerusalem. The Gemara answers: It is <b>not the mouse</b> that <b>steals, but the hole</b> that <b>steals.</b> In other words, a mouse cannot steal an item unless he has a hole in which to hide it. Here too, the money would not have been desacralized without the help of the seller.

### Part 2
The Gemara questions this logic: <b>But if not</b> for the <b>mouse, what has the hole done?</b> Since they both are integral to the prohibited act, each of them is deserving of a penalty. The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>anywhere that the forbidden</b> item <b>is,</b> i.e., anywhere that the money is, and in this case it is with the seller, <b>there we</b> should <b>penalize.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with <i>orla</i>,</b> i.e., fruit grown during a tree’s first three years, or <b>with diverse kinds in a vineyard,</b> i.e., grain and grapes planted together, or <b>with an ox that is</b> sentenced to be <b>stoned, or with a heifer whose neck is broken,</b> or <b>with</b> the <b>leper’s birds</b> which are designated for his offering, <b>or with a nazirite’s hair, or</b> with <b>a firstborn donkey, or</b> with <b>meat</b> cooked <b>in milk, or</b> with <b>non-sacred</b> animals <b>that were slaughtered in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard,</b> if he betroths her with any of these items, the woman <b>is not betrothed,</b> since it is prohibited to derive benefit from any of these items. By contrast, if <b>one sold them and betrothed</b> a woman <b>with</b> the <b>money</b> received from <b>their</b> sale, <b>she is betrothed,</b> as in these cases one may derive benefit from the money he receives in exchange for the forbidden item.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara explains the source of the <i>halakha</i> that it is prohibited to derive benefit from the items mentioned in the mishna. <b>With <i>orla</i>: From where do we</b> derive that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from <i>orla</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: “And shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then you shall count the fruit thereof as forbidden; three years shall it be as <b>forbidden [<i>arelim</i>]</b> to you; <b>it shall not be eaten”</b> (Leviticus 19:23). From this verse, <b>I have</b> derived <b>only a prohibition</b> against <b>eating</b> it. <b>From where</b> do I derive that one may not even derive <b>benefit</b> from it? From where do we derive <b>that one may not</b> derive <b>benefit from it</b> in another manner, <b>and one may not paint with</b> the dye that can be extracted from the fruit, <b>and one may not light a lamp with</b> its oil? <b>The verse states: “Then you shall count the fruit thereof [<i>orlato</i>] as forbidden [<i>araltem</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 19:23), <b>to include all these</b> types of benefit in the prohibition.

### Part 5
The mishna stated that one may not betroth a woman <b>with diverse kinds in a vineyard. From where do we</b> derive that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from diverse kinds in a vineyard? <b>Ḥizkiyya said: The verse states:</b> “You shall not sow your vineyard with diverse kinds; lest the growth of the seed that you have sown be forbidden [<i>pen tikdash</i>], together with the yield of the vineyard” (Deuteronomy 22:9). Ḥizkiyya expounds <b>“lest</b> the growth of the seed that you have sown <b>be forbidden [<i>pen tikdash</i>]”</b> as: <b>Lest it be burned [<i>pen tukad esh</i>],</b> indicating that the seed of diverse kinds must be destroyed by fire, so that no benefit is derived from it.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi says</b> that the phrase “<i>pen tikdash</i>” indicates that it is comparable to consecrated property, as if it said: <b>Lest it become consecrated [<i>kodesh</i>],</b> and one is therefore prohibited from deriving benefit from it, just as one may not derive benefit from consecrated property. The Gemara questions Rav Ashi’s interpretation: <b>If</b> diverse kinds in a vineyard is compared to consecrated property, then <b>just as consecrated</b> property <b>transfers</b> its sanctity to the <b>money</b> with which <b>it</b> is redeemed <b>and becomes desacralized, so too, diverse kinds in a vineyard</b> should <b>transfer</b> their sanctity to the <b>money</b> with which <b>they</b> are redeemed <b>and become desacralized.</b> Contrary to this logic, the mishna taught that if one sells diverse kinds in a vineyard, the proceeds can be used for betrothal, indicating that it is not forbidden to derive benefit from this money. <b>Rather, it is clear</b> that the correct derivation is <b>as</b> that <b>of Ḥizkiyya.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara continues its analysis of the mishna: <b>From where</b> is it derived that one is prohibited from deriving benefit from <b>an ox that is</b> sentenced to be <b>stoned?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It is taught <b>by inference from</b> that <b>which is stated</b> with regard to an ox that killed a person: “And if an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die, <b>the ox shall be stoned,</b> and its flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be clear” (Exodus 21:28). <b>Don’t I know</b> from this verse <b>that</b> the stoning makes it an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass, and it is prohibited to eat</b> an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass? What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Its flesh shall not be eaten”?</b> The verse <b>is telling you that</b> even <b>if one slaughtered</b> the ox <b>after its verdict had been reached</b> but before it was stoned, it is still <b>prohibited to eat</b> it.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>From where</b> is it derived that one is prohibited <b>from</b> deriving <b>benefit</b> from the ox as well? <b>The verse states: “But the owner of the ox shall be clear.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred</b> that one may not derive benefit from this ox? <b>Shimon ben Zoma says:</b> This is <b>like a person who says to another: So-and-so was left clear [<i>naki</i>] of his property, and he has no benefit from it at all.</b> Similarly, “But the owner of the ox shall be clear” means that he may not derive any benefit from the ox.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is it known <b>that this</b> phrase: <b>“Its flesh shall not be eaten,” comes</b> to teach a <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to</b> a case <b>where he slaughtered</b> the ox <b>after its verdict was reached,</b> but before it was stoned? <b>Perhaps it is permitted</b> to eat the ox <b>if he slaughtered</b> it <b>after its verdict had been reached. And this</b> phrase: <b>“Shall not be eaten,” comes</b> to teach a <i>halakha</i> with regard to a case <b>where they</b> had already <b>stoned it,</b> but not to teach a prohibition against eating it, as that is already known due to the fact that it was stoned. Rather, it comes to prohibit deriving benefit from the ox, <b>and</b> that would be <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Abbahu</b> who <b>says</b> the following, citing <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara continues the question: <b>As Rabbi Abbahu says</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says</b> that <b>wherever it is stated: “It shall not be eaten”;</b> or <b>“you,”</b> singular, <b>“shall not eat”; or “you,”</b> plural, <b>“shall not eat”; both a prohibition</b> against <b>eating and a prohibition</b> against deriving <b>benefit</b> are indicated. This is so <b>unless the verse specifies for you</b> that one may derive benefit, <b>in the manner that it specified for you with regard to an animal carcass,</b> from which the verse explicitly permits one to derive benefit, as it states: “You may sell it to a foreigner” (Deuteronomy 14:21). Here, too, with regard to the ox that is stoned, the phrase: “Its flesh shall not be eaten,” may serve to teach that one may not derive benefit from the stoned ox.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>This statement</b> of Rabbi Abbahu <b>applies only</b> to a case <b>where we derive the prohibition</b> against <b>eating from the words: “It may not be eaten,”</b> which is interpreted to include any manner of consumption. But <b>here, the prohibition</b> against <b>eating is derived from: “It shall be stoned,”</b> from which it is understood that since the ox becomes an unslaughtered animal carcass, it may not be eaten. <b>As if it enters your mind that</b> the phrase: “Its flesh may not be eaten,” <b>is written to prohibit</b> one from deriving <b>benefit, let the verse state: “One may not derive benefit.”</b> Why does it refer to eating if that prohibition has already been derived?

### Part 12
<b>Alternatively,</b> even if one would say that the phrase: <b>“It shall not be eaten,”</b> can be used to indicate that it is prohibited to derive benefit from the ox, <b>why do I</b> need the additional words <b>“its flesh”?</b> These words must teach that <b>although he slaughtered</b> the ox <b>like</b> one does with kosher <b>meat,</b> after it was condemned to be stoned, it remains <b>forbidden</b> and cannot be eaten.

### Part 13
<b>Mar Zutra objects to this: But say</b> that <b>this</b> prohibition against eating the ox <b>applies</b> only <b>where he examined</b> a sharp <b>stone</b> to ensure that it had no nicks, <b>and slaughtered with it</b> in a halakhically acceptable manner. That action could <b>be considered like stoning,</b> since in any event the ox was killed by a stone. The Torah teaches that even if it was killed in this manner, one is prohibited from eating it. <b>But</b> if <b>he slaughtered it with a knife,</b> he should <b>not</b> be prohibited from eating it. The Gemara expresses surprise at this reasoning: <b>Was a knife written in the Torah?</b> If one slaughters the animal in a halakhically acceptable manner, this is called slaughtering, not stoning. <b>And moreover, it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ḥullin</i> 1:2): One may <b>slaughter with anything</b> that cuts cleanly, <b>whether with a stone, whether with glass, whether with the stalk of a reed.</b> Consequently, there is no difference in the <i>halakha</i> with regard to using a knife or a sharp stone.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And now that we have derived</b> both <b>the prohibition</b> against <b>eating and the prohibition</b> against <b>benefiting</b> from an ox sentenced to be stoned <b>from: “It shall not be eaten,” what</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>does that</b> other phrase: <b>“But the owner of the ox shall be clear,” come</b> to teach? The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to</b> teach the prohibition against deriving <b>benefit</b> from <b>its hide</b> after it has been killed. Were it not for this phrase, it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>it is written: “Its flesh shall not be eaten,”</b> only <b>its flesh is forbidden, but its hide is permitted.</b> Therefore, the words “and the owner of the ox is clean” teach that its hide is forbidden as well.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to those <i>tanna’im</i> who expound this</b> phrase: <b>“The owner of the ox shall be clear,” to</b> teach that the owner of an innocuous ox, i.e., one that is not known to cause damage with the intent to injure, is exempt from the payment of <b>half</b> of the <b>indemnity</b> incurred if that ox killed a person, or that he is exempt from <b>payment</b> of damages <b>for</b> miscarried <b>offspring</b> if his ox gores a pregnant woman and causes her to miscarry; <b>from where do they</b> derive this prohibition against <b>benefiting from</b> the ox’s <b>hide?</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: They derive it <b>from</b> the wording: <b>“Its flesh</b> may not be eaten [<i>velo ye’akhel <b>et besaro</b></i><b>].”</b> The verse could have been formulated: <i>Velo ye’akhel besaro</i>, which already means: And its flesh shall not be eaten. The addition of the word “<i>et</i>” teaches that the prohibition applies also to <b>that which is secondary to the flesh,</b> i.e., the hide. The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, who derives the prohibition against benefiting from the hide from the verse: “But the owner of the ox shall be clear,” what does he learn from the additional word “<i>et</i>”?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC