
### Part 1
<b>Had</b> the verse <b>stated: His ear to the door, I would say: He should pierce, opposite his ear, into the door</b> alone. In other words, with regard to <b>the door, yes,</b> it should be pierced, but <b>his ear</b> itself, <b>no,</b> it should not be pierced. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> how could it even be suggested that <b>his ear</b> should <b>not</b> be pierced? <b>But isn’t it written: “And his master shall pierce his ear with an awl”</b> (Exodus 21:6)?

### Part 2
<b>Rather, I would say</b> that the master <b>should pierce his ear outside,</b> i.e., not at the door, <b>and he should place it</b> afterward <b>on the door, and</b> then <b>he should pierce opposite his ear on the door.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And you shall take the awl and place it <b>through his ear and into the door”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:17). <b>How so? He bores through</b> his ear <b>until he reaches the door.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> adds: Since the verse states <b>“door,” I</b> would <b>derive</b> that this applies to any door, regardless of <b>whether</b> it is <b>detached</b> from its doorpost or <b>whether it is not detached.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “Then his master shall bring him to the court, and shall bring him to the door, or to the <b>doorpost”</b> (Exodus 21:6): <b>Just as a doorpost is upright</b> and attached, <b>so too, a door</b> must be <b>upright</b> and attached to the doorpost.

### Part 4
<b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai would expound this verse as a type of decorative wreath [<i>ḥomer</i>],</b> i.e., as an allegory: <b>Why is the ear different from all the other limbs in the body,</b> as the ear alone is pierced? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said:</b> This <b>ear heard My voice on Mount Sinai when I said: “For to Me the children of Israel are slaves”</b> (Leviticus 25:55), which indicates: <b>And</b> they should <b>not</b> be <b>slaves to slaves. And</b> yet <b>this</b> man <b>went and</b> willingly <b>acquired a master for himself.</b> Therefore, <b>let</b> this ear <b>be pierced.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>would</b> likewise <b>expound this verse as a type of decorative wreath: Why are the door and a doorpost different from all other objects in the house,</b> that the piercing is performed with them? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: The door and the doorpost were witnesses in Egypt when I passed over the lintel and</b> when I passed <b>over the two doorposts</b> of houses in which there were Jews (Exodus, chapter 12), <b>and I said: “For to Me the children of Israel are slaves,” and</b> they should <b>not</b> be <b>slaves to slaves. And I delivered them</b> at that time <b>from slavery to freedom, and</b> yet <b>this</b> man <b>went and acquired a master for himself.</b> Therefore, <b>let him be pierced before them,</b> as they are witnesses that he violated God’s will.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A Canaanite slave is acquired by</b> means of <b>money, by</b> means of <b>a document, or by</b> means of the master <b>taking possession</b> of him. <b>And he can acquire himself,</b> i.e., his freedom, <b>by</b> means of <b>money</b> given <b>by others,</b> i.e., other people can give money to his master, <b>and by</b> means of <b>a bill</b> of manumission if he accepts it <b>by himself.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> The slave can be freed <b>by</b> means of <b>money</b> given <b>by himself, and by</b> means of <b>a bill</b> of manumission if it is accepted <b>by others, provided that the money</b> he gives <b>belongs to others,</b> not to him. This is because the slave cannot possess property, as anything owned by a slave is considered his master’s.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that these are the modes by which a slave can be acquired? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written</b> with regard to Canaanite slaves: <b>“And you shall bequeath them to your children as an ancestral inheritance”</b> (Leviticus 25:46). <b>The verse juxtaposes</b> Canaanite slaves <b>to an ancestral field: Just as an ancestral field can be acquired by</b> means of <b>money, by</b> means of <b>a document, or by</b> means of the owner <b>taking possession</b> of it, <b>so too, a Canaanite slave can be acquired by</b> means of <b>money, by</b> means of <b>a document, or by</b> means of the master <b>taking possession</b> of him.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> so, perhaps one can interpret this juxtaposition differently: <b>Just as an ancestral field returns to its owners in the Jubilee</b> Year, <b>so too a Canaanite slave returns to his</b> prior <b>owners in the Jubilee</b> Year. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Of them you may take your slaves forever”</b> (Leviticus 25:46), which indicates that the sale is permanent.

### Part 9
A Sage <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that a Canaanite slave can <b>also</b> be acquired <b>by</b> means of symbolic <b>exchange,</b> i.e., a <i>pro forma</i> act of acquisition performed by the giving of an item, usually a kerchief, effecting the transfer of ownership of an article. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why doesn’t <b>the <i>tanna</i> of our</b> mishna mention acquisition through symbolic exchange? The Gemara answers: He <b>teaches</b> only the effectiveness of <b>modes</b> of acquisition <b>which are not</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of movable property,</b> as it is a novelty that these are effective, as one may have thought that a slave can be acquired only in the same manner as movable property is acquired. He does <b>not teach</b> the effectiveness of <b>modes</b> of acquisition <b>which are</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of movable property,</b> as it is not a novelty that a slave can be acquired in that manner.

### Part 10
<b>Shmuel says: A Canaanite slave can be acquired by</b> means of <b>pulling,</b> as can movable property. <b>How</b> is pulling performed in the case of a slave? If the master <b>took him by force and</b> the slave <b>came to him, he has</b> thereby <b>acquired him.</b> But if the master <b>called him and he came to him</b> willingly, <b>he has not acquired him.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>the <i>tanna</i> of our</b> mishna, it is clear why he did not list pulling as a mode of acquisition, as <b>he</b> does <b>not teach</b> the effectiveness of <b>modes</b> of acquisition <b>that are</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of movable property;</b> he <b>teaches</b> only the effectiveness of <b>modes</b> of acquisition <b>that are not</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of movable property.</b> Pulling is effective with movable property. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i>,</b> who taught the mode of symbolic exchange, <b>let him teach pulling</b> as well. The Gemara answers: <b>When he teaches</b> his <i>baraita</i>, which includes acquisition through symbolic exchange, he teaches the effectiveness of <b>modes</b> of acquisition <b>that are</b> effective in transferring the ownership of <b>both land and movable property. He does not teach</b> the effectiveness of <b>pulling, which is</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of movable property</b> but <b>is not</b> effective in transferring the ownership <b>of land.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara returns to analyze Shmuel’s statement: <b>How</b> does one acquire a slave through pulling? If the master <b>took him by force and he came to him,</b> he has <b>acquired him.</b> If <b>he called him and he came to him,</b> he has <b>not acquired him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> has he <b>not</b> acquired him if <b>he called him? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How</b> is an animal acquired <b>through passing?</b> If <b>he grabbed it by its hoof,</b> or <b>by its hair,</b> or <b>by the saddle on it,</b> or <b>by the load [<i>shalif</i> ] on it,</b> or <b>by the bit [<i>bifrumbiya</i>] in its mouth,</b> or <b>by the bell on its neck, he has acquired it.</b>

### Part 13
<b>How</b> is an animal acquired <b>by pulling?</b> If <b>he calls it and it comes, or he</b> if <b>hits it with a stick and it runs before him, once it lifts a foreleg and a hind leg</b> from where it was standing, he <b>acquires it. Rabbi Asi, and some say Rabbi Aḥa, says:</b> It is not enough if the animal lifts its feet. Rather, one does not acquire it <b>until it walks</b> the distance of <b>its full height in the presence of</b> the one acquiring it. In any event, this indicates that calling is an effective use of the mode of pulling.

### Part 14
The Sages <b>say</b> in response that there is a difference between the acquisition of a slave and that of an animal. <b>An animal walks by the will of its owner,</b> as it is domesticated and follows the orders of its master. Consequently, if it comes when called it is as though it was pulled. By contrast, <b>a slave walks by his own will.</b> Consequently, even if a slave comes when called, this cannot be considered acquisition through pulling, as the master has performed no act of acquisition. <b>Rav Ashi said: A slave who is a minor is considered like an animal.</b> Since he has no will of his own, he can be acquired through calling, like an animal.

### Part 15
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 1:5): <b>How</b> does one acquire a slave <b>though possession?</b> If the slave <b>removes</b> the master’s <b>shoe,</b> or <b>carries his garments after him to the bathhouse,</b> or <b>undresses him,</b> or <b>bathes him,</b> or <b>anoints him,</b> or <b>scrubs</b> the oil off him, or <b>dresses him,</b> or <b>puts on his shoes, or lifts him,</b> the master <b>acquires him. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> Acquisition through the mode of <b>possession should not be considered greater than</b> acquisition using the mode of <b>lifting, as lifting acquires</b> property <b>in any situation.</b> With regard to this last statement the Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>saying</b> here? The first <i>tanna</i> also said that a slave can be acquired by lifting.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Ashi says</b> that one can infer from the statement of the first <i>tanna</i>: If a slave <b>lifts his master,</b> the master <b>acquires him,</b> as he is performing labor for the master. But if <b>his master lifts</b> the slave, the master <b>does not acquire him,</b> as the slave has not performed labor for his master. With regard to this <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> Acquisition through <b>possession should not be greater than</b> acquisition through <b>lifting, as lifting acquires</b> property <b>in any situation.</b> Consequently, one can acquire a slave even by lifting him.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>Now that you said</b> that if a slave <b>lifts his master,</b> the master <b>acquires him,</b> consider the following ramification of this ruling: <b>If that is so, let a Canaanite maidservant be acquired by</b> means of <b>sexual intercourse</b> with the master, as it is possible to claim she lifts him during the act of intercourse. The Gemara answers: <b>When we say</b> that one acquires a slave through the labor the slave performs for him, that applies to a situation where <b>this</b> master <b>benefits and that</b> slave <b>suffers.</b> In this manner the master exercises his authority over the slave. <b>Here,</b> with regard to sexual intercourse, <b>it is</b> a case where <b>this</b> master <b>benefits and this</b> Canaanite maidservant likewise <b>benefits.</b> Since both sides derive benefit, it cannot be seen as an act of acquisition.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: If he engages in intercourse <b>in an atypical manner,</b> i.e., anal intercourse, with her, <b>what can be said?</b> In that case the woman does not benefit from the intercourse. <b>Rav Aḥai bar Adda of</b> the place called <b>Aḥa said: Who will tell us,</b> i.e., it is not obvious, <b>that there is no benefit for both of them,</b> i.e., there is benefit only for the man, when they engage in intercourse in an atypical manner? <b>And furthermore, it is written: “Lyings with a woman”</b> (Leviticus 18:22). The plural form indicates that there are two ways of engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman: In this manner <b>the verse compares typical</b> sexual intercourse <b>to</b> intercourse in <b>an atypical manner.</b>

### Part 19
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yehuda from India was a convert who had no heirs.</b> When <b>he became ill Mar Zutra entered to ask</b> about his health. When he <b>saw that his condition intensified,</b> i.e., that he was about to die, Mar Zutra <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda’s <b>slave: Remove my shoes and take them to my house.</b> He wanted to acquire the slave upon the death of his master, as when a convert without heirs dies, the first person to claim his property acquires it. The Gemara comments: <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this slave <b>was an adult man,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC