
### Part 1
If the animal killed <b>a man, who is commanded in</b> all <b>mitzvot, yes,</b> its owner should have to pay the ransom, but if the animal killed <b>a woman,</b> who is obligated in only some mitzvot, <b>no,</b> he is exempt from the ransom. <b>And</b> conversely: <b>If</b> the Torah had <b>taught us</b> that men and women are equated only in <b>this</b> case of the ransom, one might say that <b>because there is the loss of life the Merciful One has pity on her</b> and therefore the owner of the animal is always obligated to pay the ransom. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>those two</b> other categories, <b>I</b> might <b>say no,</b> a woman is not equated to a man. Therefore it was <b>necessary</b> to mention them all.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that women are obligated in all prohibitions <b>except for</b> the prohibitions of: <b>Do not round</b> the corners of one’s head, <b>and: Do not destroy</b> the corners of your beard, and: Do not contract ritual impurity from a corpse. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> a woman of priestly lineage is not obligated in the mitzva of: <b>Do not contract ritual impurity from a corpse, as it is written: “Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron,</b> and say to them: None shall become impure for the dead among his people” (Leviticus 21:1). This verse teaches that the prohibition applies to <b>the sons of Aaron, but not the daughters of Aaron. But from where do we</b> derive the prohibitions of: <b>Do not round</b> the corners of one’s head, <b>and: Do not destroy</b> the corners of your beard?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers that this is <b>as it is written: “You shall not round the corners of your head and you shall not destroy the corners of your beard”</b> (Leviticus 19:27). The juxtaposition of the two prohibitions teaches that <b>anyone who is</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against <b>destroying</b> the beard <b>is</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against <b>rounding</b> the head. <b>And since these women are not</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against <b>destroying, they are</b> also <b>not</b> included <b>in</b> the prohibition against <b>rounding</b> the head.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> women <b>are not</b> obligated <b>in</b> the prohibition against <b>destroying</b> the corners of one’s beard? The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, propose</b> a logical <b>reason, as</b> ordinarily women <b>do not have a beard. And if you wish, cite a verse</b> that teaches this point, <b>as the verse states: “You shall not round the corners of your head [<i>roshekhem</i>] and you shall not destroy the corners of your beard [<i>zekanekha</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 19:27).

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the verse changed its language,</b> as the term “your head [<i>roshekhem</i>]” is in the plural while “your beard [<i>zekanekha</i>]” is in the singular, it can be inferred that <b>if so,</b> if the prohibition against destroying one’s beard applied to everyone, <b>let the Merciful One write:</b> And you shall not destroy the <b>corners of your beards [<i>zekanekhem</i>],</b> in the plural, so that the end of the verse parallels the beginning. <b>What</b> is indicated by the fact that the verse states: “And you shall not destroy the corners of <b>your beard [<i>zekanekha</i>],”</b> in the singular? This serves to teach: <b>Your beard</b> is included, <b>but not your wife’s beard.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is a woman <b>not</b> included in this prohibition? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Nega’im</i> 4:8): <b>The beard of a woman and</b> that of <b>a eunuch, if they grow</b> facial <b>hair, are considered like a beard for all matters. What, is it not</b> the case that this statement is referring <b>to</b> the prohibition against <b>destroying?</b>

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said: You cannot say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to destroying, as it is derived</b> that a woman is exempt through the verbal analogy of <b>“the corners</b> of your beard” (Leviticus 19:27) here and <b>“the corners</b> of their beard” (Leviticus 21:5) <b>from the sons of Aaron: Just as there,</b> in the case of priests, <b>women are</b> certainly <b>exempt</b> from the mitzva, as the verse is referring to the male descendants of Aaron who perform the Temple service and not to women, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the prohibition against destroying one’s beard, which is stated to all Jews, <b>women are exempt.</b> At this stage the Gemara assumes that the exclusion of women denoted by the verse: “Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron” (Leviticus 21:1), which excludes women, is applied to all the mitzvot stated in that chapter, including destroying the corners of one’s beard.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But if we maintain that when</b> the Merciful One <b>writes: “The sons of Aaron”</b> (Leviticus 21:1), it <b>is written with regard to the entire manner</b> of that chapter, including the prohibition against destroying one’s beard, <b>let the verse,</b> i.e., the Torah, <b>be silent</b> and not state <b>about</b> this prohibition concerning all Jews. <b>And</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>could be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as <b>I</b> could <b>say</b> the following: <b>And if</b> with regard to <b>priests, for whom the verse includes additional mitzvot,</b> this prohibition applies only to <b>the sons of Aaron and not the daughters of Aaron,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> the case with regard to <b>Israelites,</b> who have fewer mitzvot, that only men should be obligated and not women?

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, the verbal analogy is necessary. <b>Were it not for</b> the <b>verbal analogy, I would say</b> that the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity <b>concluded</b> discussion of <b>that matter.</b> In other words, the exclusion of women denoted by the phrase “the sons of Aaron” applies only to the <i>halakhot</i> of impurity, which appear immediately after that phrase. Conversely, the other <i>halakhot</i> mentioned in this chapter, including the prohibition against destroying the beard, apply to women as well.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>now too, let us say</b> that the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity <b>concluded</b> discussion of <b>that matter,</b> and the daughters of Aaron are also prohibited to destroy their beards. <b>And if</b> you maintain that the reason the prohibition stated with regard to priests does not apply to women is <b>due to</b> the <b>verbal analogy</b> employing the term “the corners of,” which serves to connect the <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to priests with the <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to all Jews, that verbal analogy <b>is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to priests: <b>“Neither shall they shave off</b> the corners of their beard” (Leviticus 21:5). One <b>might</b> have thought that a priest <b>would be liable</b> even if <b>he shaved his</b> beard <b>with scissors.</b> Therefore <b>the verse states,</b> in a command issued to all Jews: <b>“And you shall not destroy</b> the corners of your beard” (Leviticus 19:27). This teaches that one is liable only for destroying the beard to the root, which is not achieved with scissors.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>if he extracted</b> his hairs <b>with tweezers,</b> which uproot hairs, <b>or</b> small <b>planes [<i>uvirhitni</i>], he should</b> likewise <b>be liable</b> for destroying his hair. <b>The verse</b> therefore <b>states: “Neither shall they shave off</b> the corners of their beard,” to teach that shaving alone is prohibited and these actions are not considered shaving. <b>How</b> can both <b>these</b> requirements for the prohibition be met? The verse is referring to a type of <b>shaving that involves destruction. You must say</b> this <b>is</b> shaving with <b>a razor.</b> According to this <i>baraita</i>, the verbal analogy is necessary to define the action included in the prohibition against destroying, not to teach who is included in the prohibition.

### Part 12
The Gemara explains: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the verbal analogy teaches only which action is included in the prohibition against destroying, <b>let the verse write: That which is of your beard. What</b> is added by the expression <b>“the corners of your beard”? Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from it,</b> both the definition of the prohibition against shaving and the exemption of women.

### Part 13
The Gemara returns to its question. <b>But that which is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The beard of a woman and</b> that of <b>a eunuch, if they grew</b> facial <b>hair, are considered like a beard for all matters, with regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is this stated? <b>Mar Zutra says:</b> It is stated <b>with regard to ritual impurity from leprosy.</b> A leprous sore in the beard of a woman or a eunuch is treated like an affliction of the beard, not like an affliction on the skin. Different <i>halakhot</i> apply to leprous sores that develop on various parts of the body.

### Part 14
The Gemara objects: Concerning <b>ritual impurity from leprosy, it is written explicitly: “And when a man or woman has a plague upon the head or upon the beard”</b> (Leviticus 13:29). This indicates that there is no difference between a man and woman with regard to the beard in the case of leprosy. The <i>baraita</i> would not state a <i>halakha</i> that is explicit in the verse. <b>Rather, Mar Zutra says:</b> This <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to ritual purification from leprosy,</b> i.e., women can also be purified from leprosy of the beard.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>ritual purification from leprosy it is also obvious: Since impurity applies to</b> a woman, <b>purity</b> likewise <b>applies to her.</b> The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary</b> to state this with regard to the impurity of afflictions of the beard, as <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that this verse <b>is written disjunctively,</b> i.e., that the phrase: <b>“And when a man or woman has a plague upon the head,”</b> applies to both a man or a woman; whereas when it states: <b>“Or upon the beard,” we have come back to</b> the case of <b>a man</b> alone. Therefore the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that this phrase is not referring solely to a man, as there is no difference between a man and a woman with regard to leprosy.

### Part 16
<b>Isi taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Women are also exempt</b> from the prohibition: <b>Do not make baldness</b> upon your heads, a prohibition against tearing out one’s hair in grief over someone’s death. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of Isi?</b> The Gemara explains <b>that he teaches as follows:</b> The verse states: <b>“You are the sons of the Lord your God; you shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead. For you are a holy people to the Lord your God”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:1–2). This verse, which applies to <b>sons and not daughters,</b> is referring <b>to</b> causing <b>baldness,</b> and therefore this prohibition includes only men.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: Do <b>you say</b> that this is referring <b>to</b> causing <b>baldness, or is it</b> perhaps referring <b>only to</b> the prohibition against <b>cutting,</b> which appears first? The Gemara answers that <b>when it states: “For you are a holy people to the Lord your God,”</b> it <b>is stated</b> with regard to the prohibition against <b>cutting,</b> and this verse applies to both men and women, as they are all members of God’s people. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> and explain the emphasis on <b>sons and not daughters?</b> This is referring <b>to</b> the prohibition against causing <b>baldness.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see to include cutting and to exclude</b> causing <b>baldness?</b> Perhaps the opposite is true, and causing baldness applies to men and women whereas cutting applies only to men. The Gemara answers: <b>I include cutting,</b> whose prohibition is broader, <b>as it is</b> applicable both <b>in a place of hair and not in a place of hair; and I exclude</b> causing <b>baldness,</b> which is more limited, <b>as it</b> applies <b>only in a place of hair.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that the limitation of <b>sons and not daughters</b> applies <b>both to</b> causing <b>baldness and to cutting, and when</b> the verse <b>writes: “For you are a holy people to the Lord your God,” that is written with regard to scoring</b> oneself. The prohibition against scoring oneself is derived from a verbal analogy from a verse stated with regard to priests (see Leviticus 21:5), which applies to both men and women. The Gemara answers: <b>Isi maintains</b> that <b>scoring</b> oneself <b>and cutting</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC