
### Part 1
the father is <b>deemed credible</b> concerning the ages of his children <b>with regard to vows,</b> i.e., any vow they make is valid; <b>and with regard to dedications,</b> i.e., if they consecrate an item by saying it should be dedicated to God; and <b>with regard to consecrations and with regard to valuations,</b> i.e., vows to donate to the Temple treasury the fixed valuation of oneself or others. In all these cases their vows are valid. <b>But</b> the father is <b>not</b> deemed credible <b>with regard to lashes</b> of the court, <b>or with regard to</b> other corporal <b>punishments</b> for transgressions they have committed, as the testimony of one witness, especially that of a family member, is insufficient for this purpose.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a father says: <b>I betrothed my</b> minor <b>daughter</b> to someone, or: <b>I betrothed her</b> to someone <b>and</b> accepted <b>her divorce when she was a minor girl, and she is</b> still <b>a minor girl</b> at the time of this statement, he is <b>deemed credible</b> to render her forbidden to all other men as a married woman, or to a priest as a divorced woman. But if he says: <b>I betrothed her</b> to someone <b>and</b> accepted <b>her divorce when she was a minor, and she is an adult woman</b> at the time of his declaration, his statement is <b>not deemed credible.</b> Likewise, if he says: <b>She was taken captive and I redeemed her, he is not deemed credible</b> to disqualify her from marrying a priest <b>whether she was a minor girl or an adult woman.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna <b>and what is different</b> in <b>the latter clause?</b> Why is the father deemed credible when she is a minor but not when she is an adult or to testify that she was taken captive? The Gemara answers: In <b>the first clause</b> it is still <b>in his power</b> to betroth her, and therefore he is deemed credible when he says that he did so earlier. By contrast, in <b>the latter clause</b> it is <b>not in his power</b> to betroth her, as one cannot betroth his adult daughter. Likewise, as it is not permitted for him to disqualify her by handing her over to a gentile, either when she is a minor or when she is an adult, he is not deemed credible when he says that she was taken captive.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> does a father <b>not</b> have the power to disqualify his daughter? <b>But</b> it is <b>in his power to marry</b> off his minor daughter <b>to a <i>ḥalal</i>,</b> i.e., the son of a priest who married a woman prohibited to him, <b>which</b> thereby <b>disqualifies her from</b> marrying into <b>the priesthood.</b> The father should therefore be deemed credible when he claims that she was taken captive.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as one can say that the mishna <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda, who says: The daughters of Israelites</b> are <b>a ritual bath of purity for individuals of <i>ḥalal</i> status.</b> In other words, an Israelite woman who marries a <i>ḥalal</i> purifies their children, i.e., renders their children fit, in that any daughter born to them is qualified to marry a priest. Similarly, the woman herself does not become disqualified by her intercourse with the <i>ḥalal</i>, and she may marry a priest if her husband dies. If so, a father does not have the power to disqualify his daughter from marrying into the priesthood.

### Part 6
The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> it is <b>in</b> the father’s <b>power to marry her</b> off <b>to a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> thereby disqualifying her from the priest-hood. The Gemara answers: This <i>tanna</i> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: Betrothal does not take effect</b> even <b>with</b> those women with whom one <b>is</b> only <b>liable</b> for violating <b>a prohibition</b> of engaging in intercourse and not a more severe prohibition that would render one liable for <i>karet</i> or capital punishment, so betrothal does not take effect with a <i>mamzer</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara further challenges: <b>But</b> it is <b>in</b> the father’s <b>power to marry her</b> off as <b>a widow to a High Priest, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Simai, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Simai says: In all</b> cases <b>Rabbi Akiva deems</b> the child <b>a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> i.e., he considers the offspring of all forbidden acts of intercourse to be <i>mamzerim</i>, <b>apart from a widow to a High Priest, as the Torah stated</b> with regard to a High Priest: “A widow…<b>shall he not take…and he shall not profane [<i>yeḥallel</i>]</b> his seed” (Leviticus 21:14–15). From this verse it is derived: <b>He renders</b> his children <b><i>ḥalalim</i></b> by means of this relationship, <b>but he does not render</b> them <b><i>mamzerim</i>.</b> Since this act of intercourse does not produce <i>mamzerim</i>, Rabbi Akiva agrees that betrothal is effective in this case.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> of the mishna holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yeshevav, who says: Come, let us shout at Akiva ben Yosef, who would say:</b> In <b>every</b> case where <b>a Jew may not engage in intercourse</b> with a particular woman, and he does so, <b>the offspring</b> that results from this union <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> This indicates that according to Rabbi Akiva all acts of forbidden intercourse produce <i>mamzerim</i>. Consequently, betrothal is of no effect in the case of any prohibition, including a widow to a High Priest, which means that a father cannot disqualify his daughter from the priesthood.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> mishna can <b>work out well</b> even <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yeshevav if</b> he states <b>a reasoning of his own,</b> i.e., he states an independent statement critical of Rabbi Akiva’s ruling that the child of any illicit union is a <i>mamzer</i>. Then, the ruling of the mishna is <b>well,</b> as it is a categorical statement that applies to all illicit unions. <b>But if he comes to exclude the reason of Rabbi Simai,</b> i.e., he means to take issue with the ruling of Rabbi Akiva in the specific case mentioned by Rabbi Simai, that of a widow to a High Priest, then Rabbi Yeshevav too concedes that according to the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, betrothal does take effect in a case where a positive mitzva is violated by the betrothal. Accordingly, it is <b>in</b> the father’s <b>power to marry her to those</b> with whom intercourse renders them <b>liable for</b> the violation of <b>positive</b> mitzvot, as Rabbi Akiva’s principle does not include cases of this kind.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi says: And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it that way? Can it be that the reason for the <i>halakha</i> in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna <b>is because</b> it is <b>in his power? Although</b> it is <b>in his power to betroth her,</b> is it <b>in his power to divorce her? And furthermore, if this one,</b> the prospective husband, <b>says that</b> it is <b>not satisfactory</b> for him <b>to</b> betroth <b>her, can</b> her father <b>betroth her to him against his will?</b> A father cannot betroth his daughter to whomever he chooses without taking the man’s wishes into account.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, Rav Ashi says:</b> In <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, the reason is that <b>the Merciful One believes him, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, as Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says: From where</b> is it derived that <b>a father is deemed credible to render his daughter forbidden</b> as a betrothed woman <b>by Torah law? As it is stated: “I gave my daughter to this man [<i>la’ish hazzeh</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:16). When the father said that he married her <b>to “the man [<i>la’ish</i>],” he rendered her forbidden</b> to all men. When he then said <b>“this [<i>hazzeh</i>],” he rendered her permitted</b> to this specific man, her husband.

### Part 12
Rav Ashi explains the ruling of the mishna: <b>The Merciful One deems the father credible with regard to marriage,</b> whereas He <b>does not deem him credible with regard to a captive.</b> The Torah did not grant a father any special credibility with regard to the claim that his daughter was taken captive.

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who said at the time of his death: I have children,</b> in which case his wife does not require levirate marriage after his death, he is <b>deemed credible.</b> But if he said on his deathbed: <b>I have brothers,</b> indicating that it is prohibited for her to marry anyone else until one of his brothers performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with her after his death, he is <b>not deemed credible.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Apparently,</b> one can infer from the mishna that a husband <b>is deemed credible to render</b> his wife <b>permitted but he is not deemed credible to render</b> her <b>forbidden.</b> The Gemara suggests: Shall <b>we say</b> that <b>the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Natan?</b>

### Part 15
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If someone <b>said at the time of</b> his <b>betrothal</b> that <b>he has children,</b> but <b>at the time of</b> his <b>death he said</b> that <b>he does not have children;</b> or if he <b>said at the time of betrothal</b> that <b>he does not have brothers,</b> and <b>at the time of death he said he has brothers,</b> in both cases he is <b>deemed credible to render</b> her <b>permitted,</b> i.e., to release her from the obligation of levirate marriage on the basis of his first statement, <b>but he is not deemed credible to render</b> her <b>forbidden</b> based on his last claim. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> He is <b>deemed credible even to render</b> her <b>forbidden.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rava says: There,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>it is different, since at the time of</b> his <b>death he retracted</b> his initial statement. Therefore, one can <b>say</b> that it is likely that <b>he spoke the truth.</b> In general, however, he is not deemed credible to render her forbidden. <b>Abaye said to him: And isn’t it all the more so</b> that he should be deemed credible in this case? Abaye elaborates: <b>Now</b> consider, <b>if there, where</b> he <b>weakens his</b> previous <b>statement,</b> as he now says the opposite of his earlier claim, nevertheless <b>you say</b> that <b>he spoke the truth,</b> in the case of <b>the mishna, where</b> he <b>does not weaken his</b> earlier <b>statement,</b> as he had issued no prior claim about having or lacking children or brothers, <b>is it not all the more so</b> that he should be deemed credible?

### Part 17
<b>Rather, Abaye said: The mishna</b> is referring to a case <b>where we</b> do not <b>have a presumptive status with regard to</b> possible <b>brothers</b> of his, <b>and</b> likewise <b>we</b> do <b>not have a presumptive status with regard to</b> his <b>children.</b> The court has no prior knowledge as to whether the dying man has brothers or children. <b>As we say: Since we</b> do <b>not</b> have <b>presumptive status with regard to either children or brothers,</b> if <b>he said: I have children,</b> he is <b>deemed credible,</b> whereas if he said: <b>I have brothers,</b> he is <b>not deemed credible.</b> Why? <b>It is not in his</b> power <b>to render her forbidden to everyone,</b> counter to the presumption that he has no brothers. By contrast, the <b><i>baraita</i></b> is referring to

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC