
### Part 1
<b>renders her a <i>zona</i>,</b> as he was forbidden to her, but <b>he does not render her a <i>ḥalala</i>,</b> since her status as a <i>zona</i> does not result from a prohibition specific to the priesthood, but due to the prohibition of a forbidden relative. If her brother, or any other priest, <b>again engaged in intercourse with her, he</b> thereby <b>makes her a <i>ḥalala</i>,</b> in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> pertaining to a priest who engages in intercourse with a <i>zona</i>.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says: A High Priest</b> who engages in sexual intercourse <b>with a widow is flogged two</b> sets of lashes, <b>one</b> set <b>due to</b> transgressing the prohibition of: “A widow, or one divorced, or a <i>ḥalala</i>, or a <i>zona</i>, these <b>shall he not take”</b> (Leviticus 21:14), <b>and one</b> set <b>due to</b> transgressing the prohibition of: “And <b>he shall not profane”</b> (Leviticus 21:15), since he profanes the woman with whom he engages in intercourse. The Gemara asks: <b>And let him also be flogged</b> with a third set of lashes <b>due to</b> the complete phrase: <b>“He shall not profane his offspring,”</b> because the offspring resulting from that act of intercourse is a <i>ḥalal</i>. The Gemara answers: It is referring to a situation <b>where he did not complete his</b> act of sexual <b>intercourse.</b> Since this act does not lead to pregnancy, he is not flogged for profaning his offspring.

### Part 3
<b>Rava raises an objection</b> against Rav Yehuda’s statement from a mishna (<i>Makkot</i> 13a): A High Priest who engages in sexual intercourse with <b>a widow</b> who was previously <b>a divorcée is flogged due to two labels</b> of prohibitions. <b>What, is it not</b> stating that he is flogged due to <b>two labels and no more?</b> This indicates that he receives only one flogging for each prohibition, and not two as Rav Yehuda taught.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No;</b> it means due to <b>two labels for this,</b> i.e., he is flogged two sets of lashes for engaging in intercourse with a widow, one for transgressing: “Shall he not take,” and one for transgressing: “He shall not profane,” <b>and two labels for that,</b> i.e., engaging in intercourse with a divorcée.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, say the latter clause</b> of that same mishna: If a priest engages in sexual intercourse with <b>a divorcée</b> who was <b>also a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>], he is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>due to only one</b> transgression, since a <i>ḥalutza</i> is not forbidden to a priest by Torah law. This is contrary to the opinion of Rav Yehuda, that he should receive two sets of lashes for engaging in intercourse with a divorcée. The Gemara answers: <b>This is</b> what the mishna <b>is saying: He is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>due to only one</b> act, that of engaging in intercourse with a divorcée, <b>but actually</b> he is liable to receive two sets of lashes for his act of intercourse with a divorcée, since she is forbidden due to <b>two labels.</b> He does not receive an additional set of lashes on account of her being a <i>ḥalutza</i>, as this prohibition is by rabbinic law.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is <b>a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> forbidden to a priest only <b>by rabbinic law? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It states in the Torah that a priest may not marry <b>a divorcée. I have</b> derived <b>only a divorcée; from where</b> do I derive that <b>a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> is also forbidden? <b>The verse states: “And a woman</b> divorced” (Leviticus 21:7), with the additional conjunction of “and” serving to include a <i>ḥalutza</i>, that she is also considered to be a type of divorced woman. The Gemara rejects this: Even so, this prohibition is only <b>by rabbinic law, and the verse is a mere support,</b> but it is not the true source of the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye says:</b> A priest who <b>betrothed</b> a woman forbidden to him <b>is flogged;</b> if he <b>engaged in sexual intercourse</b> with her he <b>is flogged</b> additional lashes. The Gemara clarifies this: If he <b>betrothed,</b> he <b>is flogged due to</b> transgressing the prohibition of: <b>“Shall he not take.”</b> If he also <b>engaged in intercourse,</b> he <b>is flogged due to</b> transgressing the prohibition of: <b>“He shall not profane.” Rava says:</b> If he <b>engaged in intercourse</b> he <b>is flogged;</b> if he <b>did not engage in intercourse, he is not flogged</b> at all, <b>because it is written: “Shall he not take…and he shall not profane,”</b> which Rava understands to mean: <b>For what reason</b> is he commanded <b>not to take?</b> It is <b>so that he not profane.</b> Rava holds that he is not liable for taking, i.e., betrothing, the woman, but only for engaging in intercourse with her, as this leads to profanation.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> although <b>Abaye</b> holds that the act of betrothal itself is forbidden, he <b>concedes in</b> the case of an Israelite who <b>remarries his divorcée</b> after she had been married to someone else in the interim, <b>that if he betrothed</b> her <b>without engaging in intercourse, he is not flogged.</b> Why not? It is as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah with regard to this prohibition: <b>“Take her again to be his wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:4), which indicates that the act of betrothal is forbidden only if it leads to the intimacy of marriage, <b>and</b> there is <b>no</b> such intimacy here since he has not engaged in intercourse with her.

### Part 9
<b>And</b> conversely, <b>Rava concedes in</b> the case of <b>a High Priest with a widow, that if he engaged in sexual intercourse without betrothing</b> her, <b>he is flogged</b> for the act of intercourse, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“And he shall not profane his offspring among his people”</b> (Leviticus 21:15), <b>and he has profaned</b> her with his act of intercourse. <b>And they both concede in</b> the case of the prohibition with regard to <b>one who remarries his divorcée that if he engaged in intercourse</b> with her <b>without betrothing</b> her <b>he is not flogged,</b> because <b>the Torah forbade</b> them to reestablish their union only <b>through the manner of taking,</b> i.e., betrothal, but it did not prohibit the act of intercourse on its own.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The daughter of a male convert is like the daughter of</b> a male <b><i>ḥalal</i>,</b> and is prohibited from marrying into the priesthood. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The daughter of a male convert is like the daughter of a male <i>ḥalal</i>,</b> and is prohibited from marrying into the priesthood. <b>And logic dictates</b> that this is so: <b>Just as</b> in the case of <b>a <i>ḥalal</i>, who comes from a fit drop</b> of semen, as both his parents are Jewish, <b>his daughter is</b> nevertheless <b>unfit</b> to marry into the priesthood, in the case of <b>a convert, who comes from an unfit drop,</b> as he was born a gentile, <b>is it not logical that his daughter should be unfit</b> to marry into the priesthood?

### Part 11
The Gemara counters this derivation: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a <i>ḥalal</i>?</b> He is notable <b>in that he is formed through a transgression,</b> whereas the gentile parents of a convert were permitted to engage in sexual intercourse with each other. Therefore, the <i>halakha</i> of the daughter of a <i>ḥalal</i> might be more stringent than the <i>halakha</i> of the daughter of a convert. The Gemara responds: The case of <b>a High Priest</b> who engages in intercourse <b>with a widow shall prove</b> that this aspect is not germane to the fitness of the offspring, <b>since the formation of</b> the High Priest <b>was not through a transgression, and</b> yet <b>his daughter is unfit</b> to marry into the priesthood, indicating that being formed through a transgression does not play a role in this matter.

### Part 12
The Gemara counters again: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a High Priest</b> who engages in intercourse <b>with a widow?</b> He is notable <b>in that his</b> act of <b>intercourse is a transgression.</b> This aspect is what leads to the stringent <i>halakha</i> that his daughter is unfit to marry into the priesthood. The Gemara responds: The case of <b>a <i>ḥalal</i> will prove</b> that this aspect is not germane to the fitness of the offspring, as his daughter is unfit despite the fact that his act of intercourse does not involve a transgression.

### Part 13
<b>And the derivation has reverted</b> to its starting point. <b>The aspect of this</b> person, a <i>ḥalal</i>, <b>is not like the aspect of that</b> person, a High Priest, as with regard to each of them there is a unique reason for the <i>halakha</i> to be stringent. Despite this, <b>their common denominator is that they are unlike most of the congregation,</b> in that they both differ from Jews of unflawed lineage, either because their formation or their act of sexual intercourse involved a transgression, and their daughters are therefore unfit to marry into the priesthood. <b>I will also bring</b> the case of <b>the convert, who is unlike most of the congregation, and</b> therefore <b>his daughter is</b> also <b>unfit to marry</b> into the priesthood.

### Part 14
This is rejected: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about their common denominator is that</b> the reason they are not like most of the congregation <b>includes an aspect of a transgression,</b> either with regard to their formation or to their act of intercourse. Therefore, the <i>halakha</i> of the daughter of a convert cannot be derived from them.

### Part 15
The Gemara modifies the proof: <b>Do not say</b> that <b>a High Priest</b> who engages in sexual intercourse <b>with a widow will prove</b> it; <b>rather, say</b> that <b>a first</b>-generation male <b>Egyptian</b> convert who married a first-generation female Egyptian convert <b>will prove</b> it. Although their intercourse does not involve a transgression, their offspring are nevertheless unfit to marry into the priesthood, as Egyptians may enter into the congregation only after three generations.

### Part 16
This proof is also rejected: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about a first</b>-generation <b>Egyptian?</b> He is notable <b>in that he is not fit to enter into the congregation</b> at all, and that is why his offspring may not marry into the priesthood. The Gemara responds that <b>a <i>ḥalal</i> will prove</b> that this aspect is not germane to the fitness of the offspring, since his daughter is unfit to marry into the priesthood although his offspring may enter into the congregation.

### Part 17
<b>And the derivation has reverted</b> to its starting point, as the <i>halakha</i> of the daughter of a convert cannot be derived from the case of the Egyptian alone or from the case of the <i>ḥalal</i> alone. <b>The aspect of this</b> person, an Egyptian convert, <b>is not like the aspect of that</b> person, a <i>ḥalal</i>, as with regard to each of them there is a unique reason for the <i>halakha</i> to be stringent. Despite this, <b>their common denominator is that they are unlike most of the congregation,</b> in that they both differ from Jews of unflawed lineage and their <b>daughters are</b> consequently <b>unfit</b> to marry into the priesthood. <b>I will also bring</b> the case of <b>the convert, who is unlike most of the congregation, and</b> therefore <b>his daughter is</b> also <b>unfit to marry</b> into the priesthood.

### Part 18
The Gemara rejects this: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about their common denominator is that they disqualify</b> the daughter of a priest from marrying a priest <b>through their</b> act of <b>intercourse,</b> which is not the case with a convert. The Gemara explains: <b>And Rabbi Yehuda</b> holds that <b>a convert also disqualifies</b> the daughter of a priest from marrying a priest <b>through his</b> act of <b>intercourse, and he derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> that the daughter of a convert is unfit to marry into the priesthood <b>by</b> means of an analogy derived from <b>the common factor</b> of two sources, i.e., <b>from this <i>halakha</i></b> of a <i>ḥalal</i> and of an Egyptian.

### Part 19
§ The mishna states that <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says</b> that the daughter of <b>a convert</b> and a Jewish woman is fit to marry into the priesthood. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: A female</b> who <b>converts</b> at <b>less than three years and one day</b> old <b>is fit to</b> marry into <b>the priesthood, as it is stated</b> after the war with Midian: <b>“But all the female children</b> who have not known a man by lying with him, <b>keep alive for yourselves”</b> (Numbers 31:18), i.e., you may marry them. <b>But wasn’t Pinehas</b> the priest <b>with them,</b> and yet the Torah permitted these women to all of them, which indicates that girls who are not of age when they convert are permitted even to priests. <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that even a girl who converts at less than three years and one day old is unfit to marry into the priesthood, interpret this verse? In their opinion, <b>“keep alive for yourselves”</b> means <b>as slaves and as maidservants,</b> but not for marriage.

### Part 20
The Gemara comments: <b>And all of</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> who have a dispute with regard to the fitness of the daughter of a convert for marrying into the priesthood <b>expounded a single verse.</b> It states with regard to priests: <b>“Neither shall they take as their wives a widow, nor her that divorced; but they shall take virgins of the seed of the house of Israel”</b> (Ezekiel 44:22). <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds:</b> A priest may marry a woman <b>only if the entire seed is from</b> those born to <b>the Jewish people,</b> but not if one of the parents is a convert. <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov holds: “Of the seed</b> of the house of Israel” indicates that not all of the seed must come from the house of Israel, <b>and even</b> if <b>part of the seed</b> is from the house of Israel, that is sufficient to allow her to marry a priest.

### Part 21
<b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who holds that even the daughter of two converts is permitted to marry into the priesthood, <b>holds</b> that “of the seed of the house of Israel” means <b>one who was seeded,</b> i.e., conceived, <b>in Israel,</b> and the children of converts were conceived by Jewish parents. And <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai,</b> who permits a female who converted at less than three years and one day old to marry into the priesthood, <b>holds</b> that the phrase “virgins of the seed of the house of Israel” is referring to <b>one whose hymen was formed as a Jew,</b> i.e., a woman who was already Jewish when her hymen completed its formation, which occurs at the age of three.

### Part 22
<b>Rav Naḥman said to Rava:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC