
### Part 1
<b>I would say to the Satan: An arrow in your eye,</b> i.e., I would not be afraid of the evil inclination at all. <b>Rava said to Rabbi Natan bar Ami: While your hand is still on your son’s neck,</b> i.e., while you still have authority and control over him, find him a wife. What is the appropriate age? <b>From sixteen until twenty-two, and some say from eighteen until twenty-four.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara notes that this is <b>like</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> based on the verse: <b>“Train a child in the way that he should go”</b> (Proverbs 22:6). <b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya</b> disagreed about the age in which the verse instructs the parent to educate his child: <b>One said</b> that the verse is referring to the ages <b>from sixteen until twenty-two, and one said</b> it is referring to the ages <b>from eighteen until twenty-four.</b> The dispute concerning the correct age for marriage and the dispute about educating a child are the same, as while a father still has a large measure of influence over his son, he must both teach him and find him a wife.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara continues its discussion of a father’s obligation to teach his son Torah. <b>To what</b> extent <b>is a person obligated to teach his son Torah? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> One should emulate the education of, <b>for example, Zevulun ben Dan,</b> a contemporary of Shmuel, <b>whose father’s father taught him Bible, Mishna, Talmud, <i>halakhot</i>, and <i>aggadot</i>. The Gemara raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: If a father <b>taught</b> his son <b>Bible,</b> he is <b>not</b> required to <b>teach him Mishna. And Rava said</b> in explanation of this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Bible is</b> the <b>Torah,</b> not the Prophets or Writings, i.e., he is not required to teach him anything else, including Mishna.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers that Shmuel’s statement should be understood as follows: One should teach his son <b>like Zevulun ben Dan was taught</b> in certain aspects, <b>but not like Zevulun ben Dan</b> in other respects. One should teach his son <b>like Zevulun ben Dan</b> in <b>that his father’s father taught him; but not like Zevulun ben Dan, as there</b> he was taught <b>Bible, Mishna, Talmud, <i>halakhot</i>, and <i>aggadot</i>, while here,</b> in this <i>baraita</i>, one is required to teach his son <b>Bible alone.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But is one’s father’s father obligated</b> to teach him Torah? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, that the verse: <b>“And you shall teach them to your sons”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:19), indicates: <b>But not your sons’ sons? And how do I realize,</b> i.e., understand, the meaning of the verse: <b>“But make them known to your sons and to your sons’ sons”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:9)? This serves <b>to say to you</b> that <b>whoever teaches his son Torah, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he taught him, and his son, and his son’s son, until the end of all generations.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara answers that the <i>tanna</i> of this <i>baraita</i> <b>stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: From the verse <b>“And you shall teach them to your sons” I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that you must teach <b>your sons. From where do</b> I derive that there is an obligation to teach <b>your sons’ sons? The verse states: “But make them known to your sons and to your sons’ sons.” If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Your sons”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:19), which implies only sons? This limitation teaches: <b>Your sons, but not your daughters.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: Anyone who teaches his son’s son Torah, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he received it from Mount Sinai, as it is stated: “But make them known to your sons and to your sons’ sons,” and juxtaposed to it</b> is the phrase in the verse: <b>“The day when you stood before the Lord your God in Horeb”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:10), as Horeb is Mount Sinai.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: Once <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba encountered Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi,</b> and saw <b>that he had placed</b> an inexpensive <b>covering on his head and brought</b> his <b>child to the synagogue</b> to study. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba <b>said to him: What</b> is the reason for <b>all this</b> fuss, as you are in such a hurry that you do not have time to dress yourself properly? <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said to him: Is it insignificant, that which is written: “But make them known to your sons,” and juxtaposed to it</b> is the phrase in the verse that states: <b>“The day when you stood before the Lord your God in Horeb”?</b> The Gemara comments: <b>From this</b> moment <b>onward, Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba would not taste meat [<i>umtza</i>],</b> meaning he would not eat breakfast, <b>before he had read to</b> his <b>child and added to</b> the child’s studies from the day before. Similarly, <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna would not taste meat before he had brought</b> his <b>child to the study hall.</b>

### Part 9
§ <b>Rav Safra says in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And you shall teach them diligently [<i>veshinnantam</i>] to your sons”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:7)? <b>Do not read</b> this as <b>“<i>veshinnantam</i>,”</b> with the root <i>shin</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>nun</i>, which indicates a repetition. <b>Rather,</b> read it as <b><i>veshillashtam</i>,</b> with the root <i>shin</i>, <i>lamed</i>, <i>shin</i>, related to the word three, <i>shalosh</i>. This means that one must study, review, and study again, thereby dividing one’s studies into three parts.

### Part 10
In light of this statement, the Sages said that <b>a person should always divide his years into three</b> parts, as follows: <b>A third for Bible, a third for Mishna, and a third for Talmud.</b> The Gemara asks: How can a person divide his life this way? <b>Who knows the length of his life,</b> so that he can calculate how long a third will be? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary for</b> one’s <b>days,</b> i.e., one should divide each day of his life in this manner.

### Part 11
<b>Therefore,</b> because they devoted so much time to the Bible, the <b>first</b> Sages <b>were called: Those who count [<i>soferim</i>],</b> because <b>they would count all the letters in the Torah, as they would say</b> that the letter <b><i>vav</i></b> in the word <b>“belly [<i>gaḥon</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 11:42) <b>is the midpoint of the letters in a Torah scroll.</b> The words: <b>“Diligently inquired [<i>darosh darash</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 10:16), <b>are the midpoint of the words</b> in a Torah scroll. And the verse that begins with: <b>“Then he shall be shaven”</b> (Leviticus 13:33), is the midpoint <b>of</b> the <b>verses.</b> Similarly, in the expression: <b>“The boar out of the wood [<i>miya’ar</i>] ravages it”</b> (Psalms 80:14), <b>the <i>ayin</i> in</b> the word wood <b>[<i>ya’ar</i>]</b> is the <b>midpoint of Psalms,</b> with regard to its number of letters. The verse: <b>“But He, being full of compassion, forgives iniquity”</b> (Psalms 78:38), <b>is the midpoint</b> of <b>verses</b> in the book of Psalms.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yosef raises a dilemma:</b> Does the <b><i>vav</i> of</b> the word <b>“belly [<i>gaḥon</i>]”</b> belong <b>to this side or to this side?</b> Is it part of the first or second half of the Torah? The Sages <b>said to him: Let us bring a Torah scroll and count</b> the letters. <b>Didn’t Rabba bar bar Ḥana say</b> with regard to a different issue: <b>They did not move from there until they brought a Torah scroll and counted</b> the letters? Therefore we can do the same. Rav Yosef <b>said to them: They</b> were <b>experts</b> in the <b>deficient and plene</b> forms of words and therefore could count the letters precisely. <b>We are not experts</b> in this regard, and therefore we would be unable to resolve the question even if we were to count the letters.

### Part 13
Similarly, <b>Rav Yosef raises a dilemma:</b> Does the midpoint of the verses in the Torah, which is <b>“then he shall be shaven,”</b> belong <b>to this side or to this side? Abaye said to him:</b> Even if we cannot count the letters, <b>we can at least bring</b> a Torah scroll <b>to count the verses.</b> Rav Yosef explained: <b>We are not experts about verses either, as when Rav Aḥa bar Adda came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said: In the West,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, <b>they divide this</b> following <b>verse into three</b> separate <b>verses: “And the Lord said to Moses, behold I come to you in a thick cloud,</b> that the people may hear when I speak with you, and may also believe you forever; And Moses told the words of the people to the Lord” (Exodus 19:9). Perhaps there are other verses that we do not know how to divide properly.

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught: Five thousand eight hundred and eighty-eight verses are the verses in a Torah scroll. Psalms has eight more</b> verses <b>than that,</b> and <b>Chronicles</b> has <b>eight fewer</b> verses <b>than that.</b>

### Part 15
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states: <b>“And you shall teach them diligently [<i>veshinnantam</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:7). The root <i>shin</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>nun</i>, of <i>veshinnantam</i> should be understood as meaning sharp, i.e., <b>that matters of Torah should be sharp</b> and clear <b>in your mouth,</b> so <b>that if a person asks you something, do not stutter</b> in uncertainty <b>and say</b> an uncertain response <b>to him. Rather, answer him immediately, as it is stated:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC