
### Part 1
<b>One may not send greetings to a woman</b> even with a messenger, as this may cause the messenger and the woman to relate to each other inappropriately. Rav Naḥman countered by suggesting that he send his greetings <b>with her husband,</b> which would remove all concerns. Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel says: One may not send greetings to a woman at all.</b> Yalta, <b>his wife,</b> who overheard that Rav Yehuda was getting the better of the exchange, <b>sent</b> a message <b>to him: Release him</b> and conclude your business with him, <b>so that he not equate you with another ignoramus.</b>

### Part 2
Desiring to release Rav Yehuda, Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master is here?</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: The Master sent me a summons.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Now</b> that <b>I have not</b> even <b>learned the Master’s</b> form of <b>speech,</b> as you have demonstrated your superiority to me by reproving me even over such matters, <b>could I</b> have <b>sent a summons to the Master?</b> Rav Yehuda <b>removed the summons from his bosom and showed it to him.</b> While doing so, Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Here is the man and here is the document.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Since the Master has come here, let him present his statement, in order that</b> people <b>should not say: The Sages flatter one another</b> and do not judge each other according to the letter of the law.

### Part 3
Rav Naḥman commenced the deliberation, and <b>said to him: What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master excommunicated that man?</b> Rav Yehuda replied: <b>He caused discomfort to an agent</b> of one <b>of the Sages,</b> and therefore he deserved the punishment of one who causes discomfort to a Torah scholar. Rav Naḥman challenged this answer: If so, <b>let the Master flog him, as Rav would flog one who causes discomfort to an agent of the Sages.</b> Rav Yehuda responded: <b>I</b> punished <b>him more severely than that.</b> Rabbi Yehuda held that excommunication is a more severe punishment than flogging.

### Part 4
Rav Naḥman further inquired: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master proclaimed about him that he is a slave?</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him:</b> Because he <b>is in the habit of calling people slaves, and</b> it <b>is taught: Anyone who disqualifies</b> others by stating that their lineage is flawed, that is a sign that he himself <b>is</b> of <b>flawed</b> lineage. Another indication of his lineage being flawed is that <b>he never speaks in praise</b> of others. <b>And Shmuel said: He disqualifies with his</b> own <b>flaw.</b> Rav Naḥman retorted: You can <b>say that Shmuel said</b> this <i>halakha</i> only <b>to</b> the degree that one should <b>suspect him</b> of being of flawed lineage. But <b>did he</b> actually <b>say</b> this <b>to</b> the extent that one could <b>proclaim about him</b> that he is of flawed lineage?

### Part 5
The Gemara continues the story: <b>Meanwhile, that litigant arrived from Neharde’a. That litigant said to Rav Yehuda: You call me a slave? I, who come from the house of the Hasmonean kings?</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel says: Anyone who says: I come from the house of the Hasmonean</b> kings, <b>is a slave.</b> As will be explained, only slaves remained of their descendants.

### Part 6
Rav Naḥman, who heard this exchange, <b>said to</b> Rav Yehuda: <b>Does the Master not hold in accordance with this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that Rabbi Abba says</b> that <b>Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> With regard to <b>any Torah scholar who proceeds to teach</b> a ruling of <b><i>halakha</i></b> with regard to a particular issue, <b>if he said it before an action</b> that concerns himself occurred, <b>they</b> should <b>listen to him,</b> and his ruling is accepted. <b>But if not,</b> if he quoted the <i>halakha</i> only after he was involved in an incident related to the <i>halakha</i> he is quoting, <b>they do not listen to him,</b> due to his personal involvement? Your testimony with regard to what Shmuel ruled should be ignored, as you stated it only after the incident. Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> Rav Naḥman: <b>There is Rav Mattana, who stands by my</b> report, since he has also heard this ruling of Shmuel.

### Part 7
The Gemara continues: <b>Rav Mattana had not seen</b> the city of <b>Neharde’a</b> for <b>thirteen years. That</b> very <b>day he arrived.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him:</b> Does <b>the Master remember what Shmuel said when he was standing</b> with <b>one foot on the bank and one foot on the ferry?</b> Rav Mattana <b>said to him: This is what Shmuel said</b> at that time: <b>Anyone who says: I come from the house of the Hasmonean</b> kings, <b>is a slave, as none remained of them except for that young girl who ascended to the roof and raised her voice and said:</b> From now on, <b>anyone who says: I come from the house of the Hasmonean</b> kings, <b>is a slave.</b> Other than this girl, the only members of the family who remained were descendants of Herod, and he was an Edomite slave.

### Part 8
The girl then <b>fell from the roof and died,</b> leaving only slaves from the Hasmoneans. With the confirmation of the report of the statement of Shmuel, <b>they</b> also <b>publicized</b> in Neharde’a <b>about him,</b> i.e., that man who claimed to come from the Hasmonean kings, <b>that he was a slave.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: On <b>that day, several marriage contracts were torn up in Neharde’a,</b> as many had their marriages annulled after having discovered that they had married slaves. <b>When</b> Rav Yehuda <b>was leaving</b> Neharde’a, <b>they pursued him,</b> seeking <b>to stone him,</b> as because of him it was publicized that their lineage was flawed. Rav Yehuda <b>said to them: If you are silent,</b> remain <b>silent. And if</b> you will <b>not</b> remain silent, <b>I will reveal about you this</b> statement <b>that Shmuel said: There are two</b> lines of <b>offspring in Neharde’a. One is called the dove’s house, and one is called the raven’s house. And your mnemonic</b> with regard to lineage is: The <b>impure</b> bird, the raven, is <b>impure,</b> meaning flawed, and the <b>pure</b> one, the dove, is <b>pure,</b> meaning unflawed. Upon hearing this, <b>they threw</b> all <b>those</b> stones that they were intending <b>to stone him</b> with <b>from their hands,</b> as they did not want him to reveal who had a flawed lineage. <b>And</b> as a result of all of the stones thrown into the river, <b>a dam arose in the Malka River.</b>

### Part 10
§ The Gemara continues the discussion of those with a flawed lineage: <b>Rav Yehuda proclaimed in Pumbedita: Adda and Yonatan,</b> known residents of that town, are <b>slaves; Yehuda bar Pappa</b> is a <b><i>mamzer</i>; Bati bar Tuviyya, in his arrogance, did not accept a bill of manumission</b> and is still a slave. <b>Rava proclaimed in</b> his city of <b>Meḥoza: Balla’ai, Danna’ai, Talla’ai, Malla’ai, Zagga’ai: All</b> these families <b>are</b> of <b>flawed</b> lineage. <b>Rav Yehuda</b> likewise <b>says: Gova’ai,</b> the inhabitants of a place called Gova, are in fact <b>Gibeonites,</b> and their name has been corrupted. Similarly, those people known as <b>Dorenunita</b> are from <b>the village of Gibeonites,</b> and they may not marry Jews with unflawed lineage. <b>Rav Yosef says:</b> With regard to <b>this</b> place called <b>Bei Kuvei of Pumbedita,</b> its residents <b>are all</b> descendants <b>of slaves.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Four hundred slaves, and some say four thousand slaves, were owned by Pashḥur ben Immer,</b> a priest in the time of Jeremiah, <b>and</b> due to their greatness <b>they were assimilated into the priesthood</b> and became known as priests. <b>And any priest who has</b> the trait of <b>insolence is only from them. Abaye said: They all sit in the rows</b> of honor <b>that are in</b> the city of <b>Neharde’a.</b> The Gemara comments: And this statement <b>disagrees with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar says: If you see an insolent priest, do not speculate about him</b> that he may be of flawed lineage, <b>since it is stated: “For your people are as those who strive with a priest”</b> (Hosea 4:4), which indicates that priests had a reputation for being cantankerous.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara discusses an idea raised earlier. <b>Rabbi Avin bar Rav Adda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> Concerning <b>anyone who marries a woman who is not suited for him</b> to marry, <b>when the Holy One, Blessed be He, rests His Divine Presence</b> upon the Jewish people, <b>He testifies with regard to all the tribes</b> that they are His people, <b>but He does not testify with regard to he</b> who married improperly, <b>as it is stated: “The tribes of the Lord, as a testimony to Israel”</b> (Psalms 122:4). <b>When is it a testimony to Israel? When the tribes are the tribes of the Lord,</b> but not when their lineage is flawed.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: When the Holy One, Blessed be He, rests His Divine Presence, He rests it only upon families of</b> unflawed lineage <b>among Israel, as it is stated: “At that time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of Israel”</b> (Jeremiah 30:25). <b>Of all Israel, is not stated, but “of all the families,”</b> which includes only those of unflawed lineage, the renowned families of Israel.

### Part 14
The verse from Jeremiah ends with the words <b>“And they shall be my people.” Rabba bar Rav Huna says: This is a higher standard</b> that differentiates <b>between</b> those born as <b>Jews and converts, as with regard to</b> those born as <b>Jews it is written about them: “And I will be their God, and they shall be My people”</b> (Ezekiel 37:27), <b>whereas with regard to converts it is written: “For who is he that has pledged his heart to approach unto Me? says the Lord. And you shall be My people, and I will be your God”</b> (Jeremiah 30:21–22). This teaches that converts are not drawn close to God, as indicated by the words “And I will be your God,” until they first draw themselves near to God, as indicated by the subsequent phrase “And you shall be my people.”

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Ḥelbo says: Converts are</b> as <b>difficult for the Jewish people as a scab.</b> The proof is <b>that it is stated: “And the convert shall join himself with them, and they shall cleave [<i>venispeḥu</i>] to the house of Jacob”</b> (Isaiah 14:1). <b>It is written here “<i>venispeḥu</i>,” and it is written there,</b> among the types of leprosy: <b>“And for a sore and for a scab [<i>sappaḥat</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 14:56). The use of a term with a similar root indicates that converts are like a scab for the Jewish people.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina says: When the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC