
### Part 1
In the case of <b>one who sells a promissory note to another, and</b> he, the seller, <b>went back and forgave</b> the debtor his debt, <b>it is forgiven,</b> since the debtor essentially had a non-transferable obligation to the creditor alone. <b>And even</b> the creditor’s <b>inheritor can forgive</b> the debt. It can be explained <b>that</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel.</b> Since the man can forgive the debt, the woman will not rely on her ability to collect using the promissory note she has received for her betrothal. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>is not of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel;</b> the woman relies on her ability to collect using the promissory note and is betrothed.

### Part 2
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel, and here</b> they <b>disagree with regard to a woman</b> who is becoming betrothed. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that <b>a woman relies</b> on a promissory note she receives, since <b>she says</b> to herself: <b>He would not leave</b> aside <b>my</b> benefit <b>and forgive</b> the debt <b>of others. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>even a woman</b> who received the promissory note for betrothal <b>does not rely</b> on being able to collect the debt, since she is concerned he might forgive it.

### Part 3
Having enumerated several possibilities for the dispute in the case of a loan with a promissory note, the Gemara explains the dispute in the case of a loan by oral agreement: In the case of one who betroths a woman <b>with a loan</b> by <b>oral</b> agreement, <b>with regard to what do they disagree?</b> They disagree <b>with regard to</b> the statement <b>of Rav Huna,</b> who quoted a statement that <b>Rav says, as Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> If one said to another: <b>I have one hundred dinars in your possession, give it to so-and-so,</b> if he stated this <b>in the presence of</b> all <b>three</b> parties, i.e., the one who had the money, the one who was the owner of the money, and the intended recipient, the intended recipient <b>has acquired</b> it.

### Part 4
One <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>when Rav said</b> that it can be acquired in the presence of all three parties, <b>this applies in</b> the case of <b>a deposit,</b> since the item is intact. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a loan,</b> which is meant to be spent, he did <b>not</b> rule that it can be transferred this way, since there is no actual money but merely a debt. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds:</b> There <b>is no difference</b> whether it is <b>a loan or a deposit.</b> The third party acquires it in both cases. A woman is therefore betrothed if he gave her a loan in the above manner.

### Part 5
The Gemara again suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that Rav’s statement that one cannot betroth a woman with a loan is <b>subject to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> A <i>baraita</i> teaches: If one says to a woman: <b>Be betrothed to me with a document, Rabbi Meir says she is not betrothed, and Rabbi Elazar says she is betrothed, and the Rabbis say</b> the court <b>appraises the paper</b> the document is written on: <b>If</b> the paper itself <b>has the value of one <i>peruta</i>, she is betrothed. But if not, she is not betrothed.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara clarifies the case of this <i>baraita</i>: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>this document? If we say</b> it is <b>a promissory note</b> of a debt owed him <b>by others,</b> then the statement <b>of Rabbi Meir</b> is <b>difficult</b> in light of another statement <b>of Rabbi Meir,</b> as he stated in the previous <i>baraita</i> that a woman can be betrothed by giving her a promissory note. <b>Rather,</b> this <i>baraita</i> must be referring <b>to a promissory note of</b> a debt owed him by <b>her, and they disagree with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with a loan.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says</b> that this is not necessarily so. <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where he betrothed her with a document</b> of betrothal <b>that had no witnesses to it.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Meir</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as he says</b> with regard to a bill of divorce: <b>Signatory witnesses</b> on the bill of divorce <b>effect</b> the divorce, and the same applies to a document of betrothal. Since no witnesses signed the document, it cannot be used for betrothal. <b>And Rabbi Elazar</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as he says: Witnesses to the transmission</b> of the bill of divorce <b>effect</b> the divorce, and she is betrothed if the document was handed over in the presence of witnesses. <b>And the Rabbis are uncertain if</b> the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> or <b>if</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar. Therefore,</b> they rule that the betrothal is not effected by means of the document, but it is betrothal effected by means of giving an item worth money. The court <b>appraises the paper: If it has the value of one <i>peruta</i>, she is betrothed. But if not, she is not betrothed.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that this <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where he wrote</b> the document of betrothal <b>not for her sake,</b> i.e., not for this particular woman’s sake. <b>And they disagree with regard to</b> a statement <b>of Reish Lakish, as Reish Lakish asks: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a document of betrothal that</b> the scribe <b>wrote not for her sake?</b> The Gemara clarifies the question: Do <b>we juxtapose becoming</b> a wife through betrothal <b>to leaving</b> a marriage through divorce and say: <b>Just as</b> in the document that causes her to <b>leave</b> the marriage <b>we require</b> that it be written <b>for her sake, so too,</b> in the document that causes her to <b>become</b> betrothed <b>we require</b> that it be written <b>for her sake as well. Or perhaps we juxtapose</b> different ways of <b>becoming</b> betrothed <b>to each other: Just as</b> in the act of <b>becoming</b> betrothed by means <b>of money we do not require</b> that money be minted <b>for her sake</b> and he can use any money, <b>so too,</b> with regard to the act of <b>becoming</b> betrothed by means <b>of a document, we do not require</b> that it be written <b>for her sake.</b>

### Part 10
<b>After</b> Reish Lakish <b>raised the dilemma,</b> he <b>then resolved it:</b> The verse states: <b>“And she departs</b> out of his house and goes <b>and becomes</b> another man’s wife” (Deuteronomy 24:2). The verse thereby <b>juxtaposes</b> the verb <b>becoming to</b> the verb <b>leaving,</b> so a bill of divorce and a document of betrothal must be written for her sake to be valid. <b>One Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Reish Lakish,</b> and maintains that she is not betrothed if the document was not written for her sake. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Elazar, <b>is not of</b> the opinion that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Reish Lakish.</b> The Rabbis remain uncertain, and therefore view the case as betrothal by means of giving an item worth money.

### Part 11
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone is of</b> the opinion that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Reish Lakish, and with what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where he wrote</b> the document <b>for her sake but unbeknownst to her. And</b> they <b>disagree concerning the dispute between Rava and Ravina, and Rav Pappa and Rav Sherevya, as it was stated</b> that these <i>amora’im</i> engaged in a dispute with regard to the following issue: If <b>he wrote</b> a document of betrothal <b>for her sake but unbeknownst to her</b> and gave it to her for betrothal, <b>Rava and Ravina say she is betrothed; Rav Pappa and Rav Sherevya say she is not betrothed.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara again suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that Rav’s statement that one cannot betroth a woman with a loan is <b>subject to</b> a dispute between <b>these <i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a woman gave gold to a goldsmith, instructing him: <b>Make bracelets, earrings, and rings for me, and I will be betrothed to you</b> as payment for your work, <b>once he has made them she is betrothed;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: She is not betrothed until money enters her possession.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>this money</b> mentioned by the Rabbis? <b>If we say</b> it means <b>that</b> very <b>money,</b> i.e., the jewelry she requested, then <b>by inference the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that <b>even that</b> same <b>money is also not</b> required to be given for her to be betrothed, but she is betrothed as soon as he made the jewelry. <b>But with what</b> does he betroth her? It is only <b>with</b> the jewelry that she <b>is betrothed,</b> since he has given her nothing but the jewelry. <b>Rather, is</b> the statement of the Rabbis <b>not</b> referring to when he betroths her <b>with</b> the <b>other money,</b> i.e., the payment she owes him for his service, and they hold that she is not betrothed? <b>And conclude from it</b> that Rabbi Meir and the Rabbis <b>disagree with regard to one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with a loan,</b> since the payment she owes him for making the rings is like a loan.

### Part 14
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And</b> it must be <b>they hold that everyone agrees</b> that the obligation to pay <b>a wage is</b> incurred continuously <b>from the beginning</b> of the period he was hired <b>to</b> its <b>end,</b> i.e., the obligation to pay for a service begins when the hired party starts to work, and the sum owed increases as he proceeds. <b>And it is</b> therefore <b>a loan,</b> as when he gives her the finished article she was already obligated to pay for the work he had performed earlier. <b>What, is it not</b> the case that they <b>disagree with regard to this,</b> i.e., <b>that</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that in the case of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with a loan, she is betrothed, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that in the case of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with a loan, she is not betrothed?</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is possible that <b>everyone</b> agrees that in the case of <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with a loan, she is not betrothed, and here</b> they in fact <b>disagree</b> over the question of whether or not the obligation to pay <b>a wage is</b> incurred continuously <b>from the beginning</b> of the period he was hired <b>to</b> its <b>end.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC