
### Part 1
<b>“Her brother-in-law will engage in sexual intercourse with her and take her to him as a wife,</b> and perform levirate marriage with her” (Deuteronomy 25:5), which indicates that intercourse renders her his wife. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that <b>with regard to all matters</b> she is <b>like a wife,</b> and therefore she can also be acquired with money or a document like any other woman. The Gemara answers: It could <b>not enter your mind</b> to say this, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>money and a document can complete</b> the acquisition of a <i>yevama</i> and cause her to be married, <b>in the manner that intercourse completes</b> her acquisition. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And perform levirate marriage with her”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:5), which indicates that only <b>intercourse completes her</b> acquisition, <b>but money or a document do not complete her</b> acquisition.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say: What</b> is the meaning of: <b>“And perform levirate marriage with her”?</b> It teaches <b>that he can perform levirate marriage without her consent,</b> as unlike an ordinary marriage, a levirate marriage does not require the woman’s agreement. The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse say: And perform levirate marriage,</b> and one would understand that the matter depends entirely on him. <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>“And perform levirate marriage with her”? Learn two</b> conclusions <b>from this:</b> First, that a levirate marriage can be performed against her will, and second, that the only way to acquire a <i>yevama</i> is through sexual intercourse.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches that the <i>yevama</i> acquires herself <b>through <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written</b> with regard to levirate marriage, after the <i>yavam</i> has performed <i>ḥalitza</i>: <b>“And his name shall be called in Israel: The house of him who had his shoe removed”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:10). This indicates: <b>Once</b> his <b>shoe is removed by her, she is permitted to all of Israel.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> term <b>“Israel,” does it come</b> to teach <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>? <b>It is required for that which is taught</b> by <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda:</b> The verse says <b>“in Israel”</b> to teach that <i>ḥalitza</i> may be performed only <b>in a Jewish court, but not in a gentile court.</b> The Gemara answers that the phrase <b>“in Israel” is written twice</b> in that chapter: “And his name shall be called in Israel” (Deuteronomy 25:10), and: “To establish a name for his brother in Israel” (Deuteronomy 25:7). A different <i>halakha</i> is derived from each of these instances.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But still, we</b> also <b>require</b> the additional term “in Israel” <b>for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, that <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: Once we were sitting before Rabbi Tarfon and a <i>yevama</i> came to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>. And</b> Rabbi Tarfon <b>said to us</b> after the <i>ḥalitza</i>: <b>All of you</b> should <b>answer and say: The one whose shoe was removed, the one whose shoe was removed.</b> This indicates that the phrase: “And his name shall be called in Israel” (Deuteronomy 25:10), teaches that the matter must be announced and publicized throughout the nation. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> <i>halakha</i> is not derived from the phrase “in Israel.” Rather, <b>it is derived from: “And his name shall be called,”</b> which indicates that it must be announced that this is his name.

### Part 6
§ The mishna further teaches that a <i>yevama</i> is released from levirate marriage and may remarry <b>through the death of the <i>yavam</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that it is <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If,</b> with regard to <b>a married woman, who is</b> forbidden to other men by a prohibition punished <b>with strangulation,</b> and yet <b>the death of her husband renders her permitted,</b> is <b>it not all the more so</b> that with regard to <b>a <i>yevama</i>, who is</b> forbidden to other men while the <i>yavam</i> is alive <b>by</b> only a mere <b>prohibition,</b> that the death of the <i>yavam</i> should render her permitted?

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty against this <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a married woman</b> is <b>that she can leave through a bill of divorce</b> as well. Will <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to this</b> <i>yevama</i>, <b>who does not leave through a bill of divorce?</b> The Gemara answers: This is an insufficient refutation of the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, as <b>this</b> <i>yevama</i> <b>also leaves through <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> which serves the same function as a bill of divorce.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> one can challenge this <i>a fortiori</i> inference in the following manner. <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a married woman</b> is <b>that</b> the one who <b>renders her forbidden</b> to everyone else, i.e., her husband, also <b>renders her permitted</b> when he dies. This is not so with regard to a <i>yevama</i>, as she is rendered forbidden upon the death of her husband. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> With regard to <b>this</b> <i>yevama</i> <b>as well,</b> he who <b>renders her forbidden</b> is also the one who <b>renders her permitted:</b> The <b><i>yavam</i> renders her forbidden,</b> because if he was not alive she would automatically be permitted to other men. Likewise, the <b><i>yavam</i> renders her permitted</b> through <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And let a married woman leave</b> a marriage <b>through <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> as derived <b>by an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If a <i>yevama</i>, who cannot leave through a bill of divorce, can leave through <i>ḥalitza</i>, is it not logical</b> that <b>this</b> married woman, <b>who can leave through a bill of divorce, can</b> likewise <b>leave through <i>ḥalitza</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to a married woman: <b>“A scroll of severance”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:3), which indicates that <b>a scroll,</b> i.e., a written document, <b>severs her</b> from her husband <b>and nothing else severs her</b> from him. While the husband is alive only a bill of divorce can dissolve a marriage.

### Part 10
The Gemara further asks: <b>And let a <i>yevama</i> leave through a bill of divorce,</b> as derived <b>by an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If a married woman, who cannot leave through <i>ḥalitza</i>, can leave through a bill of divorce, is it not logical</b> that <b>this</b> <i>yevama</i>, <b>who can leave through <i>ḥalitza</i>, can</b> also <b>leave through a bill of divorce?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states: “So</b> shall it be done to the man” (Deuteronomy 25:9), with regard to the <i>ḥalitza</i> of a <i>yevama</i>, <b>and “so” precludes</b> another option.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is it true that <b>anywhere that there is</b> a term that <b>precludes</b> another option <b>one cannot learn an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference? <b>But there is</b> the case of the designation of the goats on <b>Yom Kippur, as it is written:</b> “The goat upon which the <b>lot</b> came up for the Lord” (Leviticus 16:9), <b>and:</b> “This shall be an everlasting <b>statute</b> to you” (Leviticus 16:34), which indicates that everything stated with regard to the mitzvot of Yom Kippur is critical to the performance of the service of the day.

### Part 12
<b>And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the verse states: “Aaron shall bring forward the goat upon which the lot came up for the Lord, <b>and he shall offer it for a sin-offering”</b> (Leviticus 16:9). The verse indicates that <b>the lottery renders</b> it <b>a sin-offering,</b> but <b>a verbal designation</b> of the goat with the status of a sin-offering <b>does not render</b> it <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: A verse is necessary to teach this <i>halakha</i>, <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the opposite conclusion is correct: Could this <b>not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference,</b> as follows: <b>Just as in a case in which</b> the use of <b>a lottery does not effect the consecration</b> of the animals with a specific designation, e.g., with regard to a woman who has given birth and must bring two birds, one as a sin-offering and one as a burnt-offering, and nevertheless <b>a verbal designation</b> of the animals with the required status <b>does effect the consecration</b> of them, so too, in <b>a case in which</b> the use of <b>a lottery does effect the consecration</b> of the animals, <b>is it not</b> logically <b>right that a verbal designation</b> of the animals with the required status <b>should effect the consecration</b> of them?

### Part 14
To counter this reasoning, <b>the verse states</b> with regard to the goat: <b>“He shall offer it for a sin-offering”</b> (Leviticus 16:9), to indicate that <b>the lottery renders</b> it <b>a sin-offering, but a verbal designation</b> of the goat with the status of a sin-offering <b>does not render</b> it <b>a sin-offering. And the reason</b> that a verbal designation is ineffective <b>is that the verse excluded</b> this possibility, from which it may be inferred <b>that if it were not so, one would learn an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, <b>even though it is written with regard to it “statute.”</b> The same logic should apply in the case of <i>ḥalitza</i>, i.e., the term “so” should not prevent one from learning an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, and therefore it might be argued that a <i>yevama</i> can be released through a bill of divorce.

### Part 15
Rather, the Gemara explains that here too, there is a limitation derived from a verse. <b>The verse states</b> with regard to a bill of divorce: “And write <b>for her</b> a scroll of severance” (Deuteronomy 24:3). <b>“For her”</b> is a limitation, which teaches: A bill of divorce is effective for a regular woman <b>but not for a <i>yevama</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that the phrase <b>“for her”</b> indicates that the bill of divorce must be written <b>for her sake.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: <b>“For her” is written twice</b> (Deuteronomy 24:1, 3), and therefore both <i>halakhot</i> can be derived. The Gemara asks: <b>And still, one</b> instance of: <b>“For her” is required</b> to teach that the bill of divorce must be written <b>for her sake, and the other “for her”</b> is needed to teach: For her <b>and not</b> both <b>for her and for another,</b> i.e., her rival wife. One bill of divorce cannot be used for two women.

### Part 17
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara suggests a different explanation as to why a bill of divorce is ineffective for a <i>yevama</i>. With regard to a <i>yevama</i> <b>the verse states:</b> “The house of him who had his <b>shoe</b> removed” (Deuteronomy 25:10), which teaches: If she is released by the <i>ḥalitza</i> of the <b>shoe, yes,</b> she is released from the <i>yavam</i>, but if she was released by means of <b>something else, no,</b> she is not released.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>But this</b> term <b>“shoe,” does it come</b> to teach <b>this? It is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse said: “And remove <b>his shoe”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:9). <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>his shoe</b> may be used. <b>From where</b> do I derive that the <b>shoe of any person</b> may also be used for <i>ḥalitza</i>?

### Part 19
<b>The verse states “shoe,”</b> and states again in the next verse <b>“shoe,”</b> which <b>includes</b> any other shoe. <b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states “his shoe,”</b> which is apparently referring to the shoe of that particular man? This teaches that it must be <b>his shoe that is fit for him, excluding</b> a shoe so <b>large that he cannot walk in it,</b> and <b>excluding</b> a shoe so <b>small that it does not cover most of his foot,</b> and <b>excluding</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC