
### Part 1
both the term: <b>Coming, and</b> the term: <b>Dwelling, are written:</b> “When you come into the land of your dwellings” (Numbers 15:2). How, then, can Rabbi Yishmael cite this example to teach about cases where only the term dwelling is written? The Gemara answers that <b>this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: This teaches that wherever</b> both <b>coming and dwelling are stated,</b> it applies <b>only after inheritance and settlement</b> of Eretz Yisrael; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> consider that <b>Rabbi Akiva said to him:</b> But there is the verse stated with regard to <b>Shabbat</b> (Leviticus 23:3), <b>in which it is stated “dwellings,” and</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>said to him: Shabbat is derived through an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. But <b>let</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>say to</b> Rabbi Akiva instead: <b>I say</b> my principle only when <b>coming and dwelling</b> are both written, and in the case of Shabbat the verse states only the term dwelling. The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yishmael <b>states one</b> reason <b>and</b> adds <b>another</b> reason. <b>One</b> reason is <b>that I say</b> my principle only when <b>coming and dwelling</b> are written together. <b>And another</b> reason: With regard to <b>that which you say</b> that there is the case of <b>Shabbat, in which it is stated “dwellings,” Shabbat is derived through an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do</b> Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva <b>disagree?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They disagree</b> with regard to whether the Jews <b>sacrificed libations in the wilderness. Rabbi Yishmael maintains: They did not sacrifice libations in the wilderness,</b> as the obligation to sacrifice libations came into effect only once they were living in Eretz Yisrael. <b>And Rabbi Akiva maintains: They did sacrifice libations in the wilderness.</b> Rabbi Akiva derives a different <i>halakha</i> from the term dwelling.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said: This</b> statement of the <b><i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael,</b> that only when the terms coming and dwelling are both written does the mitzva takes effect after settling Eretz Yisrael, <b>diverges from another</b> statement of the <b><i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 5
This is <b>as</b> the <b><i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Since</b> instances of <b>coming</b> to Eretz Yisrael <b>are mentioned in the Torah</b> in connection to several mitzvot, <b>without specifying</b> precisely when the Jewish people are considered to have arrived there, <b>and the verse specified in one of</b> its references that it applies only <b>after inheritance and settlement</b> of Eretz Yisrael, in the mitzva of appointing a king: “When you come to the land…and you inherit it and settle it” (Deuteronomy 17:14), <b>so too, wherever</b> coming to the land is mentioned without qualification, it means <b>after inheritance and settlement.</b> According to this opinion, there is no need for the verse to also mention the term dwelling.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> the <b>other</b> <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael, cited in the dispute with Rabbi Akiva, would say that this is no proof, <b>because there is</b> not only the case of <b>a king</b> but also the mitzva of <b>first fruits,</b> where the verse also uses the terms of coming, inheriting, and dwelling (see Deuteronomy 26:1). Consequently, these are <b>two verses that come as one,</b> i.e., to teach the same matter. <b>And any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> a precedent that applies to other cases.

### Part 7
<b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, i.e., the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael cited by Abaye, would answer: Both these cases <b>are necessary,</b> as one cannot be derived from the other. <b>As, if the Merciful One</b> had <b>written</b> this matter only with regard to <b>a king, and had not written</b> it concerning <b>first fruits, I would say:</b> This delay applies only to the mitzva of appointing a king, whereas with regard to the mitzva of <b>first fruits, since one benefits</b> from eating the fruit he should have to bring it <b>immediately</b> and not wait until the land has been inherited and settled. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>had</b> the Merciful One <b>written</b> this matter only with regard to <b>first fruits and had not written</b> it in the case of <b>a king, I would say</b> that as it is <b>the manner of a king to conquer,</b> one must be appointed <b>immediately,</b> even before entering Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 8
<b>And the other,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael, cited in the dispute with Rabbi Akiva, would respond: <b>Let the Merciful One write</b> this with regard to <b>a king, and it would not be required</b> to write it in the case of <b>first fruits,</b> as <b>I would say: And if a king, whose</b> task is <b>to conquer</b> Eretz Yisrael, nevertheless is appointed only <b>after inheritance and settlement,</b> with regard to <b>first fruits</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> reasonable that a similar <i>halakha</i> apply to them? If so, these are two verses that come as one, which do not teach a precedent.

### Part 9
<b>And the other,</b> i.e., the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael cited by Abaye, would say: <b>If</b> the Merciful One had <b>written this</b> only with regard to a king, <b>I would say</b> that the Jews should be obligated in the mitzva of first fruits immediately upon entering Eretz Yisrael, and I would not derive the <i>halakha</i> of first fruits from that of appointing a king, <b>just as it is with regard to</b> the separation of <b><i>ḥalla</i>,</b> another priestly gift from one’s produce, which applied immediately upon the entrance to Eretz Yisrael. Therefore the verse is necessary, as it <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And now that you said</b> that <b>an obligation of the body applies both in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>why do I</b> need the term <b>“dwelling” that the Merciful One writes with regard to Shabbat</b> (Leviticus 23:3)? The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to say this, as <b>it might enter your mind to say: Since</b> the mitzva of Shabbat <b>was written in the context of the Festivals, it should require sanctification</b> by the court, <b>like the Festivals,</b> which rely on the sanctification of the New Moon by the court. Therefore the verse <b>teaches us</b> that this is not required.

### Part 11
The Gemara further asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the term <b>dwelling, which the Merciful One writes with regard to</b> the consumption of forbidden <b>fat and blood</b> in the verse: “A perpetual statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings, that you shall eat neither forbidden fat nor blood” (Leviticus 3:17)? The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to state this, as <b>it might enter your mind to say: Since</b> these prohibitions <b>are written in the context of the offerings,</b> then <b>when there is an offering</b> and the priests sacrifice fat and blood upon the altar, i.e., when the Temple is standing, that is when forbidden <b>fat and blood are forbidden</b> for consumption. But <b>when there is no offering,</b> forbidden fat and blood are <b>not</b> forbidden. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that they are always forbidden.

### Part 12
Additionally, the Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the term <b>dwelling, which the Merciful One writes with regard to <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs,</b> in the verse: “In all your dwellings you shall eat <i>matza</i>” (Exodus 12:20)? The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to state this, as <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since it is written: “They shall eat</b> the Paschal offering <b>with <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs”</b> (Numbers 9:11), <b>when there is a Paschal offering, yes,</b> one must eat it with <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs, but <b>when there is no Paschal offering,</b> i.e., when the Temple is not standing, there is <b>no</b> obligation to eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that these mitzvot apply every Passover, whether or not the Temple is standing.

### Part 13
The Gemara further asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the term <b>coming, which the Merciful One writes with regard to phylacteries and the firstborn donkey,</b> at the start of the Torah passage which discusses these mitzvot: “And it shall be when the Lord will bring you into the land of the Canaanite” (Exodus 13:11)? The Gemara answers: <b>That verse is necessary for that which</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Perform this mitzva</b> of donning phylacteries, <b>on account of which</b> you shall be rewarded and <b>enter Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks about the term dwelling, written in connection to the prohibition of the new crop. <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that the term <b>dwelling indicates wherever you dwell, this</b> explains the fact <b>that it is written</b> with regard to the Jewish people immediately after they entered Eretz Yisrael: <b>“And they ate the produce of the land on the morrow after the Passover”</b> (Joshua 5:11). This means that <b>on the day after the Passover</b> they <b>ate</b> the produce of Eretz Yisrael, but <b>initially,</b> before that date, they <b>did not eat</b> it. <b>Apparently,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC