
### Part 1
<b>And it is</b> only <b>now</b> that <b>the Persians moved</b> the bridge further <b>up</b> northward. <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: Until where does</b> the border extend <b>on this</b> western <b>side of the Euphrates? Rav Yosef said to him: What are you thinking?</b> Why do you ask? Is it <b>due to</b> the town of <b>Biram?</b> Even <b>those of</b> pure <b>lineage</b> who live in <b>Pumbedita marry</b> women <b>from Biram,</b> which demonstrates that the residents of Biram are presumed to have unflawed lineage.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Pappa says: Just as</b> there is <b>a dispute</b> between Rav and Shmuel as to the northern border of Babylonia with regard <b>to lineage, so</b> is there <b>a dispute with regard to bills of divorce.</b> An agent bringing a bill of divorce from a country overseas to Eretz Yisrael must state that it was written and signed in his presence. If he brought it from Babylonia, there is no requirement for him to state this. Rav Pappa is teaching that the borders that define Babylonia with regard to this issue are the same as the borders with regard to lineage. <b>And Rav Yosef says:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is <b>with regard to lineage, but with regard to bills of divorce, everyone agrees</b> that it is considered Babylonia <b>up to the second lake of the bridge</b> that Shmuel mentioned.

### Part 3
<b>Rami bar Abba said:</b> The province of <b>Ḥaveil Yamma is the glory of Babylonia</b> with regard to lineage; <b>Shunya and Guvya</b> are <b>the glory of Ḥaveil Yamma. Ravina said:</b> The town of <b>Tzitzora</b> is <b>also</b> like Shunya and Guvya. <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ḥanan ben Pineḥas says: Ḥaveil Yamma is the glory of Babylonia; Shunya and Guvya and Tzitzora</b> are <b>the glory of Ḥaveil Yamma. Rav Pappa says: And nowadays, Samaritans have assimilated with them,</b> and their lineage is problematic. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> that <b>is not so.</b> Rather, one Samaritan <b>requested</b> to marry <b>a woman from them and they would not give</b> her <b>to him,</b> which led to the rumor that Samaritans had assimilated with them. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is this region called <b>Ḥaveil Yamma? Rav Pappa said: This</b> is the area near the <b>Euphrates</b> adjacent <b>to Bursi.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who said to</b> the Sages: <b>I am from</b> a place called <b>Shot Mishot. Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa stood on his feet and said: Shot Mishot is located between the</b> Tigris and Euphrates <b>Rivers.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And if it is located between the rivers, what of it?</b> What <i>halakha</i> is this relevant for? <b>Abaye said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ukva says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says:</b> The area <b>between the rivers is like the exile,</b> meaning Pumbedita, <b>with regard to lineage.</b> The Gemara inquires: <b>And where is</b> the area between the rivers <b>located</b> for the purpose of this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: From Ihi Dekira and upward,</b> i.e., northward. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say: Until the crossing at Gizma</b> but no further? <b>Abaye said: A strip extends</b> from that region past Ihi Dekira.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ika bar Avin says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥananel says</b> that <b>Rav says: Ḥillazon Nihavnad is like the exile with regard to lineage. Abaye said to them: Do not listen to</b> Rav Ika bar Avin about this, as <b>it was a <i>yevama</i></b> who <b>fell before him</b> from <b>there</b> to perform levirate marriage, and he said that its lineage was unflawed because he wished to marry her. Rav Ika bar Avin <b>said to him: Is that to say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> <b>is mine? It is Rav Ḥananel’s,</b> and it is not reasonable to say that I was influenced by my own interests in stating it. <b>They went and asked Rav Ḥananel. He said to them: Rav said as follows: Ḥillazon Nihavnad is like the exile with regard to lineage.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this <b>disagrees</b> with the statement <b>of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana, as Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> with regard to the exile of the ten tribes of the kingdom of Israel: <b>“And he put them in Halah, and in Habor, on the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes”</b> (II Kings 18:11)? <b>Halah is Ḥillazon; Habor is Hadyav; the river of Gozan is Ginzak; the cities of the Medes are Ḥamadan and its neighboring towns, and some say: This is Nihavnad and its neighboring towns.</b> Since the ten tribes assimilated with the gentiles, the lineage of Jews from those places is flawed, unlike that which was taught before.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are the <b>neighboring towns</b> of Nihavnad? <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b>city</b> of <b>Mushekhei, Ḥosekei, and Rumekei. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And</b> all of these are the same with regard <b>to flawed</b> lineage. <b>It was assumed</b> that <b>Mushekhei is</b> the same as <b>Mushekanei.</b> The Gemara therefore asks: <b>But doesn’t Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin say</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Mushekanei is like the exile with regard to lineage? Rather,</b> it must be that <b>Mushekhei is discrete, and Mushekanei is discrete.</b>

### Part 8
In connection to the aforementioned places, the Gemara analyzes the following verse, describing a vision of a bear-like animal: <b>“And it had three ribs in its mouth between its teeth”</b> (Daniel 7:5). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This is Ḥillazon, Hadyav, and Netzivin, which</b> the Persian government <b>sometimes swallows and sometimes discharges.</b> In other words, control over these places passed from the Persians to the Romans and back again several times.

### Part 9
The first part of that verse stated: <b>“And behold a second beast, similar to a bear”</b> (Daniel 7:5). <b>Rav Yosef taught: These are Persians, who eat and drink</b> copious amounts <b>like a bear, and are corpulent like a bear, and grow hair like a bear, and have no rest like a bear,</b> which is constantly on the move from one place to another. <b>When Rabbi Ami saw a Persian riding, he would say: This is a bear on the move.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to Levi: Show me Persians,</b> i.e., describe a typical Persian to me. Levi <b>said to him:</b> They <b>are similar to the legions of the house of David.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said: <b>Show me Ḥabbarin,</b> Persian priests. Levi said to him: They <b>are similar to angels of destruction.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said: <b>Show me Ishmaelites.</b> Levi said to him: They <b>are similar to demons of an outhouse.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said: <b>Show me Torah scholars of Babylonia.</b> Levi said to him: They <b>are similar to ministering angels.</b>

### Part 11
<b>When Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>was dying, he said</b> prophetically: <b>There is</b> a place called <b>Homanya in Babylonia,</b> and <b>all its</b> people are the sons <b>of Ammon. There is</b> a place called <b>Masgariya in Babylonia,</b> and <b>all its</b> people are <b><i>mamzerim</i>. There is</b> a place called <b>Bireka in Babylonia,</b> and <b>there are two brothers</b> there <b>who exchange wives with each other,</b> and their children are therefore <i>mamzerim</i>. <b>There is</b> a place called <b>Bireta DeSatya in Babylonia. Today they turned away from the Omnipresent.</b> What did they do? <b>A ditch with fish overflowed, and they went and trapped</b> the fish <b>on Shabbat. Rabbi Aḥai, son of Rabbi Yoshiya, excommunicated them, and they</b> all <b>became apostates. There is</b> a place called <b>Akra DeAgma in Babylonia. There is</b> a man named <b>Adda bar Ahava there.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC