
### Part 1
<b>A convert requires</b> the presence of <b>three</b> Jews for his conversion. <b>What is the reason</b> for this requirement? <b>It is written with regard to</b> a convert: “You shall have one manner of <b>law,</b> for the convert as for the homeborn” (Leviticus 24:22), which indicates that a conversion is <b>considered a judgment</b> that requires three judges. And if he requires three judges, <b>who says that those three will be available to him?</b> Since he cannot convert at a time of his choosing, it is not considered within his power to convert.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abba bar Memel objects to this: If that is so,</b> and anything that is in one’s power to perform is not considered lacking in its action, <b>one who gives one <i>peruta</i> to his</b> Canaanite <b>maidservant and says: You are hereby betrothed to me after I emancipate you, so too</b> will you say <b>that it is a betrothal</b> because he has the power to emancipate her? The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> the Canaanite maidservant <b>initially</b> had the legal status of <b>an animal,</b> i.e., she is not subject to betrothal at all, whereas <b>now</b> she has <b>an independent mind.</b> Once she has been emancipated she has the status of a Jew and is not considered the same person at all. Consequently, the attempted betrothal is certainly considered lacking an action.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But that which Rabbi Oshaya says:</b> With regard to <b>one who gives one <i>peruta</i> to his wife and says to her: You are hereby betrothed to me after I divorce you, she is not betrothed, so too according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> will you say <b>that it is a betrothal</b> because he has the power to divorce her? The Gemara answers: <b>Although he has the power to divorce her,</b> does <b>he have the power to betroth her</b> against her will? It is not in his power to effect the betrothal, as once she has divorced him the matter is no longer exclusively dependent upon him.

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: Being that it is not in his power to effect the betrothal, you can use this logic to <b>resolve</b> the <b>dilemma raised</b> by <b>Rav Oshaya:</b> What is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>one who gives two <i>perutot</i> to a woman,</b> and <b>with one he says to her: Be betrothed to me today, and with</b> the other <b>one he says to her: Be betrothed to me after I divorce you?</b> What is her status after he divorces her? That dilemma was left unanswered, and the Gemara suggests that you can <b>resolve from here that it is not a betrothal.</b> The Gemara explains that this case is different, and Rav Oshaya’s dilemma was actually as follows: <b>Perhaps</b> in that situation, <b>just as the betrothal is effective now, it is also effective afterward.</b> Since she is currently under her own authority and agrees to betroth herself to him, it is possible that she can now consent to a betrothal that will take effect at a later time.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan: One may not separate <i>teruma</i> from the detached for the attached, and if he separated <i>teruma</i>, his <i>teruma</i> is not <i>teruma</i>. How so?</b> If <b>he said: The detached produce of this garden bed will be <i>teruma</i> for the attached produce of this garden bed,</b> or: <b>The attached produce of this garden bed will be <i>teruma</i> for the detached produce of this garden bed, he has not said anything</b> of consequence, as the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> applies only to detached produce. <b>But</b> if <b>he said</b> that the attached produce will be <i>teruma</i> <b>when they will be detached, and they become detached, his statement is valid,</b> as he has the power to detach them.

### Part 6
<b>Moreover, Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov said</b> that <b>even</b> if <b>one said: The detached produce of this garden bed will be <i>teruma</i> for the attached produce of this garden bed,</b> or: <b>The attached produce of this garden bed will be <i>teruma</i> for the detached produce of this garden bed when they,</b> i.e., the attached produce, <b>will reach one-third</b> of their growth <b>and are detached,</b> although at the time they had yet to ripen which means that the obligations of <i>terumot</i> and tithes do not apply to them, when <b>they will reach one-third</b> of their growth <b>and are detached, his statement is upheld.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabba says: Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says</b> this ruling <b>only with regard to fodder,</b> produce that has grown stalks even if it is not yet ripe. <b>But</b> he did <b>not</b> refer <b>to</b> produce that is still completely <b>soft [<i>agam</i>]. Rav Yosef says:</b> He <b>even</b> referred <b>to soft</b> produce. In relation to this dispute, the Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred that this</b> word <b><i>agam</i> is a term of growth [<i>butzlana</i>]?</b> The Gemara answers that <b>Rabbi Elazar said</b> that this is <b>as the verse states: “Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush [<i>ke’agmon</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 58:5), i.e., like a soft, drooping plant.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is <b>that which is taught</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who says to another: If your wife gives birth to a female she is betrothed to me, he has not said anything? And Rabbi Ḥanina says: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the other’s <b>wife is not pregnant. But</b> if <b>his wife is pregnant his statement is upheld. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this ruling? The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> can be explained in accordance with everyone’s opinion. <b>If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba,</b> it is referring to a situation <b>where her fetus was</b> already <b>noticeable,</b> just as the stalks of fodder are recognizable. <b>If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yosef,</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i> applies <b>even if her fetus was not</b> yet <b>noticeable.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different version of this dispute. <b>Rabba says: Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says</b> his ruling <b>only with regard to fodder of a non-irrigated field,</b> which is not watered. <b>But</b> he did <b>not</b> speak <b>about fodder of an irrigated field.</b> Since the produce of this field will not grow on its own if it is not watered, it is not considered as if this produce has entered the world. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov referred <b>even to fodder of an irrigated field,</b> as this produce too is treated as having entered the world when it reaches the stage of fodder.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: According to this version of the dispute, <b>in accordance with whose</b> opinion is <b>that which is taught</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one says to another: If your wife gives birth to a female she is betrothed to me, he has not said anything? And Rabbi Ḥanina says: They taught</b> this <b>only when his wife is not pregnant, but</b> if <b>his wife is pregnant his statement is upheld. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this ruling? The <i>baraita</i> must be referring to a case <b>where her fetus was noticeable,</b> and therefore <b>everyone agrees</b> with this ruling. The <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinions of both Rabba and Rav Yosef, as even Rav Yosef agrees that Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov was referring only to fodder whose stalks were already noticeable.

### Part 11
<b>Abaye says: Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and Rabbi Meir all hold</b> the following principle: <b>A person can transfer an entity that has not yet come into the world.</b> That is, one can perform an act of acquisition for an item that is not yet in existence. The opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> is referring to <b>that which we</b> just <b>said,</b> that one can separate <i>teruma</i> even for produce not yet included in this mitzva. Where does <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi state a similar opinion? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC