
### Part 1
Rav Huna <b>said to him: You are out [<i>hotza’a</i>].</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin <b>was embarrassed,</b> as <b>he thought</b> Rav Huna <b>told him</b> he was out, i.e., wrong, <b>due to</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> he</b> stated. Sensing Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin’s embarrassment, Rav Huna <b>said to him: This is what I said:</b> You are a <i>Hutzla’a</i>, as <b>Rav Asi, from</b> the town of <b>Huzal, stands in accordance with your</b> opinion.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that it is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> The <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 3:9) taught: <b>One who steals another’s untithed produce pays him the</b> full <b>value of the other’s untithed produce;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: He pays only the value of the non-sacred</b> produce <b>that it contains. What, is it not</b> the case <b>that they disagree about this</b> issue: <b>That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that the <b>benefit of discretion has monetary</b> value, so he must be compensated beyond the value of the non-sacred produce; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that the <b>benefit of discretion does not have monetary</b> value, and only the non-sacred produce is of value to the owner.

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, everyone agrees</b> that the <b>benefit of discretion does not have monetary</b> value, <b>and here</b> the case is <b>with an Israelite who came into</b> possession of <b>untithed produce</b> as an inheritance <b>from the household of his mother’s father,</b> who was <b>a priest. And they disagree with regard to</b> the question of whether or not <b>gifts that have not been separated are considered as though they have been separated.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that they <b>are considered as though they have been separated,</b> which means that the grandson inherited the <i>teruma</i> itself from his grandfather, so the thief must repay him the value of the <i>terumot</i> and tithes as well. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that such gifts <b>are not considered as though they have been separated;</b> and the produce is viewed as regular untithed produce, where the Israelite has only the benefit of discretion, which is of no monetary value.

### Part 4
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>everyone agrees</b> that the gifts <b>are considered as though they have been separated, and</b> that the <b>benefit of discretion does not have monetary</b> value. The case is not concerning an Israelite who came into possession of untithed produce as an inheritance from the household of his mother’s father; rather, it is concerning regular untithed produce, <b>and here</b> they <b>disagree with regard to</b> a statement <b>of Shmuel. As Shmuel says:</b> By Torah law, even <b>one grain</b> given as <i>teruma</i> <b>exempts the</b> entire <b>heap,</b> since the Torah does not specify a minimum amount for <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 5
<b>As</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> so the thief must pay the value of the untithed produce as well, since the owner can say that he would separate a single grain as <i>teruma</i> for the entire heap and the rest would remain non-sacred produce. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is <b>not</b> in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> which means that when the owner makes his claim he must subtract at least one-sixtieth of the total amount as <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 6
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>everyone is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is <b>not</b> in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel; and here, this is</b> the <b>reasoning of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: Although the benefit of discretion does not have monetary value, and by right should not lead to reimbursement, <b>the Sages penalized the thief.</b> If he did not need to pay for the <i>teruma</i> contained in the produce, he would have been able to keep it, as no priest has the legal ability to demand that the <i>teruma</i> be given specifically to him.

### Part 7
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>everyone is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Shmuel, and here, this is</b> the <b>reasoning of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda: The Sages penalized the owner, since he should not have left his untithed produce</b> in that state, and should have separated <i>teruma</i> without delay.

### Part 8
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: With regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>with <i>terumot</i>, or with tithes, or with</b> the <b>gifts</b> given to priests, or <b>with the water of purification, or with the ashes</b> of the red <b>heifer,</b> in all of these cases <b>she is betrothed, and</b> this is so <b>even if</b> the man betrothing her is <b>an Israelite. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> to this from the following <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Bekhorot</i> 3:5): With regard to <b>one who accepts payment to judge, his judgments are nullified.</b> Similarly, with regard to one who accepts payment <b>to testify, his testimony is nullified.</b> With regard to one who accepts payment <b>to sprinkle</b> the purification water on one who was impure from impurity imparted by a corpse, <b>or to sanctify</b> the purification water by placing the ashes of the red heifer in them, <b>his water</b> is considered <b>cave water,</b> which is generally foul, <b>and his ashes are burnt ashes.</b> Using these items to betroth a woman is analogous to being paid for them, so they should be considered as having no monetary value, and the betrothal should not take effect.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> since <b>here,</b> the mishna is referring to one who betroths a woman <b>with</b> the value of the <b>payment for bringing and filling</b> the vessel with the purification waters, for which one is permitted to accept payment. Performing this act for the woman is comparable to giving her an item of value, since she will not have to pay someone to bring and fill the vessel for her. <b>There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> dealing with one who accepts payment for sprinkling or sanctifying the water is referring <b>to payment for</b> the actual <b>sprinkling and sanctifying.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: According to this answer, the language of the mishna and the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise, as it teaches here,</b> in the mishna, that she is betrothed <b>with the water of purification or with the ashes of purification,</b> which indicates that the water and ashes have not yet been mixed together; <b>and it teaches there,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>To sprinkle or to sanctify,</b> indicating that he receives payment for the actual sprinkling and sanctification. The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the correct explanation of the mishna and the <i>baraita</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC