
### Part 1
<b>An initial</b> version of the <b>mishna says</b> that a nazirite is liable to receive lashes <b>only if he drinks a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of <b>wine. Rabbi Akiva says: Even</b> if he <b>soaked his bread in wine and</b> the two together <b>contain enough to combine</b> to the amount of <b>an olive-bulk,</b> he is <b>liable. And</b> furthermore, a nazirite is <b>liable</b> to receive lashes <b>for</b> consuming <b>wine by itself, and for grapes by themselves, and for <i>ḥartzannim</i> by themselves, and for <i>zaggim</i> by themselves,</b> as each of these is forbidden separately by the Torah. <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says: He is liable only if he eats</b> an olive-bulk that includes at least <b>two <i>ḥartzannim</i> and</b> one <b><i>zag</i>,</b> in accordance with the verse “From <i>ḥartzannim</i> to <i>zag</i>” (Numbers 6:4), where the first term is in the plural and the second in the singular.

### Part 2
The mishna discusses the meaning of these terms: <b>Which</b> parts <b>are <i>ḥartzannim</i> and which are <i>zaggim</i>? The <i>ḥartzannim</i> are the outside</b> parts, the skin of the grape, while <b>the <i>zaggim</i> are the inner</b> parts, the seeds. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The opposite is the case and this is the mnemonic so <b>that you should not err:</b> It is <b>like a bell [<i>zog</i>]</b> worn <b>by an animal,</b> in which <b>the outer</b> part, which corresponds to the skin of a grape, is called <b><i>zog</i>, and the inner</b> portion of the bell, the clapper, which corresponds to the seeds in a grape, is called <b><i>inbal</i>.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna taught that <b>three types</b> of actions <b>are prohibited for a nazirite:</b> Contracting <b>ritual impurity,</b> shaving, and consuming products of the vine. The Gemara infers: <b>That which emerges from the vine, yes,</b> it is included in the prohibition; however, any part of <b>the vine itself,</b> other than its fruit, <b>no,</b> this is not forbidden. The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b> This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Even</b> the <b>leaves and tendrils</b> of the vine <b>are included</b> in the prohibitions of naziriteship.

### Part 4
<b>Some say this</b> statement with regard <b>to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>He is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>only if he eats an olive-bulk of the grapes.</b> The Gemara infers: If he eats <b>from the grapes, yes,</b> he is liable, but if he eats <b>from the vine itself, no,</b> he is not liable. If so, <b>the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b> This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Even</b> the <b>leaves and tendrils are included</b> in the prohibition.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do</b> Rabbi Elazar and the Rabbis <b>disagree;</b> what is the basis of their dispute? The Gemara explains: <b>Rabbi Elazar interprets</b> the verses employing the hermeneutical principle of <b>amplifications and restrictions,</b> while <b>the Rabbis interpret</b> them employing the hermeneutical principle of <b>generalizations and details.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Rabbi Elazar interprets</b> the verses employing the principle of <b>amplifications and restrictions,</b> as the phrase: <b>“He shall abstain from wine and strong drink”</b> (Numbers 6:3), <b>restricts</b> the prohibition to wine and strong drink, and the subsequent phrase: <b>“Anything that is made of the grapevine”</b> (Numbers 6:4), <b>amplifies</b> the prohibition.

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates: In this manner, the Torah <b>restricts and amplifies,</b> which, according to the principles of exegesis, <b>amplifies</b> and includes virtually <b>all</b> substances. <b>What</b> does it <b>amplify</b> and include? It <b>amplifies</b> and includes <b>all matters</b> and substances that come from the vine. <b>What</b> does it <b>restrict?</b> After all, the phrase “He shall abstain from wine and strong drink” must be excluding something. According to this interpretation, the verse <b>restricts</b> only one part of a vine, <b>the branches.</b> A nazirite who eats the branches of the vine has not committed a transgression.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> conversely, <b>the Rabbis interpret</b> the verses employing the principle of <b>generalizations and details,</b> as the phrase <b>“He shall abstain from wine and strong drink”</b> (Numbers 6:3) is an example of <b>a detail,</b> the phrase <b>“anything that is made of the grapevine”</b> (Numbers 6:4) is <b>a generalization,</b> and when the verse continues: <b>“From pits to grape skin,”</b> it has given an example of <b>a detail again.</b> This is <b>a detail, and a generalization, and a detail.</b> According to this exegetical method, <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail: Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail</b> are clearly <b>defined as a fruit or fruit waste,</b> i.e., grape seeds or skins, <b>so too, everything</b> forbidden by the generalization is <b>a fruit or fruit waste,</b> but not leaves or tendrils, as maintained by Rabbi Elazar.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> so, one can suggest an alternative derivation: <b>Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail</b> are clearly <b>defined as a complete,</b> i.e., ripe, <b>fruit, so too, everything</b> forbidden must be <b>a complete fruit,</b> excluding unripe fruit. Why, according to the Rabbis, are unripe grapes included in the prohibition? <b>You</b> will <b>say</b> the following counterargument: <b>If so, what has the verse left you</b> to derive <b>from its meaning that it has not stated?</b> If you say <b>grapes and raisins,</b> these are explicitly <b>written;</b> if you say <b>wine and vinegar,</b> these are also <b>written.</b> What, then, does the generalization come to add? Evidently, <b>you cannot learn in accordance with the last version,</b> which excludes unripe fruit; <b>rather,</b> you must learn <b>in accordance with the first version,</b> which includes this fruit and excludes only leaves and tendrils.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And as we eventually include everything</b> that is similar to the detail of fruit and the waste of fruit, <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “From pits to grape skin”?</b> This serves <b>to tell you</b> a general principle of exegesis that applies throughout the Torah: <b>Wherever you find</b> only <b>a detail and a generalization, you cannot broaden it and learn</b> that the generalization is limited to be <b>like the detail,</b> by saying that the generalization merely clarifies the previous detail.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, the generalization becomes added to the detail</b> so that it includes all matters, even those dissimilar to the detail, <b>until the verse specifies</b> and adds another detail after the generalization, <b>in the manner that it specified with regard to a nazirite,</b> by inserting the phrase “from pits to grape skin” after “anything that is made of the grapevine.” The exegetical method of: A detail, a generalization, and a detail, means that the generalization includes only something that is similar to the detail. In this particular example, leaves and tendrils are excluded.

### Part 11
The Gemara analyzes the details of this <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> above: <b>Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail</b> are clearly <b>defined as a fruit or fruit waste, so too everything</b> forbidden to the nazirite by the Torah is <b>a fruit or fruit waste.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>The fruit</b> mentioned by the Torah is <b>grapes. What is fruit waste? Vinegar,</b> as in the verse: “He shall drink no vinegar of wine or vinegar of strong drink” (Numbers 6:3).

### Part 12
<b>What is</b> the statement: <b>So too everything</b> forbidden by the generalization is <b>a fruit,</b> serving to include? It serves to include <b>unripe</b> grapes. And <b>what is</b> the statement: <b>So too everything,</b> forbidden by the generalization is a fruit or fruit waste, stated with regard <b>to fruit waste,</b> serving to include? Which fruit waste unspecified by the verse is added by means of this derivation? <b>Rav Kahana said:</b> This serves <b>to include grapes that have become wormy.</b> With regard to the phrase “from pits <b>to grape skin,” Ravina said:</b> This serves <b>to include</b> the part of the fruit <b>that</b> is <b>in between</b> the seeds and the skin.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues to analyze the <i>baraita</i>, which it cites at length. <b>The Master said</b> above: <b>If</b> so, <b>just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail</b> are clearly <b>defined as a complete fruit, so too everything</b> is <b>a complete fruit. You say: If so, what has the verse left you</b> to derive <b>from its meaning that it has not stated? Grapes and raisins,</b> these are <b>written; wine and vinegar,</b> these are <b>written. You cannot learn in accordance with the last version; rather,</b> you must learn <b>in accordance with the first version. And as we eventually include everything, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “From pit to grape skin”?</b> This serves <b>to tell you</b> that <b>wherever you find a detail and a generalization, you cannot broaden it and learn</b> that the generalization is limited to be <b>like the detail; rather, the generalization becomes added to the detail, until the verse specifies for you</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC