
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: With regard to one who enters <b>into a house too,</b> why should he be liable twice? Since one typically enters a place with his hands before his body, <b>once he inserts his hand he</b> immediately <b>becomes ritually impure.</b> This means that <b>when all</b> the rest <b>of him enters, this</b> person <b>is</b> already <b>impure.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Rabbi Elazar said:</b> If <b>he inserted his hand</b> into the house first, <b>there is</b> liability <b>due to</b> contracting <b>ritual impurity;</b> however, <b>there is no</b> liability <b>due to entering</b> the enclosure. <b>But</b> if <b>he joined his body</b> and his hands, i.e., all of him entered at once, contraction of <b>impurity and entering</b> the enclosure <b>occur simultaneously,</b> and in that case he is liable twice. The Gemara objects: <b>It is impossible</b> that <b>his nose would not enter first, and</b> once it does, <b>impurity would descend to it</b> and thereby to this person immediately, before the rest of his body entered the house.

### Part 3
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> If <b>he entered</b> with only <b>his hand there is</b> liability <b>due to</b> contracting <b>ritual impurity,</b> but <b>there is no</b> liability <b>due to entering</b> an enclosure with a corpse, as he cannot be considered inside the house. If <b>he entered</b> with <b>his body</b> by standing upright so that his head would not enter first, contraction of <b>impurity and entering</b> the enclosure <b>occur simultaneously.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> even so, <b>it is impossible</b> that <b>his toes would not enter first, and</b> once they do, <b>impurity would</b> thereby <b>descend to them,</b> causing him to become impure before his entire body enters the house.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rav Pappa said:</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where one entered</b> into a house <b>in a chest, a box, or a cabinet,</b> which are not susceptible to ritual impurity and which protect their contents from impurity when they can hold more than forty <i>se’a</i>, <b>and another came and opened the cover</b> of the vessel <b>from over him.</b> In <b>that</b> case contracting <b>impurity and entering</b> the enclosure <b>occur simultaneously. Mar bar Rav Ashi said:</b> It is referring to a case <b>where one entered</b> the house <b>when</b> someone there <b>was dying, and</b> the latter’s <b>soul departed when</b> he <b>was sitting</b> there. In <b>that</b> case too, contracting <b>impurity and entering</b> the enclosure with a corpse <b>occur simultaneously.</b> Since there was no corpse in the enclosure when he entered, he is considered to have entered an enclosure with a corpse at the moment the person died.

### Part 5
§ With regard to the ritual impurity of a corpse, <b>the Sages taught:</b> The Torah states concerning a priest’s exposure to ritual impurity imparted by a corpse: “He shall not become impure, a chief among his people, <b>to profane himself”</b> (Leviticus 21:4), from which it is derived that the prohibition does not apply <b>until the time that</b> the person with whom he comes into contact <b>dies.</b> A priest does not become impure or profane his priesthood at any earlier stage. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that the verse stated with regard to a nazirite: “He shall not become impure for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die” (Numbers 6:7), from which one can infer that <b>when they die,</b> one <b>contracts ritual impurity</b> from them, i.e., not <b>until</b> the other person actually <b>dies.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the difference <b>between</b> these two derivations? They apparently state the same <i>halakha</i> from different verses. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The interpretation of the meaning</b> of the verse <b>is</b> the difference <b>between them.</b> There is no practical difference between them; rather, they derive the <i>halakha</i> from different verses. <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> The difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to <b>a dying person: According to the one who says</b> that one derives the <i>halakha</i> from “He shall not become impure, a chief among his people, <b>to profane himself,” even a dying person</b> is included in the prohibition of impurity. <b>According to the one who says</b> that it is derived from <b>“when they die,” once he dies, yes</b> there is impurity, whereas <b>a dying person, no,</b> he does not impart impurity.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks with regard to Reish Lakish’s opinion: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that it is derived from <b>“to profane himself,” isn’t it written: “When they die”?</b> What does he derive from that verse? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires</b> that verse <b>for that which</b> was taught <b>by Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that the verse stresses “when they die,” to teach: In a case <b>when they die he may not become impure; however, he may become impure from their leprosy or from their gonorrhea-like discharge.</b> A nazirite is prohibited from contracting ritual impurity only if it is from a corpse.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that the earliest time the prohibition takes effect is derived from the phrase <b>“when they die,” he</b> also <b>requires that</b> verse <b>for this reason;</b> how does he derive two <i>halakhot</i> from the same verse? The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse state: When he dies; what is</b> the reason for the emphasis of <b>“when they die”? You can learn from</b> this verse <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i>, that one does not impart impurity until he is actually dead, and that a nazirite is prohibited from contracting only the impurity of a corpse.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks the reverse question: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that the source for the earliest time of the impurity of a corpse is the verse <b>“when they die,” isn’t it written: “To profane himself”?</b> What does he derive from that verse? The Gemara answers: <b>“To profane himself” comes for this</b> purpose, that the prohibition against becoming impure apply only <b>to one who is not profaned, excluding one who is</b> already <b>profaned.</b> There is no prohibition against a ritually impure priest becoming impure from a corpse.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that the source for the commencement of impurity imparted by a corpse is <b>“to profane himself,” he</b> also <b>requires that</b> verse <b>for this reason;</b> how does he derive two <i>halakhot</i> from the same verse? The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse state: To profane; what is</b> the reason for the emphasis of <b>“to profane himself”? You can learn from</b> this verse <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i>, that a nazirite is prohibited from becoming impure even through contact with a dying person, and that there is no prohibition against contracting impurity a second time for one who is already impure.

### Part 11
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Oholot</i> 1:6): <b>A person renders</b> others <b>impure only when his soul departs</b> from <b>him, even if he has severe lacerations [<i>meguyyad</i>], and even if</b> he <b>is dying. But according to the one who says</b> that the commencement of the impurity of a corpse is derived <b>from “to profane himself,”</b> this <i>baraita</i> is difficult, as it <b>teaches</b> that a dying person <b>does not impart impurity.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>With regard to imparting impurity,</b> he does not impart impurity <b>until his soul departs, but with regard to profaning</b> the sanctity of the priesthood, a priest <b>is profaned</b> by a dying person.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC