
### Part 1
<b>Rava said: Do not say</b> that it is <b>uncertain</b> whether he <b>saw</b> a discharge and <b>uncertain</b> whether he <b>did not see</b> one. The uncertainty is not with regard to whether he experienced a discharge at all. <b>Rather, he certainly saw a</b> discharge, but it is <b>uncertain</b> whether the discharge was <b>due to,</b> i.e., defined as, an emission of <b>semen,</b> and it is <b>uncertain</b> whether the discharge was <b>due to</b> the <b>sighting</b> of <i>ziva</i>. In this case, <b>once he has been confirmed as being ritually impure</b> as a <i>zav</i>, <b>his uncertain</b> case is also <b>impure.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna taught that <b>his semen is impure.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard <b>to what</b> <i>halakha</i> is the mishna stating that the semen of a <i>zav</i> is impure? <b>If we say</b> that this is referring <b>to</b> the impurity of <b>contact,</b> i.e., this semen renders one who touches it impure, there is no need to teach this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Is it</b> any <b>worse than the semen of a pure</b> man, which also imparts impurity through contact? <b>Rather,</b> the mishna is teaching that <b>the semen of a <i>zav</i> renders</b> people <b>impure</b> even <b>by carrying,</b> like the impurity of <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Who did you hear that said that</b> the <b>semen of a <i>zav</i> renders</b> one <b>impure by carrying? If we say</b> it is <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: The semen of a <i>zav</i> does not render</b> one <b>impure by carrying, and Rabbi Yehoshua says: It</b> does <b>render</b> one <b>impure by carrying, because it is impossible for</b> his semen <b>to be without droplets of <i>ziva</i>;</b> yet this source is no proof, as <b>even Rabbi Yehoshua said</b> that this semen imparts impurity by carrying <b>only due to the droplets of <i>ziva</i></b> it contains. <b>However, he did not say</b> that semen <b>in its unadulterated</b> form renders people impure.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rav Adda bar Ahava said:</b> The mishna does not mean that the semen of a <i>zav</i> itself renders one impure by carrying. Rather, it comes <b>to say that one does not attribute</b> the <i>ziva</i> <b>to it.</b> Even if the man experienced a discharge within twenty-four hours of his ejaculation of semen, one does not say his discharge was triggered by a general weakening as a result of his seminal emission. Once the man has experienced two discharges of a <i>zav</i> he is an impure <i>zav</i>, and this third discharge is also considered <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 5
When he was <b>before Rava, Rav Pappa thought to say</b> the following explanation for this <i>halakha</i>: <b>Since he sees</b> his discharges <b>out of</b> the <b>weakness</b> brought about from his previous <i>ziva</i>, it can be assumed that any later discharge, even one that follows a seminal emission, is <i>ziva</i>. <b>Rava said to him: But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Zavim</i> 2:3): <b>A convert who</b> has just <b>converted can immediately become impure as a <i>zav</i>.</b> Even if he had a seminal emission as a gentile, subsequently converted, and then experienced the discharge of a <i>zav</i>, one does not associate the discharge of a <i>zav</i> with the earlier emission of semen. Rather, it is treated as the first discharge of a <i>zav</i>. In this case there is no prior weakness of a <i>zav</i> to speak of, and nevertheless the convert is impure as a <i>zav</i>. Rav Pappa <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>There is no greater illness than this.</b> The very acceptance of mitzvot can be considered an illness, as the burden of mitzvot is a weighty matter. For this reason, one does not ascribe a discharge of a <i>zav</i> to the earlier emission of semen.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>Rather,</b> the possibility rejected earlier, that the mishna means that semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts impurity by carrying, <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The semen of a <i>zav</i> renders</b> one <b>impure by carrying</b> like the regular discharge of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> a twenty-four hour <b>period.</b> In other words, if a <i>zav</i> experienced a seminal emission within twenty-four hours of a <i>ziva</i>, the seminal emission does not impart impurity only through contact in the manner of the semen of a pure individual, but by carrying as well. <b>And Rabbi Yosei says</b> that it imparts impurity by carrying only on <b>its day,</b> i.e., if the seminal emission was before the evening of the day of the <i>ziva</i>. As opposed to Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua cited earlier, these <i>tanna’im</i> both maintain that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts impurity by carrying like <i>ziva</i> does.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do</b> the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yosei <b>disagree?</b> What is the basis of their dispute? The Gemara answers: They disagree <b>with regard to</b> the following issue discussed <b>by Shmuel, as Shmuel raises a contradiction: It is written: “If there be among you any man who is not pure, by reason of that which chances him by night,</b> then shall he go abroad out of the camp, he shall not come within the camp” (Deuteronomy 23:11). This verse is applied to a <i>zav</i> who experienced a seminal emission. <b>And it is written: “When evening comes on, he shall bathe himself in water,</b> and when the sun is down, he may come within the camp” (Deuteronomy 23:12).

### Part 8
The Gemara explains the dispute. <b>The one who says</b> that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts impurity by carrying <b>for</b> a twenty-four hour <b>period</b> after experiencing a <i>ziva</i> <b>infers from</b> the phrase <b>“when evening comes on”</b> that the period can involve two evenings, as “comes on” indicates another evening. If so, the semen imparts impurity by carrying for a full twenty-four hour period. <b>And the other</b> Sage, Rabbi Yosei, <b>infers</b> from the expression <b>“by reason of that which chances him by night”</b> that the seminal emission imparts impurity by carrying only until that night, i.e., until the end of the day on which the man experienced the <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to <b>the one who says</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is derived from <b>“when evening comes on,” isn’t it written: “By reason of that which chances him by night”?</b> The Gemara answers: He could have <b>said to you</b> that this verse affords no proof, as it is referring to the usual case and <b>it is the manner of a seminal emission to occur at night.</b> Consequently, one cannot derive a <i>halakha</i> from this expression.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The tractate concludes with an aggadic statement about nazirites. <b>Samuel</b> the prophet <b>was a nazirite, in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Nehorai, as it was stated</b> that when Hannah, his mother, prayed for a son, she vowed: <b>“And no <i>mora</i> shall come upon his head”</b> (I Samuel 1:11). How is it derived that <i>mora</i> is an expression of naziriteship? <b>It is stated with regard to Samson: “And</b> no <b>razor [<i>mora</i>]</b> shall come upon his head, for the child shall be a nazirite to God” (Judges 13:5), <b>and it is stated: “And</b> no <b><i>mora</i>,” with regard to Samuel. Just as</b> the term <b>“<i>mora</i>” that is stated with regard to Samson</b> means that he was <b>a nazirite, so too</b> the term <b>“<i>mora</i>” that is stated with regard to Samuel</b> indicates that he was <b>a nazirite.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: But doesn’t</b> the word <b>“<i>mora</i>”</b> mean <b>nothing other</b> than the fear <b>of flesh and blood?</b> The word should be read as though it were written with an <i>alef</i>, and not a <i>heh</i>, so that it means fear. <b>Rabbi Nehorai said to him: But isn’t it already stated: “And Samuel said: How can I go; if Saul hears it he will kill me”</b> (I Samuel 16:2). This verse indicates <b>that there was fear of flesh and blood upon</b> Samuel. Consequently, the term <i>mora</i> must be understood in accordance with its plain meaning of a razor. If so, Samuel was indeed a nazirite.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav said to his son Ḥiyya:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC