
### Part 1
<b>who is not of</b> the opinion that the principle of <b>combination</b> is operative, as he renders one liable for consumption of forbidden substances of any amount (see <i>Makkot</i> 13a), <b>what does he derive</b> from the verse <b>“anything that is made</b> of the grapevine” (Numbers 6:4)? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Shimon could have <b>said to you: That</b> verse is <b>necessary</b> to teach that <b>one is never</b> considered <b>a nazirite until he vows naziriteship from all of them.</b> Rabbi Shimon maintains that if one vows to be a nazirite only with regard to one or two of the prohibitions of naziriteship, the vow does not take effect at all.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> With regard to <b>every</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that is in the Torah</b> that involves <b>a quarter-</b><i>log</i>, <b>a permitted</b> substance <b>does not combine with a forbidden</b> substance to complete this measure, <b>apart from the quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of a nazirite.</b> In the case of a nazirite, permitted liquid combines with wine to render him liable, <b>as the Torah stated: “Soaked”</b> (Numbers 6:3). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there between</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> who stated (35b) that a permitted substance does not combine with a forbidden one with regard to any prohibition of the Torah apart from that of a nazirite, <b>and</b> that of <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> who apparently says the same thing in different terms?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them, as Rabbi Yoḥanan amplifies</b> the <i>halakha</i> to include <b>even foods,</b> i.e., he renders a nazirite liable for eating an olive-bulk of bread and grapes combined, <b>and Rabbi Elazar</b> maintains that with regard to <b>liquids, yes,</b> the permitted combines with the forbidden, but for <b>other matters,</b> i.e., solids, <b>no,</b> the different foods do not combine.

### Part 4
§ Apropos a quarter-<i>log</i>, the Gemara cites a statement that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: There are ten</b> applications of the <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i> measurement in various areas of <i>halakha</i>, <b>and Rav Kahana held in his hand</b> the following mnemonic for them: <b>Five</b> are <b>red and five</b> are <b>white.</b> The Gemara elaborates: The <b>five red</b> ones of wine and blood are listed in the following mnemonic: <b>A nazirite; and one who performs</b> the ritual of <b>the Paschal offering; who instructed; in the Temple; and they died.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains this mnemonic: <b>A nazirite,</b> this is referring to the <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of wine for</b> which <b>a nazirite</b> is liable for drinking. <b>Who performs</b> the ritual of the <b>Paschal offering,</b> this is <b>as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It is a mitzva to drink <b>these four cups</b> at the Passover seder and <b>they must</b> each <b>contain</b> the amount of <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i>. <b>Who instructed,</b> this is referring to the following <i>halakha</i>: One who <b>drank a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of wine may not issue rulings</b> to others in matters of <i>halakha</i>, lest he err. <b>In the Temple,</b> this is referring to the <i>halakha</i> that one who <b>drank a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of wine and entered the Temple is liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty</b> (see Leviticus 10:9).

### Part 6
<b>And they died,</b> this is <b>as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Oholot</i> 2:10): <b>From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of blood that emerges from two corpses, that it renders</b> people and objects <b>ritually impure in a tent,</b> i.e., a house, meaning that one who enters that house contracts ritual impurity imparted by a corpse? <b>As it is stated,</b> with regard to the prohibition against ritual impurity for priests: <b>“Neither shall he go in to any dead bodies”</b> (Leviticus 21:11). The plural form indicates that the blood of two people joins together to form the minimum amount of a quarter-<i>log</i> for ritual impurity in a tent.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> the <b>five white</b> cases of oil and water are listed in this mnemonic: <b>The loaf of, a nazirite, and a leper, which were disqualified, on Shabbat.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>The loaf of,</b> this is referring to the <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of oil</b> added <b>to the loaves</b> of a thanks-offering. <b>A nazirite,</b> this is referring to the <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of oil for</b> the wafers of <b>a nazirite,</b> which were brought with his offering. <b>A leper,</b> this is referring to the <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of spring <b>water</b> into which a bird is slaughtered <b>for</b> the ritual purification of <b>a leper</b> (see Leviticus 14:5).<b>Which were disqualified,</b> this is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Me’ila</i> 17b): <b>And all other ritually impure liquids disqualify the body</b> to the extent that one who drinks them may not eat <i>teruma</i>, if one drank the amount <b>of</b> one <b>quarter</b>-<i>log</i>.

### Part 8
<b>On Shabbat,</b> this is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna which lists the minimum amounts of various liquids for which one is liable for violating the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat for carrying them from one domain to another. At the conclusion of this list, the mishna states (<i>Shabbat</i> 76b): <b>And</b> the measure that creates liability for carrying <b>all other liquids,</b> those not specified in the list, is <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i>, <b>and</b> the measure for carrying <b>all waste water</b> is likewise <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i>. This completes the list of ten <i>halakhot</i> that feature the quarter-<i>log</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And are there no more</b> than ten? <b>But there is</b> also the following mishna (<i>Yadayim</i> 1:1): <b>With a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of water <b>one can wash the hands of one</b> person before eating bread, <b>and</b> this amount can be used <b>even for two</b> people, if they do so in the correct manner. The Gemara answers: Rabbi Elazar, who listed ten cases, <b>does not deal</b> with <i>halakhot</i> that are subject <b>to a dispute,</b> and some Sages disagree with the ruling that two people can wash their hands with a single quarter-<i>log</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara further asks: <b>But there is</b> this <i>halakha</i> concerning a <i>sota</i> (<i>Sota</i> 15b): The priest who dealt with a <i>sota</i> <b>would bring an earthenware vessel [<i>pailei</i>] and place in it a half</b>-<b><i>log</i> of water from the basin</b> in the Temple, <b>and Rabbi Yehuda says</b> it was <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i>. This is another case involving a quarter-<i>log</i>. The Gemara answers as before, that Rabbi Elazar <b>does not deal</b> with <i>halakhot</i> that are subject <b>to a dispute,</b> and this quarter-<i>log</i> applies only according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 11
The Gemara continues to ask. <b>But there is</b> the following <i>halakha</i>: <b>How much water must one place in</b> a vessel that contains urine, before he can pray nearby? <b>Any quantity</b> is sufficient. <b>Rabbi Zakkai said: A quarter</b>-<i>log</i>. The Gemara again answers that Rabbi Elazar <b>does not deal</b> with <i>halakhot</i> that are subject <b>to a dispute.</b> The Gemara suggests another example: <b>But there is</b> the case of <b>a ritual bath,</b> as it is taught that one may immerse extremely small vessels in a quarter-<i>log</i> of rainwater in the ground. The Gemara answers: His list <b>excludes that</b> case, <b>as the Sages annulled</b> that <i>halakha</i> by ruling that one must use a standard ritual bath of forty <i>se’a</i> even for extremely small vessels.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC