
### Part 1
<b>as if it enters your mind</b> to say that the <i>baraita</i> is discussing the <b>shaving</b> done as a result of the nazirite’s <b>impurity,</b> and contrasts a nazirite with a leper, do the end of a leper’s <b>days of confirmed</b> leprosy <b>not require shaving?</b> A leper must shave when he is purified from his condition, so how can he be described as unfit for shaving? Rather, the <i>baraita</i> must be referring to the nazirite’s shaving of purity, as suggested above (17b). The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it could be that the <i>baraita</i> is discussing the shaving done as a result of the nazirite’s impurity, and when it states that a leper is unfit for shaving, the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching</b> about the <b>shaving of naziriteship,</b> and the <i>baraita</i> is stating that a leper is unfit for any shaving of a nazirite, since he must first shave for his leprosy.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests another proof to answer the question of whether one who vows naziriteship while in a cemetery must shave upon undergoing purification. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And he defiles his consecrated head,</b> he shall shave his head on the day of his purification, on the seventh day shall he shave it” (Numbers 6:9). The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>The verse is speaking of a ritually pure</b> nazirite <b>who became impure, who requires hair removal and the bringing of birds</b> as offerings. And this verse comes <b>to exempt a nazirite</b> who vowed while <b>in the grave,</b> i.e., a cemetery, <b>that he does not require hair removal and the bringing of birds.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues its analysis of this <i>halakha</i>. For one might have explained differently: <b>And are</b> these <b>matters,</b> the ruling that such a nazirite is exempt, <b>not</b> inferred with an <b><i>a fortiori</i> inference</b> to reach the opposite conclusion: <b>Just as a</b> nazirite who was <b>pure</b> from the outset and <b>who</b> subsequently <b>became impure requires hair removal and the bringing of birds,</b> if <b>one was impure from the outset,</b> as he took a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery, <b>is it not logical that he should require hair removal and the bringing of birds?</b>

### Part 4
Therefore <b>the verse states: “And he defiles his consecrated head,”</b> indicating that <b>the verse speaks</b> only <b>of one who was a pure</b> nazirite <b>and</b> later <b>became impure,</b> and <b>that</b> only <b>he requires hair removal and the bringing of birds. And</b> the verse serves <b>to exempt the nazirite</b> who vowed while <b>in</b> a place of <b>a grave,</b> who was ritually impure from the outset. The Gemara concludes: <b>Learn from this</b> that a nazirite who was ritually impure from the outset does not have to shave; this answers the question of Rav Ashi.

### Part 5
§ After resolving the question, the Gemara discusses additional <i>halakhot</i> involving a ritually impure person who took a vow of naziriteship. <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>that the Sages taught</b> in the previous discussion: <b>The difference between an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship and a pure nazirite who became ritually impure is only</b> the following <i>halakha</i>: <b>That</b> with regard to <b>an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>counts</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of the term of naziriteship. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a pure nazirite who became impure, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>does not count</b> as part <b>of his tally.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>as Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: Naziriteship of purity takes effect only from the eighth day.</b> When a nazirite becomes impure during his term, he begins to count his term of observing naziriteship in purity only on the day following his purification. <b>For if you say it</b> follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, didn’t he say</b> that the <b>naziriteship of purity takes effect from the seventh</b> day of his purification process?

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and what is</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> that Rav Ḥisda referred to? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to a ritually impure nazirite who underwent the purification rite: <b>“And he shall sanctify his head on that day”</b> (Numbers 6:11). This means that he renews the sanctity of his hair growth, i.e., begin observing his naziriteship in purity, <b>on the day of the bringing of his offerings,</b> the eighth day of his purification. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> This means that he renews the sanctity of his hair growth <b>on the day of his shaving,</b> the seventh day of his purification.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara cites a related <i>halakha</i>: <b>And that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Karetot</i> 9a): If <b>a nazirite became impure</b> by contracting <b>many</b> consecutive <b>impurities, he brings only one</b> set of <b>offerings. Who taught</b> that? <b>Rav Ḥisda said: It is Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> the <b>naziriteship of purity takes effect from the seventh</b> day of his purification process. <b>And you find this,</b> that he contracts ritual impurity several times consecutively, in a case <b>where he became ritually impure on the seventh</b> day <b>and,</b> after undergoing the purification process, <b>again became ritually impure on the seventh</b> day. <b>And whose</b> opinion is it? <b>It is</b> that of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. Since</b> the <b>appropriate time to bring an offering had not</b> yet <b>arrived,</b> as all agree that his offerings are only brought on the eighth day, if he became ritually impure a second time <b>he is obligated</b> to <b>bring only one</b> set of <b>offerings.</b>

### Part 9
<b>For if you say it</b> follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, how can this mishna be explained? <b>If</b> it deals with a nazirite <b>who became ritually impure on the seventh</b> day, <b>and,</b> after undergoing the purification process, <b>again became ritually impure on the seventh</b> day, <b>and,</b> after undergoing the purification process, <b>again became ritually impure on the seventh</b> day, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi would hold that <b>all these</b> impurities <b>are</b> in fact one <b>long ritual impurity,</b> because he never reached the eighth day, which would renew his observance of naziriteship in ritual purity, so the mishna would not refer to this as a case of multiple impurities. <b>And if</b> the mishna is referring to a nazirite <b>who became ritually impure on the eighth</b> day <b>and,</b> after undergoing the purification process, <b>again became ritually impure on the eighth</b> day, the <b>appropriate time to bring an offering had</b> already <b>arrived,</b> and if he becomes ritually impure at that stage, it is not viewed as a continuation of the previous ritual impurity, and he is obligated to bring another set of offerings.

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies the dispute between Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda: <b>What is the reason for Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi’s ruling that he begins counting only from the eighth day? The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states:</b> “And the priest shall prepare one for a sin-offering, and the other for a burnt-offering, <b>and make atonement for him, for he sinned by the soul”</b> (Numbers 6:11), <b>and</b> the same verse <b>again</b> states immediately afterward: <b>“And he shall sanctify his head.”</b> This shows that the naziriteship of purity commences only after he has brought his offerings. <b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> says in response: <b>If so,</b> if the verse intended to teach us that his naziriteship starts only on the eighth day, <b>let the verse</b> merely <b>state: “And he shall sanctify his head,”</b> since that phrase addresses the bringing of his offerings, which is on the eighth.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC