
### Part 1
<b>Rather,</b> it can be explained that <b>this is what he is saying: If I find</b> someone <b>who becomes a nazirite, I will shave him. Here too,</b> in the case of betrothal, <b>this is what</b> the one who appointed the agent <b>is saying to</b> the agent: Even <b>if</b> the woman <b>you find</b> is married at this moment but when you come to her you discover that she <b>has</b> been <b>divorced</b> in the meantime, <b>betroth</b> her <b>to me.</b> If so, he would be prohibited from marrying her sister, contrary to the ruling of Rava.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this comparison: The Sages <b>say</b> that there is a distinction between the two cases: <b>A person appoints an agent only for a matter that he</b> himself <b>can perform now,</b> at the time of the appointment, <b>but for a matter that he cannot perform now, he does not appoint</b> an agent. Consequently, the agent cannot betroth a woman who was married at the time of his appointment. The one who appointed the agent may therefore marry the sister of the recently divorced woman, as stated by Rava.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks another question on the ruling of Rava: <b>And</b> can one <b>not</b> appoint an agent to betroth a woman in this manner? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i> that indicates the contrary: <b>One who says to the steward [<i>apotropos</i>] of his</b> affairs: <b>All vows that my wife will vow from now until I come from such and such a place, nullify for her, and</b> the steward <b>nullified</b> them <b>for her,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought <b>they are nullified.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Her husband sustains</b> the vow <b>and her husband nullifies</b> the vow” (Numbers 30:14); this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoshiya.</b> The repetition of “husband” teaches that it is the husband alone who may nullify his wife’s vows. <b>And Rabbi Yonatan says: We have found in all places that</b> the legal status of <b>a person’s agent is like</b> that of <b>himself.</b> Therefore, a steward, who serves as the husband’s agent, may nullify the wife’s vows.

### Part 4
Even according to Rabbi Yoshiya, who maintains that the steward cannot nullify her vows, <b>the reason is that the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“Her husband sustains</b> the vow <b>and her husband nullifies</b> the vow,” <b>but if</b> it were <b>not so,</b> the <b>steward could nullify</b> even the future vows of the wife. <b>However, with regard to</b> the husband <b>himself</b> it <b>is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 75a): <b>One who says to his wife: All vows that you will vow from now until I come from such and such a place shall be ratified, he has not said anything.</b> However, if a husband says: All vows that you will vow from now until I come from such and such a place, <b>they are hereby nullified, Rabbi Eliezer says: It is nullified, and the Rabbis say: It is not nullified.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara finishes the question: <b>It enters our mind</b> to say that <b>when Rabbi Yoshiya said</b> that the steward cannot nullify the vows, he spoke <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that the husband <b>is not able to nullify</b> her vows ahead of time, <b>and</b> yet, even according to their approach, <b>if the Merciful One had not stated</b> in the Torah: <b>“Her husband sustains</b> the vow <b>and her husband nullifies</b> the vow” the <b>steward would</b> be able to <b>nullify</b> such vows. This proves that one can appoint an agent for something he himself cannot do at the time, which contradicts the statement of Rava.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this: <b>And perhaps</b> Rabbi Yoshiya spoke <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who says</b> the husband <b>can nullify</b> the vows ahead of time, and it is for this reason that he can appoint the steward to do the same. The Gemara rejects this: <b>If so, why do I</b> need <b>to make him into an agent; let him nullify</b> the future vows <b>for her</b> before he sets out on his journey. The Gemara answers: <b>He thinks, perhaps I will forget, or become angry, or be occupied</b> with other matters when I am about to set out on my journey. This is why he appoints an agent to nullify the vows on his behalf, and no proof can be derived from this <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: <b>It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave half a nazirite,</b> i.e., he is vowing to pay half the costs of a nazirite’s offerings, <b>and another heard and said: And I, it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave half a nazirite, this</b> one <b>shaves a whole nazirite and that</b> one <b>shaves a whole nazirite,</b> i.e., each pays the full cost of a nazirite’s offerings; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir,</b> since there is no such entity as half a nazirite. <b>And the Rabbis say: This</b> one <b>shaves half a nazirite and that</b> one <b>shaves half a nazirite;</b> they may join together to pay for the offerings of one nazirite.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to this dispute, <b>Rava said: All concede</b> that <b>whenever one said: Half of the offerings of a nazirite are</b> incumbent <b>upon me, he brings half of the offerings,</b> since he vowed to pay only that amount. Also, everyone agrees that if he said: <b>The offerings of half a nazirite are</b> incumbent <b>upon me, he needs to bring all of the offerings</b> of a nazirite. <b>What is the reason</b> that he must bring all of the offerings of a nazirite? It is <b>that we have not found</b> such an entity as <b>half a naziriteship.</b> If one vowed to be half a nazirite, he is a full nazirite.

### Part 9
<b>And when they disagree,</b> it is only <b>in</b> a case of one who used <b>the</b> precise <b>wording of the mishna. Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>once he said: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me, he is obligated in all of the naziriteship offerings, and when he</b> later <b>says: Half a naziriteship,</b> it <b>is not in his power</b> to uproot his first obligation. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>it is a vow with</b> its inherent <b>opening.</b> By saying he had only half the offerings of a nazirite in mind from the outset, he has nullified his own vow.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite when I will have a son, and a son was born to him, he is a nazirite.</b> If <b>a daughter, a <i>tumtum</i>, or a hermaphrodite [<i>androginos</i>] is born to him, he is not a nazirite,</b> since a son was not born to him. However, <b>if he says:</b> I am hereby a nazirite <b>when I will have a child,</b> then <b>even if a daughter, a <i>tumtum</i>, or a hermaphrodite is born to him, he is a nazirite.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC