### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need for Rav to state <b>this</b> at all? <b>Now that it is</b> already <b>said</b> with regard to <b>a stringent</b> case, where there were two sets of witnesses who generally have full credibility yet <b>Rav said</b> that the testimony is considered divided, with regard to <b>a lenient</b> case, involving a conflict within one pair of witnesses, who cannot each obligate him in naziriteship, would he <b>not say</b> that a conflict in their testimony causes it to be disregarded? Of course the testimonies are disregarded if the conflict is within the same set of witnesses. <b>They say in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael: <b>There is no conflicting</b> testimony <b>in</b> a case of <b>counting,</b> as since one of them counted a smaller number and the second counted a larger number, they do not conflict at all, as the smaller number is included in the larger one.

### Part 2
end of chapter

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who said: I am hereby a nazirite, and another heard</b> this vow <b>and said: And I,</b> and a third person added: <b>And I, they are all nazirites.</b> If the vow of <b>the first was dissolved</b> by a halakhic authority, <b>they are all dissolved.</b> However, if the vow of <b>the last</b> individual <b>was dissolved</b> by a halakhic authority, the vow of <b>the last</b> individual alone <b>is dissolved, and all</b> the others remain <b>bound</b> by their nazirite vows. If someone <b>said: I am hereby a nazirite, and another heard and said: My mouth is like his mouth and my hair is like his hair, he is a nazirite.</b>

### Part 4
If one said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite, and his wife heard</b> him <b>and said: And I,</b> he can <b>nullify her</b> vow of naziriteship if he so chooses (see Numbers 30:7–16). <b>But his</b> vow remains <b>intact,</b> as his naziriteship is not dependent on hers. However, if the wife said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite, and her husband heard and said: And I, he cannot nullify</b> her vow of naziriteship, as he would thereby be nullifying his own vow, which he made dependent on hers, and he does not have the ability to nullify his own vow. If he said to his wife: <b>I am hereby a nazirite, and you,</b> i.e., you shall be a nazirite as well, <b>and she said: Amen,</b> in acceptance of this vow, <b>he can nullify her</b> vow, <b>and his</b> vow remains <b>intact.</b> However, if the wife said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite, and you, and he said: Amen, he cannot nullify</b> her vow.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Reish Lakish sat before Rabbi Yehuda Nesia, and he sat and said</b> in explanation of the mishna: <b>And this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that they are all nazirites, applies only <b>when they all</b> took a vow by <b>associating</b> themselves with the previous vow <b>within the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase. The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> time is included in the measure of: <b>Within the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase? The Gemara answers: It is the time necessary <b>for greeting</b> someone. The Gemara asks: <b>And how much is</b> the time necessary <b>for greeting</b> someone? The Gemara answers that it is the time necessary <b>for a student to say: Peace</b> upon you, my teacher, <b>to</b> his <b>rabbi.</b>

### Part 6
Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>Once again you have provided no advantage to a student</b> who wishes to associate himself with the naziriteship of another. If the student’s rabbi was passing by at the precise moment that his colleague was vowing to be a nazirite, he would have to greet his rabbi first, and therefore he would not be able to respond to his colleague’s vow in time.