
### Part 1
§ The mishna taught: <b>And he is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>only if he eats an olive-bulk of the grapes.</b> The mishna continues by noting that with regard to drinking, the first <i>tanna</i> holds that a nazirite is liable for a quarter-<i>log</i>, whereas Rabbi Akiva maintains that the amount of an olive-bulk applies to liquids as well. The Gemara explains this dispute: <b>The first <i>tanna</i> does not liken all the</b> other <b>prohibitions of a nazirite to</b> the prohibition of <b>drinking</b> wine, and therefore the measurements for eating and drinking are the same as for prohibitions in other contexts: An olive-bulk of food and a quarter-<i>log</i> of drink. <b>And Rabbi Akiva</b> maintains that <b>since it is written: “Nor eat fresh grapes or dried”</b> (Numbers 6:3),this verse teaches that <b>just as eating</b> is measured by the amount of <b>an olive-bulk, so too, all the prohibitions</b> of a nazirite are measured by <b>an olive-bulk.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna further taught: <b>And he is liable for</b> consuming <b>wine by itself,</b> and for grapes by themselves, and for grape seeds by themselves, and for grape skins by themselves. <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse: <b>“Nor eat fresh grapes or dried”</b> (Numbers 6:3), serves <b>to render</b> him <b>liable for this by itself and for that by itself,</b> i.e., that he need not consume all of the grape products listed in the verses. <b>From here you derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard <b>to all prohibitions of the Torah: Just as here there is one type</b> of food, grapes, <b>which are</b> called by <b>two names,</b> fresh or dried, <b>and he is liable for this by itself and for that by itself, so too,</b> in <b>all</b> cases where there <b>is one type and they are</b> called by <b>two names, one is liable for this by itself and for that by itself.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara adds that in the case of a nazirite this principle serves <b>to include new wine,</b> i.e., grape juice, <b>and grapes.</b> Although these are apparently a single type, as the juice, before fermenting, is merely grapes in liquid form, nevertheless one is liable for grape juice and grapes separately, as they have different names.

### Part 4
§ <b>Abaye says:</b> A nazirite who <b>ate a grape seed is flogged twice,</b> i.e., two sets of thirty-nine lashes, one set for the specific prohibition stated with regard to grape seeds, and the other for the general prohibition “anything that is made of the grapevine” (Numbers 6:4). Likewise, if he <b>ate a grape skin he is flogged twice.</b> If he <b>ate a grape seed and a grape skin he is flogged three</b> times, for the seed, for the skin, and for the prohibition “anything that is made of the grapevine.” <b>Rava says: He is flogged only once</b> if he ate a seed or a skin. He is not flogged for “anything that is made of the grapevine,” <b>because one is not flogged for</b> violating <b>a general prohibition.</b> One is not liable to receive lashes for violation of a single prohibition that includes many items or cases.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa raised an objection</b> to Abaye’s statement. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: A nazirite who was drinking wine all day is liable to</b> receive <b>only one</b> set of lashes. If two witnesses <b>said to him</b> in warning: <b>Do not drink, do not drink, and he</b> continued <b>drinking, he is liable for each and every one</b> of the warnings that was followed by an act of drinking. If he <b>ate grapes and raisins, grape seeds and grape skins, and squeezed a cluster of grapes and drank</b> the juice, <b>he is flogged five</b> times. The difficulty for Abaye is as follows: <b>If so,</b> that Abaye’s opinion is accepted, <b>let him be flogged six</b> times, to include <b>one</b> more <b>for</b> transgressing the verse <b>“anything that is made</b> of the grapevine” (Numbers 6:4).

### Part 6
Abaye responded: Rabbi Eliezer <b>taught</b> certain prohibitions <b>and omitted</b> others. He did not include all the prohibitions for which one is liable to be flogged. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> else <b>did he omit that he omitted this?</b> He would not have listed all relevant prohibitions less one. The Gemara answers: <b>He</b> also <b>omitted</b> the additional prohibition of <b>“He shall not profane his word”</b> (Numbers 30:3),as the nazirite profaned his word by violating his vow of naziriteship.

### Part 7
The Gemara retorts: <b>If</b> it is <b>due to that</b> verse, this <b>is not an omission, as when</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>teaches</b> and lists the lashes which a nazirite is liable to receive, he includes only <b>matters that are not</b> found <b>elsewhere,</b> i.e., he mentions only prohibitions that apply exclusively to a nazirite. The prohibition <b>“He shall not profane his word” is</b> relevant <b>to vows</b> in general, and therefore he omitted it. Consequently, Rabbi Eliezer should have mentioned the prohibition “anything that is made of the grapevine,” and the fact that he did not do so presents a difficulty for the opinion of Abaye.

### Part 8
<b>Ravina from Parzakya said to Rav Ashi: But he omitted</b> the case <b>of in between.</b> Rabbi Eliezer could have added that a nazirite is liable not only for the seed and skin of a grape but also for the substances in between them, as the verse: “From pits to grape skin” (Numbers 6:4), comes to include all that is in between the two (see 34b). <b>Rather, Rav Pappa said:</b> Actually, Rabbi Eliezer <b>did not teach anything</b> about <b>five</b> sets of lashes, but merely stated that he is flogged for all those actions, without enumerating the precise number. Therefore, this source does not present a difficulty for Abaye. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC