
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: This is not possible, <b>as Rabbi Yehuda holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna (8a) with regard to one who vows: I am hereby a nazirite like the hair of my head, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: This</b> nazirite <b>does not shave</b> his hair <b>once</b> every <b>thirty days,</b> as he is considered to have accepted one long term of naziriteship. <b>And who is</b> the nazirite <b>who</b> has accepted distinct terms of naziriteship and therefore <b>shaves</b> his hair <b>once</b> every <b>thirty days?</b> One <b>who says: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me</b> to observe <b>naziriteships like the hair of my head, or: Like the dust of the earth, or: Like the sand of the sea.</b> Since Rabbi Yehuda agrees with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, he holds that one who uses a formulation similar to that used in the first case in the mishna and says: I am hereby a nazirite according to the capacity of the basket, has accepted one long term of naziriteship.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And does Rabbi Yehuda hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that if one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite in accordance with the number of days</b> in <b>a solar</b> year, he counts 365 consecutive naziriteships, in accordance with the number of days in a solar year. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: There was an incident</b> where someone took this vow and observed 365 consecutive terms of naziriteship. <b>Once he completed</b> all these terms of naziriteship, <b>he died.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains its question: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that <b>he accepts upon himself</b> many <b>naziriteships, that is the reason</b> for his statement <b>that once he completed</b> all these terms of naziriteship <b>he died. However, if you say</b> that Rabbi Yehuda does not agree with the unattributed opinion of the mishna and holds that <b>he accepted upon himself one</b> term of <b>naziriteship</b> lasting 365 days, <b>is there completion</b> here <b>at all?</b> Rabbi Yehuda would not have used this terminology in reference to the mishna’s previous statement if he himself holds that the individual accepted only one term of naziriteship.

### Part 4
<b>And furthermore, does</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> like <b>the number of piles [<i>helketei</i>] of figs [<i>kayitz</i>]</b> left to dry, <b>or:</b> Like <b>the number of sheaves of the Sabbatical Year,</b> he must <b>count</b> as many <b>naziriteships as the number of piles of figs or as the number of sheaves of the Sabbatical Year?</b> This proves that Rabbi Yehuda does not hold that the individual accepts only one long term of naziriteship.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: This does not prove that Rabbi Yehuda does not agree with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, since one who specifies: Like the <b>number, is different,</b> as even Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi would agree that he is referring to distinct terms of naziriteship rather than one long term of naziriteship.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And is</b> the case of one who says: Like the <b>number, different</b> according <b>to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that if one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite like the number of days</b> in <b>a solar</b> year, <b>he counts naziriteships</b> corresponding <b>to the number of days</b> in <b>a solar</b> year. If one says: <b>Like the days</b> in <b>a lunar</b> year, i.e., a year comprised of twelve lunar months, <b>he counts</b> terms of naziriteship corresponding <b>to the days</b> in <b>a lunar</b> year. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> He is assumed to have accepted one term of naziriteship <b>until he says:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to observe <b>naziriteships like the number of days</b> in <b>a solar</b> year, <b>or: Like the number of days</b> in <b>a lunar</b> year. This demonstrates that if one did not explicitly use the plural term naziriteships, he is assumed to have accepted a single term of naziriteship even if he said: Like the number.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds in accordance with</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s opinion <b>in one</b> case <b>and disagrees with him in one</b> case. <b>He holds in accordance with his</b> opinion <b>in one</b> case, as follows: If one says: I am hereby a nazirite like the hairs of my head, he has <b>accepted upon himself</b> one term of <b>naziriteship</b> for as many days as the number of hairs on his head. <b>And he disagrees with him in one</b> case, <b>as</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> the case of one who <b>counts</b> is <b>different</b> from the previous case, and so one who states: Like the number of hairs of my head, is considered to have accepted many distinct terms of naziriteship. However, according to <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, one who <b>counts</b> is <b>not different.</b> He is assumed to have accepted a single term of naziriteship unless he explicitly uses the plural term naziriteships.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>one says: I am hereby a nazirite all the days of my life,</b> or: <b>I am hereby a permanent nazirite, he is a permanent nazirite</b> and he trims his hair on a yearly basis like Absalom. However, in the case of one who accepts upon himself naziriteship for a fixed amount of time, <b>even</b> if he says: <b>One hundred years</b> or <b>even: One thousand years, he is not</b> the specific type of nazirite known as <b>a permanent nazirite. Rather,</b> he is a regular <b>nazirite forever,</b> and he may never cut his hair.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite and one, he counts two</b> terms of naziriteship, since he first took a nazirite vow and then accepted an additional term of naziriteship. If one said: I am hereby a nazirite and one <b>and more, he counts three</b> terms of naziriteship. If he added to that statement: <b>And again, he counts four.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> this last <i>halakha</i> <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary to teach this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Lest you say</b> that the words <b>and again</b> are referring to terms of naziriteship <b>equal</b> in number to <b>all the</b> terms he has already accepted, <b>and he has</b> therefore accepted <b>six</b> terms of naziriteship altogether, the <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us that</b> this is <b>not</b> the correct interpretation of his statement.

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite, Sumakhos says:</b> If he then added the word <b><i>hen</i>,</b> which means one in Greek, he has accepted <b>one</b> term of naziriteship. If one said: <b><i>Digon</i>,</b> which means two sides in Hebraicized Greek, he must observe <b>two</b> terms of naziriteship. If one said: <b><i>Trigon</i>,</b> which means triangle in Hebraicized Greek, then he has accepted three terms of naziriteship. If he said: <b><i>Tetragon</i>,</b> quadrilateral in Hebraicized Greek, then he has accepted <b>four</b> terms, and if he said: <b><i>Puntigon</i>,</b> pentagon in Hebraicized Greek, then he has accepted <b>five</b> terms of naziriteship.

### Part 11
The Gemara cites another <i>baraita</i> dealing with these same expressions: <b>The Sages taught: A round house, a two-sided</b> house, <b>a triangle-</b>shaped house, and <b>a pentagon-</b>shaped house <b>cannot become impure with leprosy,</b> whereas a house shaped like <b>a quadrilateral</b> can <b>become impure with leprosy. What is the reason</b> for this? In the verse <b>below it states,</b> when referring to <b>a wall,</b> the plural term <b>walls:</b> “And, behold, if the plague has spread in the walls of the house” (Leviticus 14:39). Additionally, in the verse <b>above it states,</b> when referring to <b>a wall,</b> the plural term <b>walls:</b> “And behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house” (Leviticus 14:37). These plural terms are unnecessary, and it is therefore understood that <b>there are four</b> walls mentioned <b>here</b> in order to indicate that a house can become impure through leprosy only if it has four sides.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC