
### Part 1
<b>or like the meal-offering of a <i>sota</i>,</b> both of which are made of barley, <b>it should become consecrated,</b> and <b>if</b> it is <b>not</b> possible to volunteer a meal-offering from barley, it should <b>not</b> be a meal-offering at all. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us that one</b> nevertheless <b>brings</b> a meal-offering made <b>from wheat.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that the difficulty raised by Ḥizkiyya against his own explanation is inconclusive, and he need not have retracted it.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one <b>said: This cow said: I am hereby a nazirite if I stand up;</b> or if he said: <b>This door says: I am hereby a nazirite if I am opened, Beit Shammai say</b> he is <b>a nazirite, and Beit Hillel say</b> he is <b>not a nazirite. Rabbi Yehuda said: Even when Beit Shammai say</b> that the vow is effective, <b>they say</b> so <b>only</b> with regard to <b>one who said: This cow is hereby</b> forbidden <b>to me</b> as <b>an offering if it stands up.</b> In that case it is as if he took a vow that the cow is forbidden. However, Beit Shammai concede that although the vow takes effect, it is not a vow of naziriteship.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Does a cow speak?</b> What is the meaning of the statement: A cow said: I am hereby a nazirite? <b>Rami bar Ḥama said: With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where there was a prone cow before him,</b> and he tried, without success, to cause it to stand, <b>and he said: This cow thinks it</b> will <b>not stand; I am hereby a nazirite</b> and therefore will refrain <b>from its flesh if it stands of its own accord, and</b> in fact <b>it stood of its own accord. Beit Shammai follow their</b> standard <b>approach and Beit Hillel follow their</b> standard <b>approach.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: <b>Beit Shammai, who say</b> that one who vows to be a nazirite and therefore will refrain <b>from dried figs and from cakes of dried figs is a nazirite,</b> say that <b>here too, when he says: I am hereby a nazirite</b> and therefore will refrain <b>from its flesh, is a nazirite.</b> Since one does not utter a statement for naught, he is held to the first part of his statement: I am hereby a nazirite, and the words: And therefore will refrain from its flesh, are disregarded. <b>And Beit Hillel say: He is not a nazirite.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> if Rami bar Ḥama is correct, <b>didn’t Beit Shammai</b> already <b>say this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>one time?</b> According to Rami bar Ḥama’s explanation, this mishna and the previous one differ only with regard to the examples provided, but the principle is identical. <b>Rava said:</b> It is normal for the Sages to cite <b>two</b> or <b>three</b> examples from different cases that offer novel perspectives, although they essentially reflect the same principle. <b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya also taught two</b> or <b>three</b> examples with regard to this same issue. <b>And Rabbi Oshaya also said two</b> or <b>three</b> examples.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> all these cases <b>are necessary, as, if it were stated</b> only that he is a nazirite <b>in this</b> case of <b>dried figs and cakes of dried figs,</b> it could have been said that it is only <b>there that Beit Shammai say he is a nazirite, since</b> figs <b>are confused with grapes,</b> and it is reasonable to assume that he had grapes in mind. <b>But meat is</b> certainly <b>not confused with grapes,</b> and it could be that in the case of the mishna he is not a nazirite even according to Beit Shammai. <b>And if it were stated</b> only that he is a nazirite where he vowed that <b>meat</b> was forbidden to him, it could have been said that <b>it is here that Beit Shammai say he is a nazirite</b> because he was referring to the often-paired <b>meat and wine,</b> and it is reasonable to assume that he might have had wine in mind. <b>But dried figs and cakes of dried figs</b> are not paired with wine, so he should <b>not</b> be a nazirite. To counter that claim, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that he is a nazirite in both cases.

### Part 7
<b>And if it were stated</b> only that he is a nazirite with regard to <b>these two</b> cases of figs and meat, it could be said: It is in <b>these</b> cases <b>that Beit Shammai say</b> he is a nazirite, <b>but</b> in the case of <b>a door, I will say they concede to Beit Hillel</b> that such a statement certainly does not constitute a vow of naziriteship. Therefore, this case had to be stated as well. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>if</b> it <b>taught</b> only the case of <b>a door,</b> the opposite could be said, i.e., that it is <b>in this</b> case that <b>Beit Hillel say</b> there is no naziriteship, <b>but in these two</b> earlier cases <b>I will say they concede to Beit Shammai</b> that the individual has taken a vow of naziriteship. The <i>tanna</i> therefore <b>teaches us that</b> this is <b>not</b> the case; in fact, Beit Shammai hold that he is a nazirite in all three cases, and Beit Hillel hold that he is not.

### Part 8
After providing the answer to one difficulty raised against Rami bar Ḥama’s explanation, Rava presents another problem. <b>Rava said: Is</b> the mishna <b>teaching: If it stood of its own accord?</b> The mishna states: If it stands, and does not mention the condition of: On its own accord. <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where there was a prone cow before him, and he said: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to bring</b> it as a nazirite <b>offering,</b> and in this way the individual accepts naziriteship upon himself. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Granted, a cow</b> can <b>be an offering, but</b> can <b>a door be an offering?</b> How can his vow that a door should be an offering be considered an acceptance of naziriteship? <b>Rather, Rava said</b> it means the following: It is a case <b>where there was a prone cow before him</b> refusing to stand,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC