
### Part 1
<b>the verse</b> therefore <b>states: “And he shall consecrate</b> to the Lord the days of his naziriteship, <b>and he shall bring</b> a lamb in its first year for a guilt-offering,” indicating: <b>Even though he has not brought</b> his guilt-offering <b>he has</b> nevertheless <b>consecrated</b> his days for the start of a new term of <b>naziriteship.</b> The opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka,</b> is as follows: <b>The verse states: “And he shall consecrate</b> to the Lord the days of his naziriteship, <b>and he shall bring,”</b> which means: <b>When has he consecrated</b> his days of <b>naziriteship,</b> i.e., when does his new term of naziriteship begin? It begins <b>when he has</b> already <b>brought</b> his guilt-offering.

### Part 2
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught this that the Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>a woman who vowed to be a nazirite and became ritually impure,</b> leading her to designate a bird for a sin-offering, a bird for a burnt-offering, and a sheep for a guilt-offering, <b>and afterward her husband nullified</b> her vow of naziriteship <b>for her, she brings the bird sin-offering and she does not bring the bird burnt-offering?</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka. According to the opinion of the Rabbis, the burnt-offering is a gift, and she would bring it despite the fact that her naziriteship was nullified. According to Rabbi Yishmael, the burnt-offering is part of the atonement process, and since her naziriteship was nullified, there is no longer a need for atonement.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What does he hold? If he holds</b> that the <b>husband uproots</b> a vow entirely when he nullifies it, and she is considered not to have vowed at all, <b>she should not bring the bird sin-offering,</b> as she was never a nazirite, and she does not need atonement. Conversely, <b>if he holds</b> that the <b>husband severs</b> the vow from that point onward, but it did take effect beforehand, <b>she should also bring the bird burnt-offering,</b> as she requires atonement for becoming impure while she was a nazirite. The Gemara answers: <b>Actually, he holds</b> that the <b>husband uproots</b> the vow, <b>and</b> why is she obliged to bring a sin-offering? <b>Rabbi Yishmael holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar HaKappar.</b>

### Part 5
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Elazar HaKappar, the esteemed one, says: What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> with regard to a nazirite: <b>“And make atonement for him, for he sinned by the soul”</b> (Numbers 6:11)? <b>And with which soul did this</b> person <b>sin</b> by becoming a nazirite? <b>Rather,</b> in <b>afflicting himself</b> by abstaining <b>from wine,</b> he is considered to have sinned with his own soul, and he must bring a sin-offering for the naziriteship itself, for causing his body to suffer. <b>And an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference can be learned from this: <b>Just as this</b> person, in <b>afflicting himself</b> by abstaining <b>only from wine, is</b> nevertheless <b>called a sinner,</b> in the case of <b>one who afflicts himself</b> by abstaining <b>from everything,</b> through fasting or other acts of mortification, <b>all the more so</b> is he described as a sinner. According to this opinion, Rabbi Yishmael holds that since the woman afflicted herself by abstaining from wine she must bring a sin-offering, even though, due to her husband’s nullification, she did not actually become a nazirite.

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty with Rabbi Elazar HaKappar’s dictum: <b>But this</b> verse, labeling the nazirite a sinner, <b>is written with regard to an impure nazirite, and we are saying</b> that <b>even a pure nazirite</b> is a sinner. The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Elazar HaKappar holds</b> that <b>a pure nazirite is also a sinner. And this is the reason that</b> the statement that a nazirite is a sinner <b>is written</b> in reference <b>to an impure nazirite</b> rather than a pure one: <b>Since he repeated his sin,</b> as his impurity causes him to start his naziriteship again, he thereby deprives himself for a longer period. He should have taken extra care to prevent this from happening.

### Part 7
§ The mishna taught that if one took a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery, <b>left</b> the cemetery, <b>and</b> then <b>entered</b> it again, the days he spent outside <b>do count</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of his term of naziriteship, and he is obligated to bring the offerings of ritual impurity upon reentering the cemetery. The mishna <b>teaches: They do count</b> as part <b>of his tally.</b> The Gemara questions the meaning of this linkage: <b>Does naziriteship take effect for him because he</b> merely <b>left</b> the ritually impure place? He is still ritually impure, and he cannot begin counting his term of naziriteship until after he has undergone the purification process. <b>Shmuel said:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where he left and</b> received the <b>sprinkling</b> of the ashes of the red heifer on the third day, <b>and</b> he <b>again</b> received the sprinkling on the seventh day <b>and immersed,</b> after which he entered the cemetery a second time. Since he is now ritually pure, his naziriteship takes effect.

### Part 8
The Gemara poses another question: According to the precise reading of the mishna, his term of naziriteship starts only if he reentered the cemetery; <b>however,</b> is it only if he returned and <b>entered</b> the cemetery that those days <b>count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> but if he did <b>not enter,</b> and remained outside the cemetery, those days <b>do not count</b> as part <b>of his tally?</b> Why should the start of the naziriteship be dependent upon his reentering the cemetery? The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>It is not necessary,</b> as follows: <b>It is not necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i>, that those days count as part of his tally, in the case of one who <b>left</b> the cemetery and began his naziriteship, <b>but even if he entered</b> the cemetery again immediately after his purification, those days <b>count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> and he will be obligated to bring the offerings of ritual impurity upon his reentry.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Kahana and Rav Asi said to Rav: What is the reason you did not explain</b> it <b>to us with these words</b> of Shmuel, as explained above? <b>He said to them: I said</b> to myself that <b>perhaps you do not require that</b> explanation, as I thought it was apparent that this is the proper explanation of the mishna.

### Part 10
§ The mishna also taught an additional <i>halakha</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> This <i>halakha</i> does <b>not</b> apply to one who entered the cemetery <b>on that very day</b> that he left it, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of an impure nazirite: <b>“But the first days shall be void”</b> (Numbers 6:12), which indicates that he does not bring the offerings <b>unless he had</b> his <b>“first days”</b> of ritual purity, during which he observed his naziriteship. <b>Ulla said: Rabbi Eliezer said</b> this <i>halakha</i>, that one day of naziriteship in purity is not sufficient to obligate him to bring offerings if he becomes impure, <b>only with regard to an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship, but a pure nazirite who became impure, even</b> if he was only pure for <b>one day</b> of naziriteship, <b>it negates</b> that day of his tally and he must bring the offerings of a impure nazirite.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC