
### Part 1
The Gemara explains: <b>Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that when <b>anyone</b> becomes ritually impure <b>after the completion</b> of his term of naziriteship, but before he brought his offerings, only <b>seven</b> days are <b>negated,</b> and the thirtieth day is after the completion of his term. The mishna then teaches that one who said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> for <b>thirty days, and became impure</b> on the <b>thirtieth day, it negates the entire</b> tally. <b>Rabbi Eliezer does not disagree</b> in this case, since it is an instance <b>where he</b> explicitly <b>said that</b> he accepts naziriteship on himself for <b>a full</b> thirty days, and his ritual impurity therefore occurs during his naziriteship period.

### Part 2
The mishna also taught that if one said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> for <b>one hundred days, and he became impure</b> on the <b>one hundredth day, it negates the entire</b> tally. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says it negates only thirty. And this entire</b> mishna should be explained <b>as we discussed it, in accordance with</b> the opinions <b>of bar Padda and Rav Mattana</b> earlier (5a–6b).

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who took a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery, even if he was there</b> for a full <b>thirty days</b> without leaving, those days he spent in the cemetery <b>do not count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> since his naziriteship has not yet gone into effect. <b>And he</b> therefore <b>does not bring</b> the three <b>offerings of impurity,</b> brought by a nazirite when rendered ritually impure by contact with a corpse, despite having been in a cemetery. If <b>he left</b> the cemetery <b>and entered</b> it again, those days <b>do count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> meaning the naziriteship takes effect, <b>and he does bring the offerings of impurity</b> for reentering the cemetery.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> This <i>halakha</i> does <b>not</b> apply to one who entered the cemetery <b>on the very day</b> that he left it, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of a ritually impure nazirite: <b>“But the first days shall be void”</b> (Numbers 6:12), which indicates that he does not bring the offerings <b>until he will have “first days”</b> of purity, during which he observed his naziriteship.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disagree with regard to <b>one who vowed to be a nazirite</b> while <b>in a cemetery. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Naziriteship takes effect for him, and Reish Lakish said: Naziriteship does not take effect for him.</b> The Gemara clarifies their respective opinions: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> who <b>said naziriteship takes effect for him, holds</b> that from the moment he accepts naziriteship upon himself it is <b>pending,</b> so that <b>when</b> it <b>is found</b> that he is in a state of <b>ritual purity</b> it <b>takes</b> immediate <b>effect.</b> The vow registers from when he states it, but it cannot take effect in practice as long as he stands in a ritually impure location. <b>And Reish Lakish said</b> that <b>naziriteship does not take effect for him</b> at all. Consequently, <b>if</b> he <b>again said</b> after leaving the cemetery that he accepts a vow of naziriteship, <b>it takes effect for him; but if</b> he does <b>not</b> repeat his vow, he is <b>not</b> a nazirite.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish</b> from the mishna: <b>One who took a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery, even if he was there</b> for a full <b>thirty days</b> without leaving, those days he spent in the cemetery <b>do not count</b> as part <b>of the tally,</b> since his naziriteship has not yet gone into effect. <b>And he</b> therefore <b>does not bring the offerings of impurity</b> despite having been in a cemetery. Rabbi Yoḥanan infers from this: <b>It is the offerings of impurity that he does not bring, but</b> as far as the issue of the naziriteship <b>taking effect, it does take effect for him.</b> Reish Lakish <b>said to him:</b> It means <b>he is not</b> included <b>in the law of</b> prohibited <b>ritual impurity, and</b> therefore <b>he is not</b> included <b>in the law of the offerings.</b> He is not a nazirite at all.

### Part 7
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>raised an objection to</b> the opinion of Reish Lakish from what was taught in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:14): <b>One who was impure and took a vow of naziriteship</b> must still observe the <i>halakhot</i> of a nazirite: He is <b>prohibited from shaving, and from drinking wine, and from becoming impure from a corpse. And if he shaved, or</b> if he <b>drank wine, or</b> if <b>he became impure from a corpse, he incurs [<i>sofeg</i>] the forty</b> lashes administered to one who actively transgresses a negative Torah prohibition. Rabbi Yoḥanan asks: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that naziriteship <b>takes effect</b> despite his ritual impurity, <b>that is the reason that he incurs the forty</b> lashes, similar to any nazirite who transgresses the prohibitions of naziriteship. <b>But if you say</b> the naziriteship <b>does not take effect</b> while he is ritually impure, <b>why does he incur the forty</b> lashes?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC