
### Part 1
The Gemara notes that it <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava:</b> If one said: <b>This</b> money <b>is for my sin-offering and the rest is for the rest of my</b> obligations of <b>naziriteship,</b> and he died, <b>the money for the sin-offering</b> is <b>taken</b> and cast into the <b>Dead Sea, and</b> as for <b>the rest, he brings a burnt-offering with half of it, and half of it</b> goes <b>for a peace-offering. And</b> one who benefits <b>from all of it</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, due to the value of a burnt-offering that is included in the money. <b>But one is not</b> liable for <b>misuse of</b> consecrated property if he benefits from <b>some</b> of the money, as the money he took is possibly that of the peace-offering, to which the prohibition against misuse does not apply.

### Part 2
If one said: <b>This</b> money <b>is for my burnt-offering and the rest is for the rest of my</b> obligations of <b>naziriteship, the money for the burnt-offering goes for a burnt-offering, and</b> one who benefits <b>from it</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. <b>And the rest is allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings, as the sum includes the value of a sin-offering. <b>And</b> one who benefits <b>from all of it</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, due to the value of a sin-offering included in it, <b>but one is not</b> liable for <b>misuse of</b> consecrated property if he benefits from <b>some</b> of the money, as he might have taken the money for a peace-offering, as stated above.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said: They taught only</b> that there is a difference between unallocated and allocated money of a nazirite with regard to <b>money</b> designated for the purchase of offerings. <b>However,</b> if one designated <b>an animal it is</b> treated <b>as allocated.</b> A nazirite is obligated to bring three types of animals, a female sheep for a sin-offering, a male sheep for a burnt-offering, and a ram in its second year for a peace-offering. It is therefore evident which offering he had in mind when designating a particular animal. Consequently, if the owner died each offering is treated in the appropriate manner: The sin-offering must be left to die, like all sin-offerings whose owners have died; the burnt-offering is sacrificed as a burnt-offering; and the peace-offering is brought as a peace-offering, although it must be eaten in one day and does not require bread.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Naḥman said: When they say</b> that if one designates <b>an animal it is</b> considered <b>as allocated, they taught</b> this <b>only</b> if it is <b>unblemished</b> and is fit to be sacrificed itself. <b>However,</b> if one separated <b>a blemished</b> animal, even if he set aside the three required types, a female sheep, a male sheep, and a ram in its second year, each one <b>is</b> considered <b>as unallocated.</b> This is because one will not sacrifice the animals themselves but will sell them and use the money. <b>However,</b> this is <b>not</b> the case with regard to <b>a bar of silver [<i>naskha</i>].</b> If one separated three silver bars they are considered allocated, as each is a distinct item, designated for a particular offering.

### Part 5
<b>And Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Even a silver bar</b> is considered unallocated; <b>however, a pile [<i>sevar</i>] of beams</b> is <b>not.</b> If he set aside three piles of construction beams for his offerings, they are treated as allocated money. <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi said to Rav Pappa: What is the reasoning of the Rabbis,</b> i.e., Rav, Rav Naḥman, and Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak, <b>who say: Money and not an animal, and not a silver bar;</b> and similarly, <b>money and not a pile?</b> Do they maintain that the <i>halakha</i> of unallocated funds applies only to money and not to other items? <b>However, if that is so,</b> one should likewise say that it applies to <b>money and not birds.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say: So too,</b> this is in fact the case, and birds cannot be considered allocated, <b>but</b> what about <b>this</b> statement <b>that Rav Ḥisda said: Nests,</b> i.e., a pair of turtle doves or pigeons, one for a burnt-offering and the other for a sin-offering, <b>are</b> considered <b>allocated only by either the acquisition of the owner,</b> if the owner designates each bird for a particular offering upon their purchase, <b>or by the actions of the priest</b> who decides which bird is for which offering when he sacrifices them. This clearly indicates that the birds are considered unallocated beforehand.

### Part 7
Therefore, the question arises: <b>Why</b> is this so? Didn’t <b>we learn this</b> <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>money,</b> whereas Rav Ḥisda’s statement indicates that birds are also considered unallocated? If Rav Ḥisda’s opinion is accepted, the same <i>halakhot</i> should also apply to animals, bars, and piles of beams.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC