
### Part 1
<b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Mari, said: This</b> problem, with regard to one who associated himself with the vow of a woman whose naziriteship was later nullified, <b>is</b> in essence the same as the dilemma <b>of Rami bar Ḥama</b> concerning a different issue. <b>As Rami bar Ḥama raises a dilemma:</b> If someone said about a certain object: <b>This</b> is forbidden <b>to me like the flesh of a peace-offering, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is this a vow or not?

### Part 2
The Gemara explains the two sides of the dilemma: <b>When a person associates</b> himself with a prohibition by means of another object, does he <b>associate</b> himself with it <b>by its fundamental state?</b> In this case, this would mean that he has associated himself with an article from which it is prohibited to benefit, as the flesh of a peace-offering is forbidden before its blood is sprinkled. Consequently, the vow would take effect. <b>Or perhaps</b> one <b>associates</b> himself with the item <b>by its</b> eventual <b>permitted state</b> [<b><i>bitzenana</i></b>], and as the flesh of a peace-offering may be eaten after the sprinkling of its blood, the vow is ineffective. This question is apparently analogous to the issue of the second woman’s vow: Is she referring to the fundamental, initial state of the first vow, before its nullification, or to its later, permitted state, after it is has been dissolved?

### Part 3
The Gemara refutes this argument: <b>Are</b> the two cases <b>comparable? There, since he said:</b> It <b>is</b> forbidden <b>to me like the flesh of a peace-offering, even though after its blood has been sprinkled it can be eaten outside</b> the courtyard, nevertheless it is <b>sacred</b> to a certain extent, which means that his vow is referring to a forbidden object. <b>However, here, if it should enter your mind</b> that the second woman <b>associates</b> herself with the object’s <b>permitted state, her husband has nullified her</b> vow, and therefore there is no vow at all, which renders the statement of the second woman meaningless. <b>Some say</b> that this last refutation is not accepted. In their opinion, the dilemma concerning two women who vowed <b>is certainly</b> similar to that <b>of Rami bar Ḥama.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: If the second woman <b>said to</b> the first who vowed naziriteship: <b>I am hereby a nazirite in your footsteps,</b> and the husband of the first woman subsequently nullified her vow, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the second woman? Again the Gemara clarifies the two sides of the question: Does the statement: <b>I am hereby</b> a nazirite <b>in your footsteps,</b> mean <b>in all matters, and</b> therefore her vow is <b>dissolved,</b> as the vow of the first woman was ultimately nullified; <b>or perhaps</b> this statement is referring <b>to</b> her status <b>before her husband nullified her</b> vow, <b>and</b> therefore the second woman is <b>bound</b> by her vow?

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an answer to this question from the mishna: With regard to <b>a woman who vowed to be a nazirite and her husband heard and said: And I, he cannot nullify</b> her vow with which he associated himself, as he would thereby be canceling his own vow. <b>And if it should enter your mind</b> that <b>when he says to her: I am hereby</b> a nazirite <b>in your footsteps, he associates</b> himself with <b>the fundamental state</b> of the vow, and it does not mean that they should be linked throughout, in that case <b>let him nullify her</b> vow <b>and uphold his.</b> In this manner the husband remains bound by his own vow while nullifying his wife’s vow.

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from</b> it that he <b>associates</b> himself with <b>all matters</b> of the vow, <b>and therefore</b> in his case <b>he cannot nullify</b> her vow, as he would thereby be nullifying his own, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>a woman</b> who <b>said: I am hereby</b> a nazirite <b>in your footsteps, she is also permitted</b> by the nullification of the first vow?

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>No; actually,</b> it is possible that one <b>associates</b> himself with <b>the fundamental state</b> of the vow, <b>and here,</b> in the case of a husband, there is a different reason that he cannot nullify the vow. <b>Since he says to her: And I, he is considered to have said:</b> It is <b>upheld for you,</b> as his own vow indicates his acceptance of hers. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>if</b> he <b>requests</b> from a halakhic authority the dissolution <b>of his upholding</b> of her vow, <b>he can nullify</b> her vow, <b>and if</b> he does <b>not</b> submit this request he <b>cannot</b> nullify his wife’s vow.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that if a husband said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite and you, and</b> his wife <b>said: Amen, he can nullify her</b> vow <b>and his</b> remains <b>intact. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> to this from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 3:5): With regard to one who said to his wife: <b>I am hereby a nazirite and you, and she said: Amen, they are both bound</b> by their vows; <b>and if</b> she did <b>not</b> answer: Amen, <b>they are both permitted, because he made his vow dependent on her vow.</b> In other words, he meant that he would be a nazirite on the condition that she too accept naziriteship upon herself. This <i>baraita</i> teaches that if she says: Amen, he cannot nullify her vow, which apparently contradicts the ruling of the mishna.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yehuda said: Teach</b> the <i>baraita</i> by emending it so that it reads: <b>He can nullify hers and his</b> remains <b>intact,</b> like the mishna, rather than: They are both bound by their vows. <b>Abaye said: You</b> can <b>even say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be read <b>as it teaches,</b> without emending it, as there is a difference between the two cases. The <b><i>baraita</i></b> is referring to a case <b>where he said to her</b> in a single clause: <b>I am hereby a nazirite and you, as he makes his vow dependent on her vow.</b> Consequently, if she is not a nazirite, his vow is also canceled.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC