
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to the <b>shaving of ritual impurity</b> performed by a nazirite who became impure during his naziriteship, <b>how</b> is it performed? The priest <b>would sprinkle</b> the waters of purification on him <b>on the third and the seventh</b> days after he contracted his impurity, as performed for all those who contracted impurity imparted by a corpse. <b>And he shaves</b> his hair <b>on the seventh</b> day <b>and brings his offerings on the eighth</b> day. <b>And if he shaved on the eighth</b> day <b>he brings his offerings on that day,</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Tarfon said to him: What is</b> the difference <b>between this</b> ritual <b>and</b> that of <b>a leper?</b> A leper also shaves on the seventh day and sacrifices his offerings on the eighth. However, if a leper shaves on the eighth day he brings his offerings on the ninth day, not on the day of his shaving.

### Part 2
Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: The purification of this</b> impure nazirite <b>depends on his days,</b> as he immerses on the seventh day like all those who contract impurity imparted by a corpse, which means he is already ritually pure on the eighth day. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a leper, his purification depends on his shaving.</b> Any immersion performed earlier is of no account, and must be repeated. <b>And</b> a leper <b>brings</b> his <b>offering only if the sun has set</b> following his immersion. Since offerings are not sacrificed at night, the bringing of his offering is postponed until the following day.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: Did Rabbi Tarfon <b>accept</b> this claim <b>from</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>or</b> did he <b>not</b> accept it? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an answer to this from <b>that</b> which <b>Hillel</b> the <i>amora</i> <b>taught:</b> If a nazirite <b>shaved on the eighth</b> day, <b>he brings his offerings on the ninth. And if it should enter your mind</b> that Rabbi Tarfon <b>accepted</b> the claim <b>from</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>let</b> the nazirite <b>bring his offerings on the eighth</b> day itself, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva. Rather, this <i>baraita</i> is certainly in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Tarfon, who remains steadfast in his rejection of Rabbi Akiva’s opinion.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> i.e., it is possible that Rabbi Tarfon accepted Rabbi Akiva’s opinion with regard to a nazirite who shaved on the eighth day, and there is a difference between the two statements: In <b>this</b> case of the mishna, it is referring to a nazirite <b>who immersed on the seventh</b> day, which means that he is entirely pure on the eighth and can therefore bring his offerings on the same day after shaving. By contrast, in <b>that</b> case of Hillel’s <i>baraita</i>, it is referring to one <b>who did not immerse on the seventh.</b> Consequently, as he immerses on the eighth day he may sacrifice his offerings only after sunset, on the ninth day.

### Part 5
§ <b>Abaye said: I encountered</b> the members of <b>the assembly of Rav Natan bar Hoshaya sitting and saying</b> the following: The verse states with regard to a man who experiences a gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>zav</i>] who immerses on the seventh day of his purification: “And on the eighth day he shall take for himself two turtledoves or two young pigeons <b>and come before the Lord to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and give them to the priest”</b> (Leviticus 15:14). <b>When</b> does <b>he come</b> to the courtyard to sacrifice his offerings? Only <b>when he has immersed</b> on the seventh day <b>and performed</b> the requirement to wait until <b>sunset.</b> In that case, <b>yes,</b> he brings his offerings, but if he <b>has not immersed and</b> has not <b>performed</b> the requirement to wait until <b>sunset, no,</b> he may not enter the courtyard.

### Part 6
<b>Apparently,</b> this <i>tanna</i> <b>maintains</b> that <b>one who immersed himself that day</b> to release himself from the status <b>of a <i>zav</i> is considered like</b> an actual <b><i>zav</i>.</b> Just as a <i>zav</i> is prohibited from entering the Levite camp in his state of impurity, the same applies to him on the day of his immersion, as he must wait until after sunset, when he is entirely pure.

### Part 7
Abaye adds: Upon hearing this, <b>I said to</b> those Sages: <b>If that is so, with regard to an impure nazirite too, as it is written: And he shall bring them,</b> referring to the verse “And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves or two young pigeons <b>to the priest, to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting”</b> (Numbers 6:10), this can be explained in a similar manner: <b>When</b> does <b>he come</b> to the courtyard to sacrifice his offerings? <b>When he has immersed</b> himself <b>and performed</b> the requirement to wait until <b>sunset.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC