
### Part 1
<b>And furthermore, if it should enter your mind</b> that <b>when he performs</b> his shaving <b>with tweezers or a plane he performs a mitzva, from</b> the fact that the word <b>razor is not written</b> he should not be allowed to use a razor at all, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish, who says</b> a principle in this regard.

### Part 2
The Gemara cites the relevant principle: <b>Any place where you find a positive</b> mitzva <b>and a prohibition</b> that clash with one another, <b>if you can</b> find some way <b>to fulfill both,</b> that is <b>preferable; and if that is not</b> possible, the <b>positive</b> mitzva <b>will come and override the prohibition.</b> In this case the leper can fulfill his duty with tweezers or a plane, and therefore it should be prohibited for him to shave with a razor. Since it was necessary for the verse to say that the positive mitzva for a leper to shave overrides the prohibition against destroying one’s beard, this proves that the mitzva can be performed only with a razor.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Eliezer, what is</b> his <b>reason?</b> From where does he derive the <i>halakha</i> that a leper must use a razor? He <b>derives</b> it <b>from</b> the fact that the verse states with regard to a leper: “He shall shave all his hair off <b>his head</b> and his beard” (Leviticus 14:9). <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why does the verse state: “His head,”</b> if it already stated: “All his hair”? It is <b>because it is stated with regard to a nazirite: “No razor shall come upon his head”</b> (Numbers 6:5), and therefore one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the same</b> should <b>also</b> apply to <b>a nazirite</b> who is <b>a leper,</b> i.e., it should be prohibited for him to shave his head even for the purification ritual for his leprosy. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His head,”</b> to teach that a nazirite who is a leper must shave his head with a razor. Being that a nazirite is prohibited only to use a razor, if a leper could fulfill his obligation to remove his hair using other implements, a nazirite who is a leper would not be permitted to use a razor. Therefore, it can be inferred from the <i>halakha</i> of a nazirite who is a leper that the only way for a leper to remove his hair is with a razor.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: And <b>from where</b> do you know that a leper must shave his head with a razor? <b>Perhaps even</b> if he <b>actually removed it with tweezers or a plane he performs a mitzva. And if you would say:</b> If so, <b>why do I</b> need the verse to teach me that he uses <b>a razor,</b> through the derivation of the superfluous term “his hair,” as above, one can answer: <b>That is to say that</b> he is permitted to shave <b>even with a razor.</b> As, <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since with regard to a nazirite, when</b> he <b>performs</b> the act of shaving <b>with a razor</b> he is <b>liable</b> for transgressing the prohibition, <b>with regard to</b> a nazirite who is <b>a leper</b> as well, he should <b>also be liable</b> even if he shaved for his leprosy. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case, but it does not teach that a leper must use a razor.

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If it should enter your mind</b> that <b>when</b> a leper <b>performs</b> his hair removal <b>with tweezers or a plane he performs a mitzva,</b> then <b>from</b> the fact that the verse <b>did not</b> explicitly <b>write: Razor,</b> it can be inferred that he is not allowed to use one, <b>in accordance with</b> the aforementioned principle of <b>Reish Lakish</b> that one may not violate a prohibition, even for the sake of a mitzva, if it is possible to perform the mitzva in a different manner. Rather, the verse must be coming to teach that the mitzva of the shaving of a leper can be fulfilled only with a razor.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> with regard to <b>this</b> term: <b>“His head,”</b> which is referring to a leper, <b>what do they learn from it?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They require</b> this term <b>to override</b> the <b>prohibition of rounding</b> the corners of the head. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse <b>“You shall not round the corners of your heads”</b> (Leviticus 19:27): One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the same</b> should <b>also</b> apply to <b>a leper,</b> that it should also be prohibited for him to round the corners of his head when he shaves. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His head,”</b> with regard to a leper.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the Torah <b>to write: “His head”? And let one derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> that the mitzva of shaving overrides that prohibition <b>from</b> the term <b>“his beard”</b> (Leviticus 14:9). <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why does the verse state: “His beard”?</b> It is <b>because</b> the verse <b>states</b> with regard to priests: <b>“Neither shall they shave off the corners of their beards”</b> (Leviticus 21:5), and therefore one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the same</b> prohibition against shaving one’s beard should <b>also</b> apply to <b>a leper.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His beard.”</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>why do I</b> need the Torah <b>to write: “His head,” and why do I</b> need it <b>to write: “His beard”?</b> One source should suffice to teach that the shaving of a leper overrides any prohibitions that would be violated by that act. The Gemara answers: Both verses <b>are necessary. As, had the Merciful One written</b> only: <b>“His beard,” and not written: “His head,” I would say</b> that <b>the rounding of the entire head,</b> i.e., shaving all the hair off one’s head and not merely the sides, is <b>not called</b> a prohibited <b>rounding.</b> If that were so, the shaving of a leper’s head would not be prohibited by Torah law. <b>For this</b> reason <b>the Merciful One writes: “His head,”</b> to teach that the shaving that the leper performs would be considered a prohibited rounding of the head had the Torah not commanded him to shave.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC