
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But the money for the sin-offering is mingled with these</b> unallocated funds. How can it all be used for gift burnt-offerings? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is</b> an accepted <b><i>halakha</i> with regard to a nazirite</b> that his unallocated funds are used for gift offerings, despite the fact that they include the value of a sin-offering. <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> The verse states: “Whether <b>for any of their vows or for any of their gift offerings,</b> which are brought to the Lord as a burnt-offering” (Leviticus 22:18). In this verse, <b>the Torah states</b> that <b>the surplus of a vow shall be for a gift offering.</b> Here too, if the vow of naziriteship cannot be fulfilled, due to the death of the one who took the vow, the money is for a gift offering.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, who said</b> that <b>it is a <i>halakha</i> with regard to a nazirite,</b> it is <b>for this reason</b> that if the funds <b>were unallocated, yes,</b> the money is used for gift offerings, but if they were <b>allocated, no,</b> they may not be used for this purpose, as this is the <i>halakha</i> passed down by tradition. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish,</b> who derives the <i>halakha</i> from the verse: <b>“For any of their vows or for any of their gift offerings,” why</b> state <b>specifically unallocated</b> funds; <b>even allocated</b> money should be used for gift offerings after the death of their owner.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said: You cannot say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> should apply to <b>allocated</b> funds, as <b>the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael has already ruled</b> in <b>this</b> regard. The <i>tanna</i> explained the following verse that deals with the obligation to bring consecrated animals to the Temple: <b>“Only your sacred things that you have, and your vows”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:26). <b>The verse is speaking of the offspring of consecrated</b> female peace-offerings <b>and their substitutes,</b> i.e., when one says a non-sacred animal should substitute for a sacred animal.

### Part 4
With regard to these animals, <b>what is their</b> means of <b>remedy? “You shall take and go to the place that the Lord shall choose”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:26). One <b>might</b> have thought that this means that <b>he must bring them up to the Temple, and</b> yet he does not sacrifice them but <b>withholds water and food from them so that they should die.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall sacrifice your burnt-offerings, the flesh and the blood,</b> upon the altar of the Lord your God; and the blood of your offerings shall be poured out against the altar of the Lord your God, and you shall eat the flesh” (Deuteronomy 12:27).

### Part 5
The <i>tanna</i> explains that this verse comes <b>to say to you: In the manner that you treat a burnt-offering you must treat its substitute,</b> i.e., it should be sacrificed in its entirety; <b>in the manner that you treat a peace-offering you must treat their offspring,</b> as its inner parts must be sacrificed on the altar, with the rest eaten by the owners. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the offspring of a sin-offering and the substitute of a guilt-offering</b> should <b>also</b> be treated <b>so,</b> i.e., they too should be sacrificed on the altar like sin-offerings and guilt-offerings. Therefore <b>the verse states: “Only”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:26), which excludes these cases. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> In the case of a guilt-offering this exposition is <b>not necessary, as it says: “It is a guilt-offering”</b> (Leviticus 5:19), from which it may be inferred: <b>It</b> alone <b>shall be</b> sacrificed <b>in its</b> current <b>state,</b> but not its substitute. This <i>baraita</i> explicitly teaches that the surplus money of a sin-offering cannot be used for another offering. Consequently, the money set aside for a nazirite’s sin-offering must be cast into the Dead Sea upon the death of its owner rather than used for a gift offering, even according to the opinion of Reish Lakish.

### Part 7
§ Since the Gemara has cited the above <i>baraita</i>, it analyzes it in detail. The <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>one must bring them up to the Temple and withhold water and food from them so that they should die. The verse states: “And you shall sacrifice your burnt-offerings.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> would one think he should act in this manner? After all, <b>it is</b> only with regard to <b>the offspring of a sin-offering that we learned</b> that it must be left to <b>die,</b> but not other offerings. Why, then, is it necessary to derive the exclusion of the offspring of other offerings and the substitution of other offerings from a verse? The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> it were <b>not</b> for the <b>verse, I would say</b> that <b>the offspring of a sin-offering</b> may be killed <b>anywhere,</b> i.e., it need not be brought to the Temple and left to die there,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC