
### Part 1
Is it <b>not due to</b> the fact <b>that the permitted</b> substance <b>combines with the forbidden</b> substance? This would mean that this principle applies in other areas of Torah law besides naziriteship. Rav Dimi <b>said to him: No; what</b> is the meaning of <b>an olive-bulk</b> in this mishna? It means <b>that there is</b> enough <i>teruma</i> in the mixture so that when one eats from the mixture he will consume <b>an olive-bulk</b> of <i>teruma</i> in the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. In that case one is liable to receive a punishment for eating this olive-bulk, as though he ate the <i>teruma</i> alone.

### Part 2
Abaye asked him: <b>But is</b> eating an olive-bulk in the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread prohibited <b>by Torah law,</b> and is one flogged for it? Rav Dimi <b>said to him: Yes.</b> Abaye asked in response: <b>If so, why do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Eliezer with regard to</b> eating <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a dip that contains bread, on Passover? The Rabbis maintain that one is not punished by Torah law for eating a mixture that contains leaven. Although the Rabbis do not derive from the term “nothing [<i>kol</i>],” that leaven in a mixture is forbidden, they should nevertheless hold one liable for eating an olive-bulk of a forbidden substance in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread.

### Part 3
Rav Dimi <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Leave</b> aside the case of <b>Babylonian <i>kutaḥ</i>, as there is no</b> possibility that one will consume an <b>olive-bulk</b> of the leaven in the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. <b>If</b> he eats <i>kutaḥ</i> in its pure, unadulterated form, <b>by swallowing [<i>shareif</i> ] it</b> as food, not as a dip, <b>his intention is</b> rendered <b>irrelevant by</b> the opinions of <b>all</b> other <b>people.</b> It is unusual for a person to eat a pungent dip by itself, and especially so quickly. One receives no punishment for conduct that anomalous. And <b>if he dips [<i>shatar</i>]</b> other food into the <i>kutaḥ</i> and eats it, he will <b>not</b> be <b>found</b> to have consumed <b>an olive-bulk in</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread. Due to the pungency of the dip, one typically adds only a small portion of it to his food.

### Part 4
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rav Dimi from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>two</b> spice <b>mortars, one</b> used <b>for <i>teruma</i></b> spices <b>and one</b> used <b>for non-sacred</b> spices, <b>before which</b> were <b>two pots, one of <i>teruma</i></b> produce <b>and</b> the other <b>one of non-sacred</b> produce, <b>and</b> the contents of <b>these</b> mortars <b>fell into these</b> pots, but it is unknown which produce fell into which pot, the contents of <b>both</b> pots <b>are permitted;</b> the pot containing the <i>teruma</i> produce is permitted for a priest and the pot containing non-sacred produce is permitted for all. This is <b>because I say,</b> with no definitive proof to the contrary, that the <b>non-sacred</b> spices <b>fell into the non-sacred</b> produce <b>and</b> the <b><i>teruma</i></b> spices <b>fell into the <i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 5
Abaye explains his objection: <b>And if it would enter your mind</b> to say that eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of a forbidden substance in the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread is prohibited <b>by Torah law, why do we say</b> this principle: <b>Because I say</b> that the non-sacred spices fell into the non-sacred produce? If the <i>teruma</i> spices fell into the pot containing non-sacred produce, one who eats from the mixture will consume an olive-bulk of <i>teruma</i> within the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, and he will thereby violate a Torah prohibition. One is not lenient in a case of this kind.

### Part 6
Rav Dimi said to him: <b>Rather, what</b> will you say? That the <b>permitted</b> substance <b>combines with the forbidden</b> substance? But if so, one can still ask <b>why we say</b> this principle: <b>Because I say</b> that the non-sacred spices fell into the non-sacred produce. After all, it is possible that the second mortar contained slightly less than an olive-bulk of <i>teruma</i>, and the permitted substance combined with it to form the amount of an olive-bulk. <b>Rather, leave</b> aside the case of <b><i>teruma</i></b> separated <b>from spices,</b> which <b>is</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>by rabbinic law.</b> By Torah law one is required to separate <i>teruma</i> only from grain, wine, and oil. The Sages are lenient with regard to <i>teruma</i> by rabbinic law.

### Part 7
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rav Dimi from a similar <i>baraita</i>: There were <b>two baskets, one</b> filled <b>with <i>teruma</i> and one</b> filled <b>with non-sacred</b> produce, <b>and before them</b> were <b>two</b> containers each containing <b>a <i>se’a</i></b> of produce, <b>one of non-sacred</b> produce <b>and</b> the <b>one of <i>teruma</i>, and these,</b> the contents of each of the baskets, <b>fell into those,</b> each of the containers before them. Although it is prohibited for non-priests to eat a mixture of <i>teruma</i> and non-sacred produce, and it is possible that the <i>teruma</i> fell into the non-sacred produce, the contents of <b>both</b> of the vessels are nevertheless <b>permitted;</b> the container of <i>teruma</i> produce is permitted for a priest and the container of non-sacred produce is permitted for all. This is <b>because I say</b> that <b>the non-sacred</b> produce <b>fell into the non-sacred</b> produce <b>and the <i>teruma</i> fell into the <i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 8
Abaye explains: <b>And if it would enter your mind</b> to say that eating <b>an olive-bulk</b> of forbidden food in the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf</b> of bread is <b>prohibited</b> by Torah law, <b>why do we say</b> the principle: <b>Because I say</b> the non-sacred produce fell into the non-sacred produce? Why are the Sages not concerned that one might eat an olive-bulk of <i>teruma</i> in the time it takes to eat a half-loaf of bread, which is prohibited by Torah law?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC