
### Part 1
<b>No,</b> you cannot make this claim, because <b>if you say</b> that this is true <b>with regard to a male, when</b> bringing his offering involves only <b>one</b> uncertain <b>prohibition,</b> i.e., that he might be bringing non-sacred animals into the Temple courtyard, <b>shall you</b> also <b>say</b> that this is the case <b>with regard to a female, whose</b> case includes <b>two prohibitions?</b> This concludes the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are these <b>two prohibitions?</b> Are they <b>not the prohibition</b> against consuming an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass</b> by eating a bird killed by pinching, <b>and</b> the prohibition against bringing <b>non-sacred</b> animals <b>into the</b> Temple <b>courtyard?</b> This shows that the prohibition against bringing non-sacred animals into the Temple courtyard applies by Torah law according to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>Rav Aḥa, son</b> of <b>Rav Ika, objects to this: And perhaps</b> one is not liable for these prohibitions by Torah law, rather, the <i>baraita</i> means that one <b>is liable for this because it appears like two</b> Torah <b>prohibitions,</b> although they actually apply only <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 3
§ The Gemara returns to the question of whether the ruling that a man can impose naziriteship on his son is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai or whether it is part of the boy’s education. <b>Let us say</b> that this is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> As it is taught: <b>Until when can</b> a father <b>vow</b> that <b>his son</b> should <b>be a nazirite?</b> It is <b>until</b> the son <b>develops two</b> pubic <b>hairs;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> It is <b>until he reaches the age of vows,</b> usually approximately a year earlier, when he demonstrates an understanding of the nature of vows. If he vows at that age and comprehends the significance of his utterance, his vow is valid.

### Part 4
<b>What, is it not</b> the case that this <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>: As Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that <b>it is a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai <b>with regard to a nazirite, and</b> therefore <b>even though</b> the son has already <b>reached the age of vows</b> and is capable of making his own decision with regard to the vow, this <i>halakha</i> states that the father <b>continues to vow for him until he develops two</b> pubic <b>hairs,</b> the sign of maturity. <b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that the father can vow for the son only <b>until he reaches the age of vows, holds</b> that he imposes a vow on his son <b>in order to educate him in mitzvot, and since</b> the son <b>has left</b> the father’s <b>supervision</b> to the degree that he can utter his own vows, the father <b>is no longer obligated</b> to educate him in this area of <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this argument. The Sages <b>say</b> in response: <b>No;</b> this is not the correct explanation of that dispute, as one can say <b>that everyone,</b> both Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, agrees with Rabbi Yoḥanan that <b>it is a <i>halakha</i> with regard to a nazirite, and here they disagree with regard to</b> the issue of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority.</b> In other words, they dispute the case of a child who utters a vow when he is almost mature, on the verge of puberty. It is an accepted <i>halakha</i> that the vow of this child is valid if he understands its meaning. The dispute concerns the source of this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that the status of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority</b> applies <b>by rabbinic law, and</b> therefore the <i>halakha</i> <b>by Torah law</b> that a father can vow on behalf of his son <b>comes and overrides</b> the decree that one who is near the age of maturity is considered an independent adult with regard to vows, which is <b>by rabbinic law. And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, holds</b> that the status of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority</b> applies <b>by Torah law.</b> Consequently, the <i>halakha</i> that a father can vow on behalf of his son does not apply to this case.

### Part 7
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone</b> agrees that a father vows for his son <b>in order to educate him in mitzvot,</b> which means it is by rabbinic law, <b>and</b> likewise the status of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority is</b> also <b>by rabbinic law.</b> In that case, the <i>tanna’im</i> dispute the following: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that the mitzva of <b>education,</b> which applies <b>by rabbinic law, comes and overrides</b> the status of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority,</b> which is also <b>by rabbinic law.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> that a father can vow for his son only <b>until he reaches the age of vows, holds</b> that the mitzva of <b>education by rabbinic law does not come and override</b> the status of <b>a minor one year before</b> he or she <b>reaches majority.</b> Consequently, there is no necessary connection between this dispute of <i>tanna’im</i> and the argument between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish as to whether the ruling that a father can impose naziriteship on his son is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai or an educational tool.

### Part 9
With regard to the dispute concerning the time period for a father’s vow on behalf of his son, the Gemara suggests: <b>Shall we say</b> that the dispute between <b>these <i>tanna’im</i> is like</b> the dispute between <b>those</b> other <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Nidda</i> 5:9): <b>An incident</b> occurred <b>involving Rabbi Ḥanina</b> in <b>which his father vowed</b> that he should <b>be a nazirite</b> when he was a minor, <b>and they brought him before Rabban Gamliel, and Rabban Gamliel examined him to discern if he had</b> already <b>developed two</b> pubic <b>hairs,</b> in which case the vow would not take effect, or <b>if he had not developed</b> them, which would mean that the vow was valid.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> that Rabban Gamliel examined him <b>to discern whether he had reached the age of vows or not,</b> which he maintains is the decisive factor. The child <b>said to</b> Rabban Gamliel: <b>My teacher, do not go to the trouble of examining me,</b> since <b>if I am a minor I shall be</b> a nazirite <b>due to</b> my <b>father’s</b> vow, and <b>if I am an adult, I shall be</b> a nazirite <b>due to my own</b> vow. <b>Rabban Gamliel arose and kissed</b> the child <b>on his head. He said: I am certain of this</b> child <b>that</b> he will eventually become <b>an authority of <i>halakha</i> for the Jewish people. They said:</b> In fact, <b>it was only a few years</b> later <b>that</b> the child <b>issued rulings for the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara explains its suggestion: <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> that a father can vow on behalf of his son only <b>until he reaches the age of vows, this is</b> why the child <b>said: If I am a minor I shall be</b> a nazirite <b>due to</b> my <b>father,</b> as he means: If I have not yet reached the age of vows. <b>However, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said</b> that a father can vow naziriteship for his son <b>until he develops two</b> pubic <b>hairs,</b> despite the fact that he is already mature with regard to vows, what is the meaning of: <b>And if I am an adult, I shall be</b> a nazirite <b>due to my own vow?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC