
### Part 1
in <b>the earlier clause,</b> where one said: I did not know that a nazirite is prohibited from drinking wine, that is a case <b>where he vowed naziriteship</b> with regard to only <b>one</b> of the prohibitions. The difference of opinion is as follows: <b>According to the Rabbis, who say that even if he vowed naziriteship</b> with regard to <b>only one of the</b> prohibitions of naziriteship <b>he is</b> nevertheless <b>a nazirite,</b> in that case <b>he is prohibited</b> by all of them, despite not knowing about the prohibition against consuming wine. <b>According to Rabbi Shimon</b> who <b>said</b> he is not a nazirite <b>unless he takes a vow of naziriteship</b> with regard to <b>all of them,</b> he is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 2
Conversely, <b>the last clause</b> addresses one who <b>vowed</b> naziriteship with regard to <b>all of them,</b> thereby accepting upon himself all the <i>halakhot</i> of naziriteship, <b>and</b> now wishes <b>to request</b> dissolution <b>of one</b> of the prohibitions, thinking that a halakhic authority can dissolve one aspect of his naziriteship.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>According to the Rabbis, who say that even if he vowed naziriteship</b> with regard to <b>only one of the</b> prohibitions of naziriteship <b>he is</b> nevertheless <b>a nazirite,</b> in that case too, <b>when he requests</b> of a halakhic authority to dissolve <b>one of them, he is permitted</b> to engage in all of the behaviors forbidden to a nazirite. Just as the acceptance of one part of naziriteship causes one to be bound by all the <i>halakhot</i> of naziriteship, dissolution of one element of naziriteship nullifies the entire naziriteship. <b>According to Rabbi Shimon, who said</b> that he is not a nazirite <b>unless he takes a vow of naziriteship</b> with regard to <b>all of them, when he requests</b> dissolution <b>of that</b> prohibition, none of the prohibitions are permitted <b>until he requests</b> dissolution <b>of all of</b> the prohibitions of nazirite-ship. <b>Due to this</b> the mishna <b>teaches: And Rabbi Shimon prohibits</b> him.

### Part 4
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: The Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon <b>disagree with regard to vows</b> impeded by <b>circumstances beyond one’s control, and</b> their disagreement is <b>in the dispute between Shmuel and Rav Asi. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 20b): <b>The Sages dissolved four</b> types of <b>vows</b> without the requirement of a request to a halakhic authority. The first category is <b>vows of exhortation,</b> where one employs a vow to urge another to perform some action. The second category is <b>vows of exaggeration [<i>havai</i>],</b> where one utters a vow that is dependent upon some outlandish claim, such as: I should be bound by a vow if I did not see a square snake. Since he knows that there are no square snakes, it is evident that he is not serious in taking his vow. The third category is <b>vows that are unintentional,</b> where one vows for a particular reason and later discovers he was mistaken with regard to the facts; and the fourth is <b>vows</b> whose fulfillment are impeded by <b>circumstances beyond one’s control.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates the dispute between Shmuel and Rav Asi: <b>And Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said: These four vows require a request</b> made <b>to the halakhic authorities</b> to dissolve them, and the vows are not dissolved unless one does so. Rav Yehuda related: <b>When I stated this</b> <i>halakha</i> of Rav Asi <b>before Shmuel, he said to me: The <i>tanna</i> teaches</b> that <b>the Sages dissolved</b> them, <b>and you say they require a request</b> made <b>to the halakhic authorities?</b> Shmuel holds that they are dissolved automatically.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues its explanation: The dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon in the last clause of the mishna is also with regard to this <i>halakha</i>. This case is referring to a kind of a vow impeded by circumstances beyond one’s control, as he claims that he has no choice but to drink wine or contract impurity from corpses. <b>The Rabbis hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel,</b> and therefore the vow is dissolved automatically, without the need to request dissolution from a halakhic authority; <b>and Rabbi Shimon holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Asi</b> that one must make a request to a halakhic authority to dissolve the vow, and he remains a nazirite until he does so.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite and it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave a nazirite,</b> meaning he will also pay for the offerings that a nazirite brings when he cuts his hair; <b>and another heard and said: And I</b> too am a nazirite <b>and it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave a nazirite,</b> the other is also a nazirite and is obligated to pay for the offerings of a nazirite. <b>If they were perspicacious</b> and wish to limit their expenses, <b>they shave each other.</b> They may each pay for the other’s offerings, so that their additional vows will not cost them anything. <b>And if not,</b> if this arrangement did not occur to them and each brought his own offerings, <b>they shave other nazirites,</b> i.e., they must pay for the offerings of other nazirites.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages. If one said: I am hereby a nazirite and it is incumbent upon me to shave a nazirite as well, and <b>another heard and said</b> only: <b>And I, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do we say that: <b>And I, indicates</b> acceptance <b>of the entire statement</b> of the first one, which would mean he is both a nazirite and must shave a nazirite, <b>or perhaps it indicates</b> acceptance <b>of</b> only <b>half the statement</b> of the first speaker? <b>If you say it indicates</b> acceptance <b>of</b> only <b>half the statement,</b> does it indicate acceptance <b>of the first clause,</b> i.e., I am hereby a nazirite, <b>or the last clause,</b> i.e., it is incumbent upon me to shave a nazirite?

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna. If a second person said: <b>And I, and it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave a nazirite,</b> then <b>if they are perspicacious they shave each other. From</b> the fact <b>that it says: And I, and it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me,</b> you can <b>learn from this</b> that: <b>And I, indicates</b> acceptance <b>of</b> only <b>half the statement,</b> as otherwise he would not need to add the second part. The Sages <b>say</b> in response to this attempted proof: <b>Yes,</b> this proves that it <b>indicates</b> acceptance <b>of</b> only <b>half the statement. However,</b> the other question still has not been answered: Is he referring <b>to the first</b> part of the original statement <b>or to the last</b> part? The Gemara answers: This can be learned <b>from</b> the mishna <b>itself. From</b> the fact <b>that it says: And it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave</b> a nazirite, one can <b>learn from this</b> that: <b>And I, indicates</b> acceptance <b>of the beginning of the statement</b> to become a nazirite, which is why one has to add that he must also pay for the offerings of a nazirite.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to Rava: From where</b> do you know <b>that</b> it <b>is so</b> that the words: And I, are referring to the first part of the statement? <b>Actually, I will say to you</b> that: <b>And I,</b> is referring <b>to the entire statement, and if</b> you claim otherwise <b>because</b> he added: <b>And it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me,</b> the explanation of <b>what he is saying</b> is: <b>And it is</b> incumbent <b>on me</b> to do <b>this matter.</b> He was merely clarifying what his intention was when he said: And I. <b>As, if you do not say so,</b> then with regard to <b>that which is taught in the last clause,</b> in the following mishna, that if one said: <b>It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave half a nazirite, and another heard</b> that <b>and said: And I, it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to shave half a nazirite,</b> then <b>there, are there two statements?</b> That mishna is addressing only a single vow. <b>Rather, what is he saying</b> by using the words: <b>It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me?</b> He is referring <b>to that</b> whole <b>matter; here too,</b> in this mishna, <b>when he says: And it is</b> incumbent <b>upon me,</b> he is referring <b>to that</b> whole <b>matter.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rava said to him: How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? Granted, if you say</b> that in <b>the first clause</b> it <b>is necessary</b> to teach both parts of the statement and in <b>the latter clause</b> it <b>is not necessary</b> to teach both parts of the statement, then it can be said that <b>he taught the unnecessary latter clause due to the necessary first clause,</b> as it is typical for a mishna to phrase both of its sections in the same style. <b>But if you say</b> that it <b>is not necessary</b> to teach both parts of the statement in <b>the first clause</b> and it is also <b>not necessary</b> to teach both parts of the statement in <b>the latter clause,</b> as one has accepted the other’s entire statement by saying: And I, would the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach an unnecessary first clause and teach an unnecessary latter clause?</b> Since the addition of: And it is incumbent upon me, is not required in the latter mishna, it must be necessary in this mishna, so the inference of Rava is correct.

### Part 12
§ After analyzing the mishna itself, the Gemara turns to a related issue. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Yosef said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: One who says to his agent:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC