
### Part 1
Reish Lakish responded: <b>With what are we dealing here</b> in this <i>baraita</i>? <b>With one who left and entered,</b> meaning that after having left the cemetery and purifying himself, he then vowed again to be a nazirite and subsequently reentered the cemetery.

### Part 2
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>raised</b> another <b>objection to</b> Reish Lakish’s opinion from a different source: <b>The difference between a ritually impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship and a ritually pure nazirite who became impure is only</b> the following <i>halakha</i>: If <b>a ritually impure</b> person <b>took a vow of naziriteship, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>counts</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of his term of naziriteship, since he starts counting his term of naziriteship as soon as he becomes pure. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a ritually pure nazirite who became impure, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>does not count</b> as part <b>of his tally.</b> Rather, he starts counting his days of naziriteship from the following day, which is the day on which he brings his offerings. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that a vow of naziriteship stated while ritually impure <b>does not take effect, why</b> does the <i>baraita</i> state that the seventh day <b>counts</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> indicating that the naziriteship takes effect without a need for him to restate his vow?

### Part 3
As a result of this question, the Gemara offers a different interpretation of their dispute. <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi said:</b> The dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish is not as stated above. With regard to the question of the vow of naziriteship <b>taking effect, everyone agrees that</b> it <b>takes effect</b> from the moment of his acceptance of naziriteship, even if he was in the cemetery. <b>Rather, when they disagree</b> it is with regard <b>to being flogged,</b> as follows: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan holds</b> that <b>since</b> the vow <b>takes effect, he is</b> therefore <b>flogged</b> for becoming impure, <b>and Reish Lakish holds that he is not flogged</b> for becoming impure, <b>but</b> the vow <b>does take effect</b> with regard to the prohibitions of naziriteship.

### Part 4
According to this version of the dispute as well, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised an objection to Reish Lakish</b> from the mishna, which states: <b>One who took a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery, even if he was there</b> for a full <b>thirty days</b> without leaving, those days he spent in the cemetery <b>do not count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> since his naziriteship has not yet gone into effect. <b>And he</b> therefore <b>does not bring the offerings of impurity,</b> despite having been in a cemetery. Rabbi Yoḥanan infers from this: <b>It is the offerings of impurity</b> that <b>he does not bring, but</b> he is <b>flogged for</b> contracting impurity, which is not in accordance with the opinion of Reish Lakish.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: This inference is not correct, as <b>by right</b> the mishna <b>should teach: He is not flogged, but due to</b> the fact that the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which states: If <b>he left</b> the cemetery <b>and entered</b> it again, those days <b>do count</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> meaning the naziriteship takes effect, <b>and he does bring the offerings of impurity</b> for reentering the cemetery, the <i>tanna</i> therefore <b>taught</b> a similar phrasing in <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna: <b>He does not bring the offerings of impurity,</b> so this should not be seen as an indication that he is not flogged.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests another proof in support of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>The difference between an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship and a pure nazirite who became impure is only</b> the following <i>halakha</i>: <b>That</b> in the case of <b>an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>counts</b> as part <b>of his tally</b> of the term of naziriteship. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a pure nazirite who became impure, his seventh</b> day of purification <b>does not count</b> as part <b>of his tally.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>But with regard to flogging, this</b> nazirite <b>and that</b> nazirite <b>are equal.</b> Reish Lakish <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan: This is <b>not</b> a correct inference; rather, it is with regard <b>to shaving</b> on the seventh day of purification that <b>this</b> nazirite <b>and that</b> nazirite <b>are equal,</b> since even a ritually impure person who took a vow of naziriteship must shave on that day.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> in that case, according to Reish Lakish, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to flogging? This</b> nazirite <b>is flogged, and that</b> nazirite, who was ritually impure when he vowed, <b>is not flogged?</b> If so, <b>let him teach this</b> difference as well; why does the <i>baraita</i> state that there is only one difference between them? The Gemara answers: This <i>baraita</i> <b>is speaking of his remedy; it is not speaking of</b> a matter that is <b>detrimental to him.</b> Consequently the <i>baraita</i> does not discuss a nazirite’s punishments and discusses only the means by which he can resume his observance of naziriteship.

### Part 8
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which is taught in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:14): <b>One who was ritually impure and took a vow of naziriteship</b> must still observe the <i>halakhot</i> of a nazirite. He is <b>prohibited from shaving and from drinking wine. And if he shaved, or</b> if <b>he drank wine, or</b> if <b>he became ritually impure from a corpse, he incurs the forty</b> lashes administered to one who actively transgresses a negative Torah prohibition. The Gemara concludes: This is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion of Reish Lakish, as explained by Mar bar Rav Ashi.

### Part 9
§ After concluding that one who takes a vow of naziriteship while in a cemetery is liable to receive lashes, <b>Rava asks: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> if one took a vow to be <b>a nazirite while</b> standing <b>in a cemetery:</b> Is it <b>necessary</b> that his exit from the cemetery be <b>delayed</b> for a specific period of time for him to become liable <b>to</b> receive <b>lashes,</b> just as one who becomes ritually impure while in the Temple is receives lashes only if he remains there for a specific period of time, <b>or</b> is it <b>not</b> necessary?

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What are the circumstances</b> in which this question is relevant? <b>If we say that they said to him</b> in warning: <b>Do not take a vow of naziriteship</b> in the cemetery, and he ignored their warning and took a vow of naziriteship, <b>why do I</b> need him to <b>delay</b> his exit? <b>What is the reason</b> that one who was already <b>a nazirite</b> when he entered a cemetery <b>does not need to delay</b> his exit in order to be liable to receive lashes? <b>Because they warn him</b> not to enter, and if he enters he has transgressed a prohibition and is flogged. <b>Here too, they warn him</b> not to take the vow, and he should therefore be liable to receive lashes if he does take the vow.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC