
### Part 1
<b>If we say</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon,</b> even in a case where the individual in question came before us and identified himself, <b>is</b> the one who claimed to know his identity <b>be a nazirite? Since at the time when he vowed he did not know whether</b> the subject of their debate <b>is so-and-so or not, does naziriteship take effect with regard to him? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 3:19) that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Tarfon:</b> In the case of the mishna <b>not one of</b> the six people <b>is a nazirite, since naziriteship is imposed</b> upon someone <b>only if</b> the vow is stated with <b>explicitness [<i>hafla’a</i>]</b> enunciated. The Torah says that a vow must be “clearly” pronounced, as the verse states: “When either man or woman shall clearly utter [<i>yafli</i>] a vow, the vow of a nazirite” (Numbers 6:2). This verse indicates that his vow is valid only if it is explicit.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> the mishna represents the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as</b> stated with regard to <b>a heap</b> of grain. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:9): If someone said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite on the condition that this heap</b> of grain <b>contains one hundred <i>kor</i>,</b> a measurement of volume, <b>and</b> when <b>he went</b> to measure it <b>he discovered that</b> the heap <b>was stolen or lost,</b> so that the amount it held cannot be determined, <b>Rabbi Shimon deems</b> him <b>prohibited</b> in all the <i>halakhot</i> of naziriteship, as the heap might have contained one hundred <i>kor</i>. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda deems him permitted,</b> as he maintains that the <i>halakha</i> is lenient in cases of uncertain naziriteship. Rabbi Yehuda’s reasoning applies equally to the case of the mishna.

### Part 3
As for <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who disputes the ruling of the mishna, he <b>holds</b> with regard to the heap of grain: <b>Since if</b> the heap had <b>not been stolen perhaps it might have contained one hundred <i>kor</i> and he</b> would have been <b>a nazirite, now too, he is a nazirite</b> due to the uncertainty. <b>And here too,</b> in the case of the mishna, <b>since if</b> that person would have <b>come before us and we</b> would have <b>known that he was so-and-so,</b> the one who took the vow <b>would have been a nazirite,</b> consequently, <b>now too, he is a nazirite</b> as a result of the uncertainty cast by the unknown identity of the individual.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Someone <b>saw a kosher animal with characteristics of both a domesticated animal and a non-domesticated animal [<i>koy</i>], and said: I am hereby a nazirite if this is a non-domesticated animal;</b> and another individual said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if this is not a non-domesticated animal;</b> and a third person said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if this is a domesticated animal;</b> and a fourth said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if this not a domesticated animal.</b>

### Part 5
The mishna continues: A fifth person added: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if this is a non-domesticated animal and a domesticated animal,</b> and a sixth person said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if this is neither a non-domesticated animal nor a domesticated animal.</b> Someone who heard all the above statements said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if one of you is a nazirite,</b> and another one stated: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if not one of you is a nazirite,</b> and a final person said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite if all of you are nazirites.</b> In this case, <b>they are all nazirites.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the ruling of the mishna that they are all nazirites, it <b>is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> that this case involves a total of <b>nine nazirites, and</b> it <b>is taught</b> in <b>the other</b> <i>baraita</i> that there are <b>nine</b> sets of <b>naziriteship</b> here. The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted,</b> one can understand the <i>baraita</i> that says that there are <b>nine nazirites, for example, if there were many people who associated</b> their naziriteship with the status of <b>this</b> <i>koy</i>, each with one of the statements listed above.

### Part 7
<b>However, how can you find these</b> circumstances of <b>nine</b> sets of <b>naziriteship in one person? Granted, you find six, as we learned</b> in the mishna that there are six ways in which the nature of a <i>koy</i> can be expressed: It is a non-domesticated animal; it is not a non-domesticated animal; it is a domesticated animal; it is not a domesticated animal; is a non-domesticated animal and a domesticated animal; it is neither a non-domesticated animal nor a domesticated animal. One person could associate his acceptance of naziriteship with all of the above possibilities.

### Part 8
<b>However, how can you find these</b> circumstances of the other <b>three</b> sets of naziriteship? The statements: If one of you is a nazirite, and: If one of you is not a nazirite, are necessarily expressed by individuals who did not make the initial six statements, as these last three statements address the group of people who made the first six statements. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> It is possible in a case <b>where</b> nine people issued the statements mentioned in the mishna, and someone <b>said: I am hereby a nazirite and the naziriteship of all of them are</b> incumbent <b>upon me.</b> Since each of the nine people is obligated to observe a term of naziriteship, this last one is obligated to observe nine terms.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC