
### Part 1
§ The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Natan says</b> that if one says: I am hereby a nazirite and therefore will refrain from dried figs, <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He has rendered dried figs <b>forbidden</b> to himself <b>by a vow, and</b> he is also <b>a nazirite; and Beit Hillel say:</b> He has rendered dried figs <b>forbidden</b> to himself <b>by a vow, but</b> he is <b>not a nazirite.</b> According to Rabbi Natan, <b>Beit Shammai hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> that a person does not utter statements for naught and that he becomes a nazirite as soon as he says: I am hereby a nazirite; <b>and</b> he explains the opinion of Beit Shammai <b>as Rabbi Yehuda</b> does, i.e., that one in this situation has vowed that dried figs are forbidden to him, since the rest of his statement also has significance. <b>And Beit Hillel hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> that one is held to the conclusion of his statement, and he has therefore vowed that dried figs are forbidden to him.

### Part 2
<b>Some say a different version</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Natan says</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He has rendered dried figs <b>forbidden</b> to himself <b>by a vow and he is not a nazirite; and Beit Hillel say:</b> He has <b>not</b> rendered dried figs <b>forbidden</b> to himself <b>by a vow, and</b> he is <b>not a nazirite.</b> According to this version, the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai is as Rabbi Yehuda</b> explained in the mishna, <b>and Beit Hillel hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that a donation not performed in the manner typical of donors is not a donation.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara discusses a case mentioned earlier. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Menaḥot</i> 103a): With regard to <b>one who says: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me to bring a meal-offering from barley,</b> since voluntary meal-offerings are made only with wheat <b>he must bring</b> a meal-offering <b>from wheat.</b> If one vows to bring a meal-offering from <b>flour,</b> since a standard meal-offering is made from fine flour <b>he must bring</b> one from <b>fine flour.</b> If one vows to bring a meal-offering <b>without oil and frankincense, he must bring it with oil and frankincense,</b> in accordance with the <i>halakha</i>. If one vows to bring a meal-offering with <b>half of a tenth</b> of an ephah of fine flour, <b>he must bring</b> a meal-offering with <b>a full tenth,</b> since a meal-offering cannot have less than one-tenth of an ephah of flour. If one vows to bring a meal-offering with <b>a tenth and a half, he brings two</b> units of a tenth of an ephah in his meal-offering. Since half of one-tenth of an ephah is the minimum, his vow is increased to two full tenths. <b>Rabbi Shimon exempts</b> him entirely in all these cases, <b>as he did not donate in the manner</b> typical <b>of donors.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught that when one said: It is</b> incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a meal-offering from barley, he brings</b> a meal-offering <b>from wheat? Ḥizkiyya said</b> that this <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught as a dispute</b> between <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>and it is</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai.</b> He explains: <b>Didn’t Beit Shammai say that when one said:</b> I am hereby a nazirite and therefore will refrain <b>from dried figs and from cakes of dried figs, he is a nazirite,</b> indicating that he is held to only the first part of his statement, and the conflicting details are ignored? <b>So too, when he said</b> that he will bring a meal-offering <b>from barley, he brings</b> it <b>from wheat,</b> and the same analysis applies to the other cases listed in this mishna.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: You</b> can <b>even say</b> that <b>all,</b> including Beit Hillel, <b>agree</b> with the opinion of the Rabbis of the mishna, as the mishna may be stated <b>with regard to one who</b> later <b>says,</b> to clarify his earlier statement: <b>Had I known that one cannot vow in this manner,</b> that one cannot bring a voluntary meal-offering from barley, <b>I would not have vowed that way, only this way,</b> to bring a meal-offering from wheat. Mentioning barley was an error on his part rather than a condition, and he actually meant to bring a standard meal-offering. In this case even Beit Hillel, who maintain in the mishna here that there is no vow at all, deem him liable to bring a proper meal-offering.

### Part 6
With regard to this ruling <b>Ḥizkiyya says: They taught</b> that he must bring a meal-offering from wheat <b>only if he said</b> that he will bring a meal-offering <b>from barley. But</b> if <b>he said</b> he will bring a meal-offering <b>from lentils, he does not bring anything.</b> The difference is that the meal-offerings of the <i>omer</i> and of a <i>sota</i> are made from barley, so if he said: From barley, he may have mistakenly believed that a voluntary meal-offering can be prepared from barley as well. As everyone knows that no meal-offering is made from lentils, his statement demonstrates that he never intended to bring a meal-offering.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Now</b> consider, <b>in accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>does Ḥizkiyya establish the mishna</b> in <i>Menaḥot</i>? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai. But lentils relative to a meal-offering are comparable to dried figs relative to a nazirite,</b> as everyone is likewise aware that one cannot be a nazirite and therefore refrain from figs, <b>and</b> yet <b>Beit Shammai say he is a nazirite.</b> Why not say that one who vows to bring a meal-offering from lentils is obligated to bring a standard meal-offering? The Gemara answers: <b>Ḥizkiyya retracted from it</b> and no longer holds that the mishna in <i>Menaḥot</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And why did he</b> in fact <b>retract from it? Rava said:</b> The <b>mishna caused him difficulty</b> and demonstrated his error. If the mishna is in accordance with Beit Shammai’s opinion with regard to a nazirite, <b>why does</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically teach</b> the case of one who says that he will bring a meal-offering <b>from barley? Let him teach</b> a greater novelty, i.e., that even one who vowed to bring a meal-offering <b>from lentils</b> is obligated to bring a meal-offering made from wheat. <b>Rather, Ḥizkiyya holds</b> that <b>when Beit Shammai stated</b> their opinion <b>there,</b> i.e., in the mishna with regard to a nazirite, their intention was <b>as</b> explained by <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> that one’s statement is interpreted to be meaningful and it can have the meaning of creating a vow that dried figs are forbidden to him. In the case of the meal-offering, even they agree that since one’s vow has no meaning, as there cannot be a meal-offering made of lentils, no vow takes effect.

### Part 9
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even</b> one who vowed to bring a meal-offering <b>from lentils</b> must bring a meal-offering from wheat. The Gemara asks: <b>But Rabbi Yoḥanan is he who said</b> that the mishna is referring to a case of one <b>who says: Had I known that one cannot vow in this manner, I would not have vowed that way, only this way?</b> In the case of the lentils, it is not reasonable to say that he erred in thinking that one may vow to bring a meal-offering from lentils. The Gemara answers: <b>He stated</b> this ruling <b>in accordance with the statement of Ḥizkiyya.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan was not stating his own opinion; he was challenging the ruling of Ḥizkiyya.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains his challenge: <b>What is the reason you retracted</b> your earlier opinion that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai? You did so <b>because it does not teach: From lentils.</b> That is not conclusive, as <b>perhaps it is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>It is not necessary,</b> as follows: <b>It is not necessary</b> to say that <b>when one says:</b> It is incumbent upon me to bring a meal-offering <b>from lentils, that he brings a proper meal-offering</b> of wheat. In that situation <b>it can be said</b> that by saying: From lentils, <b>he is retracting</b> his first statement and now wants to rescind his vow. <b>And</b> yet Beit Shammai hold that he is <b>held to the first</b> part of his <b>statement,</b> and they do not allow the rescinding of a vow of consecration. <b>But if he said:</b> It is incumbent upon me to bring a meal-offering <b>from barley,</b> since it is possible to explain that <b>certainly this is what he said: If</b> this meal-offering that I have vowed to bring from barley <b>is consecrated like the <i>omer</i> meal-offering,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC