
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> A dispute among <i>amora’im</i> <b>was stated. Rabba said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said: The Torah stated</b> a <i>halakha</i> involving a nazirite in <b>a categorical verse: “He shall not become impure</b> for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die” (Numbers 6:7). This includes all manners of contracting impurity imparted by a corpse, whether ritual impurity imparted by contact, by carrying, or in a tent, i.e., a corpse under the same roof. <b>When</b> the Torah <b>states: “He shall not come</b> near to a dead body” (Numbers 6:6), it serves <b>to warn him with regard to</b> contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse in any manner, as above, and <b>to warn him with regard to entering</b> an enclosure with a corpse, which is a unique prohibition applicable to a nazirite that is added by the phrase “He shall not come near to a dead body,” and he is liable separately for each. <b>However,</b> with regard to one contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse <b>and</b> again contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse, the verse does <b>not</b> warn him, and he is liable to receive only one set of lashes.

### Part 2
<b>And Rav Yosef says</b> in the form of an oath: <b>By God! Rav Huna</b> actually <b>says</b> that he is separately liable <b>even</b> for contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse <b>and</b> again contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse, not only if he entered an enclosure with a corpse. <b>As Rav Huna says:</b> With regard to <b>a nazirite who was standing in a cemetery,</b> who is already ritually impure, <b>and they extended his corpse,</b> i.e., the corpse of his relative, <b>to him, and</b> similarly if they extended <b>a different corpse</b> to him <b>and he touched it,</b> he is <b>liable.</b> But <b>why</b> is he liable; he <b>has already become impure and is standing</b> in his state of impurity? <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from</b> this that <b>Rav Huna said</b> he is separately liable <b>even</b> for contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse <b>and</b> again contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse?

### Part 3
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rav Yosef from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a priest who had a corpse placed on his shoulder, and they extended his corpse,</b> i.e., the corpse of his relative, <b>to him, and</b> similarly if they extended <b>a different corpse</b> to him <b>and he touched it,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>he should be liable</b> even for this contact. Therefore, <b>the verse states,</b> with regard to the prohibition against a High Priest becoming impure: <b>“And he shall not profane</b> the Sanctuary of his God” (Leviticus 21:12). This teaches that the prohibition of impurity applies <b>to one who is not</b> yet <b>profaned, excluding this one who is</b> already <b>profaned and standing</b> in that state of ritual impurity.

### Part 4
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: But</b> if, as you claim, one is not liable for contracting one impurity after another, <b>the mishna should pose a difficulty for you. As we learned</b> in the mishna: If a nazirite <b>became ritually impure from corpses</b> many times <b>all day, he is liable</b> to receive <b>only one</b> set of lashes. <b>If they said to him: Do not become impure, do not become impure,</b> and he continues to become impure, <b>he is liable for each and every</b> time he was warned. <b>But why</b> should this be so? <b>He has already become impure and is standing</b> in his state of impurity.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> the mishna and <i>baraita</i> pose <b>a difficulty for each other.</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a concurrent</b> contact with impurity, i.e., when he touched the second corpse he was still in contact with the first, so he is not liable for the second impurity. Conversely, <b>there</b> the mishna is referring <b>to</b> impurity that was <b>not a concurrent</b> contact. He touched the second corpse only after he had separated himself from the first, and therefore he is liable for each impurity.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> this <i>halakha</i>, that a nazirite is exempt from being flogged for a second contact with a corpse in a case of <b>concurrent impurity,</b> does it apply <b>by Torah law? Didn’t Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yannai said: They stated</b> the principle of <b>concurrent impurity only with regard to</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i> and consecrated</b> foods, i.e., that one who touches a person who is in contact with a corpse is ritually impure with impurity imparted by a corpse for seven days. <b>However, with regard to a nazirite,</b> i.e., the question of whether a nazirite is considered ritually impure and has to bring offerings due to this contact, <b>and</b> with regard to <b>one who performs</b> the ritual of <b>the Paschal offering,</b> this <i>halakha</i> does <b>not</b> apply. <b>And if you say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>by Torah law, what is different</b> between the case of <i>teruma</i> and the case of a nazirite?

### Part 7
The Gemara explains that there are two different types of concurrent impurity. <b>Here,</b> where there is a difference between <i>teruma</i> and a nazirite, it is referring to <b>concurrent</b> contact of one <b>person with</b> another <b>person.</b> If one touched another while the other was in contact with a corpse, the impurity of the first is by rabbinic law. By contrast, <b>there</b> it is referring <b>to concurrent</b> contact of <b>a person with a corpse.</b> One who is touching a corpse is considered linked to impurity by Torah law with regard to his second contact with a corpse.

### Part 8
The Gemara summarizes: The fact that one who is touching a corpse is not liable for contact with a second corpse leads to Rabba’s aforementioned ruling: <b>However,</b> with regard to contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse <b>and</b> again contracting <b>impurity</b> from a corpse, i.e., if a person contracted impurity imparted by a corpse and then touched another corpse while still in contact with the first corpse, he is <b>not</b> liable for the second impurity, <b>as he has already become impure and is standing</b> in his state of ritual impurity.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to <b>impurity and entering</b> one should say <b>likewise,</b> that when he enters an enclosure containing a corpse when he is in contact with a corpse, <b>he has already become impure and is standing</b> in his impurity. Why should he be flogged again for entering the enclosure? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In the case of impurity and entering one must again distinguish between two instances: <b>Here,</b> where Rav Huna said that one will be liable for both contractions of impurity, it is referring to one who was pure and who went <b>into a house</b> that contained a corpse, rendering him liable twice. The entering the house and the ritual impurity imparted by a corpse in a tent, i.e., to that which is under the same roof, occurred simultaneously, and therefore he is liable twice, once for contracting ritual impurity and once for violating the particular prohibition against a nazirite entering an enclosure with a corpse in it.

### Part 10
Whereas <b>there,</b> where he is liable only once, it is referring to one who was <b>in a field.</b> In other words, if a nazirite touched a corpse in a field and subsequently entered an enclosure with a corpse in it while he was still in contact with the first corpse, he is not liable separately for that entering, as he was already ritually impure.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC