
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> and therefore will refrain <b>from dried figs and from cakes of dried figs, Beit Shammai say:</b> His statement renders him a full-fledged <b>nazirite,</b> and his addition: From dried figs, is insignificant, as this fruit is not included in the prohibitions of a nazirite, which include only products of the grapevine. <b>And Beit Hillel say: He is not a nazirite,</b> since he did not accept naziriteship upon himself. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: Even when Beit Shammai said</b> that this vow takes effect, <b>they said</b> that <b>only in</b> a case <b>where</b> one <b>said</b> that he meant: <b>They are hereby</b> forbidden <b>to me</b> as <b>an offering.</b> In that case it is as though he took a vow rendering the figs forbidden to him. However, Beit Shammai concede that although the vow takes effect, it is not a vow of naziriteship.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> It is stated in the mishna that if one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> and therefore will refrain <b>from dried figs and from cakes of dried figs, Beit Shammai say:</b> He is a <b>nazirite.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But why? The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah in the passage dealing with naziriteship: <b>“From anything that is made of the grapevine</b>…he shall not eat” (Numbers 6:4). In naziriteship, only the fruit of the vine is prohibited. The Gemara answers: <b>Beit Shammai hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says: A person does not utter a statement for naught.</b> In other words, if one utters a statement that cannot be fulfilled as stated, his statement is interpreted in a manner that renders it relevant. Here too, Beit Shammai say that he misspoke and actually intended to take a vow of naziriteship.

### Part 3
<b>And Beit Hillel hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, who says: A person is</b> also <b>held accountable for the conclusion of his statement.</b> If one states two irreconcilable clauses, e.g., this animal is a substitute for a burnt-offering, a substitute for a peace-offering; the second clause is not disregarded, and the animal assumes both statuses. <b>And this is a vow with its</b> inherent <b>opening,</b> i.e., reason for dissolution. Although he said: I am hereby a nazirite, by adding the words: From dried figs and from cakes of dried figs, he indicated that his intention was that the naziriteship would not take effect.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Beit Shammai too, it is a vow with its</b> inherent <b>opening,</b> and since they certainly agree that a vow of this kind does not take effect, why do they hold that this vow takes effect?

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the dispute: <b>Rather, Beit Shammai hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who said: A person does not utter a statement for naught, and once he said: I am hereby a nazirite, he is</b> immediately rendered <b>a nazirite. When he</b> then <b>says:</b> And therefore I will refrain <b>from dried figs and from cakes of dried figs, he is coming to request</b> that a halakhic authority dissolve his vow, as he regrets having taken the vow and is now seeking to dissolve it. <b>And Beit Shammai follow their</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as they say:</b> One <b>cannot request</b> that a halakhic authority dissolve a vow <b>of consecrated</b> property, which one can do for vows of prohibition. <b>And since</b> one <b>cannot request</b> that a halakhic authority dissolve a vow <b>of consecrated</b> property, likewise one <b>cannot request</b> that a halakhic authority dissolve a vow <b>of naziriteship,</b> as the legal status of a vow of naziriteship is like that of a vow of consecrated property in this regard.

### Part 6
<b>And Beit Hillel hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Menaḥot</i> 103a): If one vows to bring a meal-offering from barley, since voluntary meal-offerings are brought only from wheat, the Rabbis say: He must bring a meal-offering from wheat, <b>and Rabbi Shimon exempts</b> him entirely, <b>as he did not donate in the manner</b> typical <b>of donors.</b> Since he donated an offering that cannot be sacrificed, his vow is meaningless. Here too, since he took a vow of naziriteship stating that he therefore will refrain from dried figs rather than from wine, his statement is meaningless.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC