
### Part 1
<b>how can you say</b> that <b>this</b> one <b>that</b> is <b>for the sin-offering shall be sacrificed</b> as <b>a burnt-offering? Here,</b> only <b>a female</b> may be sacrificed as a sin-offering, whereas <b>here,</b> in the case of a burnt-offering, it must be <b>male.</b> Therefore, it is as though he allocated each animal for a specific offering. Consequently, you cannot compare this case to that of items that are not inherently designated for a particular purpose, e.g., a blemished animal or a silver bar, as they have the status of unallocated funds.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Hamnuna raised an objection</b> against Rav Naḥman’s statement: <b>And do we say</b> that <b>a blemished animal is considered like unallocated</b> funds? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof to the contrary from the following <i>baraita</i>, which begins: <b>How,</b> in what case, did the Sages <b>say</b> that <b>a man shaves,</b> i.e., bring the offerings sacrificed at the end of a term of naziriteship, <b>for his father’s naziriteship?</b> The Gemara cites a part of that <i>baraita</i> which records a case where the son does not bring the offerings for his father’s naziriteship: <b>When he and his father were</b> both <b>nazirites, and his father separated money for</b> the offerings of <b>his naziriteship and died, and</b> the son <b>said: I am hereby a nazirite on the condition that I will shave,</b> i.e., bring my offerings, <b>through the money</b> my <b>father</b> set aside, in that case he cannot shave for his father’s naziriteship.

### Part 3
Consequently, if the father <b>had unallocated funds, they are allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings. If <b>he had allocated animals,</b> that which is for <b>a sin-offering must</b> be left to <b>die,</b> like any sin-offering whose owner has died; the animal for <b>a burnt-offering is sacrificed</b> as <b>a burnt-offering, and</b> the animal for <b>a peace-offering is sacrificed</b> as <b>a peace-offering. What, is it not</b> referring <b>even</b> to the case of <b>a blemished</b> animal, as the <i>baraita</i> differentiated only between money and animals? This indicates that a blemished animal is also considered allocated, which contradicts Rav Naḥman’s ruling.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>No;</b> it is referring only to <b>an unblemished</b> animal, which is considered allocated because it is suitable for an offering itself. The Gemara asks: <b>However,</b> if that is so, is <b>a blemished</b> animal <b>considered like unallocated</b> funds? In that case, <b>why</b> does the <i>baraita</i> <b>specifically</b> distinguish between animals and unallocated <b>funds? Let</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>say</b> as follows: If he <b>had a blemished animal</b> its money <b>is allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings. The <i>baraita</i> would thereby distinguish between two similar cases that involve animals, from which one could infer the <i>halakha</i> of unallocated funds.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>So too,</b> this is the meaning of the <i>baraita</i>, and there is no difference between a blemished animal and money. The Gemara clarifies this claim: <b>For what</b> purpose is <b>a blemished</b> animal <b>consecrated?</b> It is <b>for the value</b> of its sale, and this <b>value is</b> provided in <b>money.</b> Consequently, this <i>baraita</i> does not refute Rav Naḥman’s opinion that the <i>halakha</i> of a blemished animal is like that of unallocated funds.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rava</b> also <b>raises an objection</b> against Rav Naḥman’s opinion, from a <i>baraita</i> that deals with sin-offerings. The Torah states: “And he shall bring for <b>his offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:23), which indicates: <b>He fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with his</b> own <b>offering, but he does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering,</b> if his father was obligated to bring a sin-offering and died after separating an animal for this purpose. One <b>might</b> have thought that one <b>does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with an offering that his father separated</b> only in a case where the son’s transgression is not equal in severity to that of his father’s sin, e.g., sacrificing his offering <b>from</b> animals that his father designated to atone for <b>a minor</b> transgression to atone <b>for</b> his own <b>major</b> transgression, <b>or from</b> animals that his father designated to atone for <b>a major</b> transgression, to atone <b>for</b> his own <b>minor</b> transgression.

### Part 7
<b>However,</b> one might have thought that <b>he does fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with an offering that his father separated</b> if it is <b>from</b> animals his father set aside to atone for <b>a minor</b> transgression and the son atones <b>for</b> his own <b>minor</b> one, <b>or from</b> animals the father set aside to atone for <b>a major</b> transgression and the son atones <b>for</b> his own <b>major</b> one. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:23), and it repeats: <b>“His offering”</b> (Leviticus 4:28), to emphasize that <b>he fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with his</b> own <b>offering, and he does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering</b> even for similar transgressions.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that a son <b>does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with his father’s offering,</b> i.e., <b>with an animal that</b> his father <b>separated, even from</b> animals that his father designated to atone for <b>a minor</b> transgression, to atone <b>for</b> the son’s <b>minor</b> one, <b>or from</b> animals the father set aside to atone for <b>a major</b> transgression, to atone <b>for</b> the son’s <b>major</b> one, as stated above, <b>as a person cannot shave,</b> i.e., bring an offering, <b>for naziriteship with his father’s animal.</b> Consequently, the <i>halakhot</i> of inheritance do not apply to this animal. <b>However,</b> it is nevertheless possible that a son can <b>fulfill</b> his obligation by purchasing a sin-offering <b>with money that his father separated</b> for his own sin-offering, <b>even from</b> money the father set aside to atone for <b>a major</b> transgression in a case where the son is atoning <b>for a minor</b> transgression, <b>or from</b> money the father set aside to atone for <b>a minor</b> transgression in a case where the son is atoning <b>for a major</b> one, <b>as a person can shave,</b> i.e., purchase an offering, <b>with the money his father</b> set aside <b>for naziriteship,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC