
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>Here,</b> with regard to impurity, <b>it is different, as the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“And he defile his consecrated head”</b> (Numbers 6:9), which indicates that even <b>one whose naziriteship is</b> dependent only <b>upon his head,</b> i.e., one who has completed his naziriteship other than shaving, is liable to receive lashes if he contracts impurity. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the statement of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A nazirite whose days are completed is forbidden to shave, and</b> is forbidden <b>to drink wine, and</b> is forbidden <b>to contract impurity from corpses. And if he did shave, or drink wine, or contract impurity from corpses, he incurs the forty</b> lashes administered to one who violates a Torah prohibition. This <i>baraita</i> clearly states that he is flogged for any of the three prohibitions, which is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of the statement of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of one who said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite when I will have a son, and</b> he added: I am hereby <b>a nazirite</b> from now for <b>one hundred days,</b> and he then began observing the one hundred days of his naziriteship, if <b>a son is born to him up to seventy</b> days from the start of his naziriteship <b>he has not lost anything.</b> He pauses from the observance of the naziriteship of one hundred days and observes the thirty-day term for his son. He then completes the thirty or more days left of his initial naziriteship. However, if his son is born <b>after seventy</b> days, this <b>negates</b> the first <b>seventy</b> days, and he must observe a full hundred days after he completes the naziriteship for his son. The reason is that here, he is unable to merely complete the remaining days of his initial naziriteship after shaving at the completion of the naziriteship for his son, <b>since shaving cannot</b> be performed after a period of <b>less than thirty days.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav said: The seventieth day</b> itself <b>counts for here and for there,</b> as the last of the seventy days of his term of naziriteship as well as the first day of the naziriteship for his son. The Gemara questions Rav’s statement. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If a son is <b>born to him up to seventy, he has not lost anything.</b> This seems to include the seventieth day as well. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that it <b>counts for here and for there,</b> not only has he not lost anything, but he even <b>gains</b> a day, so why would the mishna state: He has not lost anything? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, by right</b> the mishna should <b>not</b> have <b>taught: Up to seventy</b> he has not lost anything, since if the son is born on the seventieth day he actually gains, as stated above, <b>but due to</b> the fact <b>that it is taught</b> in <b>the last clause</b> of the mishna: <b>After seventy it negates seventy,</b> in which case he does lose, the <i>tanna</i> therefore <b>teaches the first clause</b> with the contrasting expression: Up to <b>seventy</b> he has not lost anything.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks further: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a statement that contradicts Rav’s opinion <b>from the last clause</b> of the mishna: If the son <b>is born after seventy</b> days, <b>it negates</b> the first <b>seventy</b> days. If, as Rav stated, one day can count for both terms, then the final day of the thirty-day term for his son also counts toward his hundred-day term, meaning that there will be thirty days remaining for a full hair growth; in that case, why should he forfeit the first days? The Gemara answers this: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>After?</b> It means <b>after, after.</b> The mishna is referring to the second day after the seventieth, the seventy-second day, so that there do not remain thirty days for his hair to grow.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to this explanation, <b>what</b> would be the <i>halakha</i> if a son is born on the day that <b>actually</b> comes <b>after</b> the seventieth, the seventy-first day; <b>so too,</b> would Rav say <b>that it does not negate</b> the previous days, because he has thirty days remaining to grow his hair? <b>If so, why</b> does the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically teach:</b> If he is <b>born up to seventy he has not lost anything?</b> The same would hold true <b>even</b> for a case where he was born on the day <b>after seventy as well,</b> as <b>didn’t you say</b> that <b>it does not negate? Rather,</b> one must <b>learn from this</b> that: <b>After,</b> means the <b>actual</b> day after, the seventy-first day, <b>and likewise</b> conclude that <b>the mishna</b> is difficult <b>for Rav.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna disagrees with Rav.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And Rav, in accordance with whose</b> opinion did <b>he say his <i>halakha</i>?</b> Since the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna disagrees with him, which <i>tanna</i> does he follow in ruling that one day may be counted for two different observances? <b>If we say</b> that he stated the ruling <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abba Shaul, as we learned</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Mo’ed Katan</i> 2:9): With regard to <b>one who buries his dead three days before a pilgrimage Festival,</b> the rabbinic <b>decree of seven</b> days of mourning <b>is voided for him,</b> i.e., once the Festival begins, he no longer observes the prohibitions and customs of the first seven days of mourning. Since he has mourned for three days, the Festival voids the remainder of the seven days.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If he buried his dead <b>eight days before a pilgrimage Festival,</b> the rabbinic <b>decree of</b> the restrictions of <b>thirty</b> days of mourning <b>is voided for him</b> as well. Since he already observed one day of this type of mourning he need not complete the entire period, <b>and it is</b> therefore <b>permitted</b> for him <b>to cut his hair on the eve of the pilgrimage Festival</b> in honor of the Festival. <b>But if he did not cut his hair on the eve of the pilgrimage Festival, it is prohibited</b> for him <b>to cut his hair after the pilgrimage Festival,</b> until thirty days of mourning have passed.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC