
### Part 1
the <b>offering</b> in each case does not include a level <b>of poverty.</b> In both cases the offering is fixed, i.e., a poor person does not have the option of bringing a less expensive offering due to his financial straits. Will <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to the leper, whose offering</b> includes a level <b>of poverty,</b> as a poor person can bring turtledoves instead of sheep (Leviticus 14:21–22)? Since the Torah was more lenient in the case of a leper than the cases of a nazirite and the Levites, it could also be that the <i>halakha</i> is also lenient with regard to his shaving, by not demanding the use of a razor. Consequently, there is no proof that a leper is obligated to shave with a razor.

### Part 2
In continuation of this discussion, <b>Rava bar Mesharshiyya said to Rava: This <i>tanna</i> initially said,</b> with regard to the obligation of a nazirite to shave with a razor (39b): <b>It is impossible to learn</b> this requirement <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a leper</b> must use a razor, <b>as one does not derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> in <b>a lenient</b> case <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> in a more <b>stringent</b> one in a manner that would cause one <b>to be stringent</b> in the more lenient case. This indicates that it is obvious to the <i>tanna</i> that a leper himself must shave with a razor. <b>And he then said: Let us derive</b> by means <b>of an inference</b> that a leper must use a razor, <b>and</b> ultimately <b>he did not derive</b> it <b>from an inference</b> by analogy <b>either,</b> due to Rava of Barnish’s objection. What, then, is the source for the <i>halakha</i> that a leper must use a razor?

### Part 3
Rava <b>said to</b> Rava bar Mesharshiyya: <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that one cannot derive the <i>halakha</i> from the case of a leper, which indicates that it is evident that a leper must shave with a razor, is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> They derive the <i>halakha</i> of a leper’s shaving from the prohibition against destroying one’s beard. Conversely, <b>this</b> source, which attempted to derive the shaving of a leper from that of a nazirite and the Levites, is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who does not derive the <i>halakha</i> of a leper’s shaving from the prohibition against destroying one’s beard. Rabbi Eliezer must therefore derive this <i>halakha</i> by analogy from the cases of a nazirite and the Levites. This is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Makkot</i> 20a): <b>And</b> one is <b>liable</b> for destroying his beard <b>only if he removes it with a razor. Rabbi Eliezer says: Even</b> if <b>he removed it with</b> small <b>tweezers or a plane [<i>rehitni</i>] he is liable.</b> Rabbi Eliezer maintains that one violates the prohibition even by destroying his beard with means other than a razor.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of the Rabbis;</b> how do they derive from this <i>halakha</i> that a leper must shave with a razor? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the verse states with regard to the shaving of a leper: “He shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard” (Leviticus 14:9). Since the verse states: “All his hair,” <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “His beard”?</b> It is <b>because it is stated</b> with regard to priests: <b>“Neither shall they shave off the corners of their beards”</b> (Leviticus 21:5). One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the same</b> should <b>also</b> apply to <b>a leper,</b> i.e. that a leper who was a priest should be prohibited from shaving his beard. For this reason <b>the verse states: “His beard,”</b> which emphasizes that despite the general prohibition barring a priest from shaving his beard, a priest who is a leper is obligated to do so.

### Part 5
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> this shaving of a leper must be performed <b>with a razor?</b> It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, with regard to the prohibition against a priest shaving his beard in the verse <b>“Neither shall they shave off the corners of their beards”</b> (Leviticus 21:5): One <b>might</b> have thought that a priest should <b>be liable even if he shaved</b> his beard <b>with scissors. The verse states,</b> in the general prohibition issued to all Jewish men: <b>“Neither shall you destroy</b> the corners of your beard” (Leviticus 19:27). This teaches that one is liable only if he shaves in a destructive manner, by uprooting the hairs entirely, which excludes the use of scissors.

### Part 6
One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> if <b>he removed it with tweezers or planes he</b> should <b>be liable. The verse states: “Neither shall they shave off the corners of their beards”</b> (Leviticus 21:5), which indicates that the priests are liable only for removing their beards in a manner of shaving. <b>How so? What is</b> the manner of <b>shaving that involves destruction? You must say this is</b> shaving with <b>a razor.</b> The Rabbis learn from here that the implement forbidden to a priest is the same one that must be used for the shaving of a leper, namely a razor.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> do we know that this is correct? <b>Perhaps</b> if a leper <b>actually removed it with tweezers or a plane he also performs the mitzva</b> and thereby fulfills his obligation, <b>and this</b> verse <b>is coming to teach us that even</b> if the leper shaved <b>with a razor he is not liable for</b> destroying his beard. In other words, one might have thought that a leper is prohibited from shaving with a razor, and the verse teaches that this is not correct. If so, there is no proof from here that the shaving of a leper must be performed with a razor.

### Part 8
<b>They say</b> in response: <b>If it should enter your mind that if</b> a leper <b>performs</b> his shaving <b>with tweezers or a plane too,</b> it is <b>well</b> and he has performed the mitzva, then <b>let the verse be silent</b> and refrain <b>from</b> the extra phrase, “his beard.” <b>And</b> I would <b>say</b> the following: <b>And just as with regard to a nazirite, who performs a transgression</b> by shaving his hair during his naziriteship and who, <b>even so,</b> is <b>deemed liable</b> for removing hair without the use of a razor, <b>here</b> too, in the case of a leper, <b>where</b> his shaving is <b>a mitzva,</b> does it <b>not</b> follow <b>all the more so</b> that he should be permitted to shave with any implement?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC