
### Part 1
one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even a leper</b> should <b>likewise</b> be prohibited from rounding off his head. <b>The verse</b> therefore specifically <b>states “his head”</b> to teach that the mitzva for a leper to remove all the hair of his head overrides the prohibition against rounding one’s head. <b>And it was taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why must the verse state: “His head,”</b> with regard to a leper? <b>Since it states, with regard to a nazirite: “No razor shall come upon his head”</b> (Numbers 6:5), one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even a nazirite leper</b> should <b>likewise</b> be prohibited from shaving upon his purification. Therefore <b>the verse states: “His head,”</b> from which it is derived that a nazirite who contracted leprosy must shave his head like any other leper.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains: <b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that this <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>? According to the one who says</b> that the additional term “his head” is to counter a possible prohibition derived <b>from</b> the case of <b>a nazirite,</b> he <b>holds</b> that <b>rounding the entire head is not called rounding,</b> and therefore there is no need for a verse to teach that a leper can shave all the hair off his head. <b>And when the verse</b> “He shall shave all his hair; his head” <b>comes,</b> it comes <b>to override</b> both the <b>prohibition</b>: “No razor shall come upon his head,” <b>and</b> the <b>positive mitzva</b> stated with regard to a nazirite: “He shall be sacred, he shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long” (Numbers 6:5). <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>rounding the entire head is called rounding, and</b> consequently, <b>when the verse comes,</b> it serves <b>to override only</b> the <b>prohibition</b> against rounding one’s head.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said</b> in refutation of this proof: No; it is possible <b>that everyone</b> agrees that <b>rounding the entire head is not called rounding,</b> even the <i>tanna</i> who maintains that the purpose of the verse is to permit a leper to round his head. <b>And when the verse comes,</b> it serves to address a particular case, <b>such as</b> one <b>in which he rounded</b> off only the corners of the head <b>and ultimately shaved</b> off the rest of his hair. Although shaving only the corners of one’s head is prohibited by the Torah, in this instance he is exempt. The reason is that <b>since if he shaved</b> his entire head <b>at one time he would not be liable,</b> then <b>if he rounded</b> off his head <b>and ultimately shaved he is also not liable.</b> Since a leper is permitted to shave all of his head, he can do so in any manner he chooses.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty with this explanation: <b>And does the verse write this?</b> Is it permitted unnecessarily to transgress a prohibition <i>ab initio</i>? <b>But didn’t Reish Lakish say: Any place that you find positive mitzvot and prohibitions</b> that clash with one another, <b>if you can</b> find some way to <b>fulfill both,</b> that is <b>preferable; and if</b> that is <b>not</b> possible, <b>the positive mitzva will come and override the prohibition?</b> If it is not prohibited to round the entire head, the leper can shave his hair in a permitted manner, and the Torah would not have allowed him to do so in a way that involves the violation of a prohibition.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara retracts its previous explanation and states the opposite. It is <b>that everyone</b> agrees that <b>rounding the entire head is called rounding.</b> If so, the <i>baraita</i> that states that the verse: “He shall shave all his hair; his head” (Leviticus 14:9), comes to permit the rounding of a leper’s entire head is easily understood, as it is derived from here that a positive mitzva overrides a prohibition. <b>But</b> according to <b>the one who establishes the verse</b> “He shall shave all his hair; his head” as coming <b>to override</b> the <b>prohibition and</b> the <b>positive mitzva</b> of a nazirite, <b>from where does he</b> derive that a positive mitzva overrides <b>only a prohibition?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: He <b>derives</b> it <b>from</b> the case of ritual <b>fringes.</b> How so? <b>As the verse states: “You shall not wear diverse kinds,</b> wool and linen together” (Deuteronomy 22:11), <b>and it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that although the command <b>“You shall not wear diverse kinds”</b> applies to most cases, the juxtaposed verse: <b>“You shall make for you fringes”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:12), teaches that one may prepare ritual fringes even <b>from</b> diverse kinds of wool and linen. This teaches that the positive mitzva of ritual fringes overrides the prohibition of diverse kinds.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>who derives</b> the principle that a positive mitzva overrides a prohibition <b>from “his head”</b> stated with regard to a leper, <b>what is the reason that he does not derive it from</b> the verse that deals with ritual <b>fringes?</b> Why does he require another source? The Gemara answers: He could have <b>said to you</b> that the verse concerning ritual fringes does not teach that principle, as <b>it comes for that which Rava</b> said.

### Part 8
<b>As Rava raises a contradiction: It is written: “And that they put on the fringe of each corner</b> a thread of sky blue” (Numbers 15:38). The phrase “the fringe of each corner” indicates that ritual fringes must be of the same <b>type as the corner</b> of the robe itself, upon which they must place <b>“a thread of sky blue.” And</b> yet <b>it is written:</b> “You shall not wear diverse kinds, <b>wool and linen together”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:11). The juxtaposition of these two verses teaches that ritual fringes must be made from wool and linen.

### Part 9
<b>How so?</b> How can ritual fringes be made from the same material as the garment itself and also from wool and linen? The answer is that ritual fringes of <b>wool and linen exempt</b> a garment and fulfill the obligation of ritual fringes <b>whether</b> the garment is <b>of their</b> own <b>type,</b> i.e., wool and linen, or <b>whether it is not of their own type,</b> i.e., all other materials. By contrast, with regard to ritual fringes of <b>other types</b> of materials, <b>they exempt</b> a garment <b>of their</b> own <b>type;</b> but <b>they do not exempt</b> a garment that is <b>not of their type.</b> According to this, the verse juxtaposing ritual fringes to diverse kinds serves to teach that ritual fringes made of wool and linen exempt any garment, not to teach that a positive mitzva overrides a prohibition.

### Part 10
The Gemara continues this line of inquiry: <b>And</b> according to <b>this <i>tanna</i>, who derives from</b> the term <b>“his head”</b> that a positive mitzva overrides <b>only a prohibition, from where do we</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> the <b>positive mitzva</b> of a leper’s shaving <b>comes and overrides</b> the <b>prohibition and the positive mitzva</b> of a nazirite? From where does this <b>tanna</b> learn that a nazirite who contracted leprosy is obligated to shave? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> the verse: “He shall shave all his hair; his head and <b>his beard”</b> (Leviticus 14:9).

### Part 11
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state: “His beard”?</b> After all, a beard is already included in the phrase “all his hair.” The <i>baraita</i> answers: <b>Since it is stated,</b> with regard to priests: <b>“Neither shall they shave off the corners of their beard”</b> (Leviticus 21:5), one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even a priest who is a leper is included</b> in this prohibition against shaving his beard. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “His beard”</b> in connection to a leper.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And the one who derives</b> from <b>“his head” that</b> the mitzva of shaving overrides both <b>the positive mitzva and prohibition</b> of a nazirite, <b>let him derive</b> this principle <b>from “his beard.”</b> The Gemara refutes this suggestion: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> that the term “his beard” teaches that a positive mitzva overrides the prohibition and positive mitzva of a nazirite, that <b>which we maintain generally,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC