
### Part 1
<b>Rav Yehuda from Diskarta said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the following halakhic midrash concerning the ritual impurity of creeping animals. The verse states: “Whoever touches <b>them</b> when they are dead shall be impure” (Leviticus 11:31). One <b>might</b> have thought this <i>halakha</i> applies only <b>to all of them,</b> i.e., to complete creatures. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And upon whatever any <b>of them,</b> when they are dead, fall, it shall be impure” (Leviticus 11:32), which indicates that part of these creatures also imparts impurity. <b>If</b> the <i>halakha</i> were derived solely from the phrase <b>“of them,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that it applies even to <b>a small part</b> of them. <b>The verse</b> therefore <b>states: “Them,”</b> which means all of them.

### Part 2
<b>How so?</b> How can one reconcile the two verses? He does not become ritually impure <b>unless he touches</b> at least <b>part of them that is</b> equal in measure <b>to all of them,</b> i.e., a large part. <b>And the Sages calculated</b> that this is the volume <b>of a lentil-bulk.</b> Why is this? <b>As the start of the formation of a skink,</b> one of the eight impure creeping animals, is the size <b>of a lentil-bulk.</b> This concludes the halakhic midrash. With regard to the issue at hand, one can <b>learn from here</b> that it <b>is learned</b> as a tradition that <b>the amount</b> for a creature to be considered whole is a lentil-bulk. If so, an ant missing a limb should likewise not have the status of a creature.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Shemaya said,</b> in refutation of this argument: <b>When we require</b> the above <b>amount, that if it is not</b> the volume <b>of a lentil-bulk it does not impart impurity,</b> the requirement applies only in a case <b>where</b> the creature <b>does not have</b> a living <b>soul</b> before it grows to the size of a lentil. <b>However,</b> if it <b>does have a soul,</b> this volume is <b>not</b> required. If the creature can survive, perhaps it does impart impurity even if it is lacking a limb. Consequently, with regard to an ant that is missing a limb, <b>the dilemma remains</b> unresolved <b>for you.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna taught that a nazirite must shave for impurity imparted by <b>a spine and skull. A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Did <b>we learn a spine and [<i>ve</i>] skull</b> together? <b>Or perhaps</b> the mishna means <b>either a spine or a skull.</b> Does the conjunctive <i>vav</i> signify: And, or: Or? <b>Rava said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a spine, the majority of whose ribs were removed</b> while the spine itself remained intact, it is <b>ritually pure. And</b> if it was <b>in a grave, even</b> if it was <b>broken or disassembled, it is impure, due to the grave,</b> which joins all the bones together.

### Part 5
The Gemara infers from this <i>baraita</i>: <b>The reason</b> it is ritually pure in the first case <b>is due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the ribs <b>were removed,</b> from which it may be inferred that if they <b>were not removed,</b> it is <b>impure</b> on its own, even without the skull. <b>Learn from this</b> that the mishna <b>teaches: Either a spine or a skull.</b> The Gemara rejects this claim: The <i>baraita</i> <b>does not teach this</b> explicitly. It does not state that if the ribs were not removed the spine imparts ritual impurity by itself. Rather, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us this, that if</b> the ribs were <b>removed</b> the spine is <b>pure.</b> And as to <b>the other</b> issue, the impurity of a spine on its own, <b>the dilemma remains</b> unresolved <b>for you.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Oholot</i> 4:2). <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rabbi Akiva deems six items impure that the Rabbis deem pure, and Rabbi Akiva</b> later <b>retracted</b> his opinion. <b>And an incident</b> occurred in <b>which they brought a box</b> that was <b>full of bones to the synagogue of blacksmiths [<i>tarsiyyim</i>], and they placed it in</b> an open <b>airspace,</b> not under the roof, so that it would not impart ritual impurity. <b>And Todos the doctor entered and all the</b> other <b>doctors</b> entered <b>with him, and they said,</b> after examining the pile: <b>There is not</b> a full <b>spine from one corpse here.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara infers from this incident: <b>The reason</b> it is ritually pure <b>is due to</b> the fact <b>that there was no spine from one</b> corpse, from which one can infer that if <b>there is either a spine or a skull from one</b> corpse, <b>a nazirite must shave due to it. Learn from this</b> that <b>we learned</b> in the mishna that a nazirite shaves <b>either</b> for <b>a spine or a skull.</b> The Gemara rejects this argument: The <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>It is not necessary,</b> as follows: <b>It is not necessary</b> to state that <b>there is no spine and skull from one corpse</b> in the box, <b>but even</b> the remains of <b>either a spine from one corpse or a skull from one corpse,</b> which together impart impurity, are <b>not</b> present. Instead, there are parts of spines and skulls from several bodies.

### Part 8
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear from the tally</b> in the above <i>baraita</i>: <b>And what are those six items that Rabbi Akiva deems ritually impure and the Rabbis deem ritually pure?</b> They consist <b>of a limb from a corpse that comes from,</b> i.e., is combined with, <b>two corpses; and</b> a severed <b>limb from a living</b> person <b>that comes from two</b> living <b>people; and half-<i>kav</i> of bones that come from two corpses; and a quarter-</b><i>log</i> <b>of blood that comes from two</b> corpses; <b>and of a bone that is a barley-grain-bulk,</b> even from one body, <b>that was divided into two; and the spine and the skull</b> from two corpses.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC