
### Part 1
<b>What is the reason of the first <i>tanna</i></b> for declaring that in all uncertain cases of floating impurity the person or item remains pure? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Avudimi says:</b> In the passage dealing with the impurity of creeping animals and the prohibition of eating them <b>it is written: “With any swarming thing that swarms”</b> (Leviticus 11:43), indicating that a carcass of a creeping animal renders items impure in <b>any place where it swarms. And it is written:</b> “All swarming things that swarm <b>upon the earth”</b> (Leviticus 11:42), indicating that it transmits impurity only if it is on the earth. <b>How so?</b> How can one reconcile these two verses? <b>Definite contact</b> with <b>it</b> renders one <b>impure;</b> one who has <b>uncertain contact</b> with <b>it,</b> e.g., the impurity is floating, remains <b>pure.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Shimon, what is the reason</b> for his opinion? <b>Ulla said</b> that as <b>it is written: “Nevertheless a fountain</b> or a cistern in which there is a gathering of water shall be pure” (Leviticus 11:36), this indicates that a creeping animal found in one of these places does not impart impurity. <b>And it is written</b> in the same verse: “He who touches their carcass <b>shall be impure</b> until evening,” which indicates that it does render one impure. <b>How so?</b> If the impurity was <b>floating</b> in water contained <b>in vessels,</b> the item it touched <b>is</b> rendered <b>impure,</b> but if the water was <b>in the ground</b> itself, e.g., in a spring or pit, the item it touched is <b>pure.</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Teharot</i> 3:13): <b>All</b> items that impart impurity <b>that are carried</b> by human hand <b>or that are dragged</b> along are not considered floating impurities, despite the fact that they are in motion. Rather, in a case where there is <b>uncertainty</b> whether a carried or dragged item affected a person, the individual is rendered <b>impure,</b> because the items are considered <b>as though</b> they were <b>at rest. And</b> in the case of items <b>that are thrown</b> by people, in <b>uncertain</b> cases that pertain to them, the individual remains <b>pure.</b>

### Part 4
This is the <i>halakha</i>, <b>except for an olive-bulk</b> from <b>a corpse,</b> which transmits impurity through uncertain contact even if it was thrown; <b>and that which overlies impurity</b> when thrown, i.e., an item that might have been positioned over a corpse when it was thrown; <b>and anything that renders</b> items <b>above</b> it <b>impure like</b> it renders those <b>below</b> it impure. To what does this last clause refer? It comes <b>to include a <i>zav</i> and a <i>zava</i>,</b> who render items placed above and below them impure even without contact. If something thrown or floating might have come into contact with a <i>zav</i> or <i>zava</i>, it is impure.

### Part 5
With regard to this <i>halakha</i> of a floating impurity, <b>Rami bar Ḥama raises a dilemma:</b> If there is <b>a corpse in a vessel and the vessel is floating on water,</b> and one did not overlie it but might have touched it, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do <b>we go according to</b> the floating <b>vessel or</b> do <b>we go according to</b> the <b>corpse,</b> which is resting on a solid surface?

### Part 6
<b>If you say</b> that <b>we go according to the vessel</b> and one is rendered ritually impure, the following question arises: If <b>a corpse</b> is placed <b>on top of</b> the carcass of <b>a creeping animal,</b> which is floating on water, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do we say that <b>since this</b> impurity of a creeping animal is <b>an impurity for an evening,</b> i.e., it lasts one day, <b>and this</b> impurity imparted by a corpse is <b>an impurity for seven</b> days, <b>it is considered as though the impurity</b> imparted by a corpse <b>were placed in a vessel,</b> and he is impure? <b>Or, perhaps</b> the fact that both a corpse and a creeping animal impart impurity means that <b>it is</b> one <b>solid impurity,</b> and because the creeping animal is floating he is pure.

### Part 7
<b>And if you say</b> that due to their different levels of impurity <b>it is considered as though the impurity were placed in a vessel and</b> therefore one is <b>definitely impure,</b> one can raise an additional dilemma. If <b>a creeping animal</b> is <b>atop</b> an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass and the animal carcass</b> is <b>floating,</b> then <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do we say that <b>since they are both</b> examples of <b>an impurity for an evening, it is</b> considered a single <b>solid impurity, or perhaps</b> here too they are different, as <b>this</b> one, the carcass, renders items impure when it is the amount of <b>an olive-bulk, and this</b> one, the creeping animal, does so when it is the amount <b>of a lentil-bulk.</b> In that case, the animal carcass and the creeping animal should be considered separate items, and it is as though the impurity is placed in a vessel, and he is impure.

### Part 8
If in that case they are considered separate, then one can also ask: If <b>a creeping animal</b> is positioned <b>atop</b> another <b>creeping animal, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do we say that <b>these certainly</b> have the <b>same measurement</b> with regard to transmitting impurity, and that they consequently should be viewed as a single floating items, which means he is pure? <b>Or, perhaps, since</b> they <b>are separate from each other</b> and are not in fact a single item, they are <b>not</b> considered as one unit.

### Part 9
<b>And if you say</b> that in the case of <b>a creeping animal atop a creeping animal, since</b> they <b>are separate from each other, it is considered as though</b> the impurity <b>were placed in a vessel</b> and is not floating, one can raise an additional dilemma. If <b>a creeping animal</b> was placed <b>atop an animal carcass that has dissolved, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?Do we say that <b>since it has dissolved it has become</b> like <b>liquid,</b> and therefore it is as though the creeping animal were floating on liquid? <b>Or, perhaps this</b> carcass <b>is</b> still considered <b>food,</b> rather than a liquid, and the creeping animal is on a solid surface.

### Part 10
<b>And if you say that</b> a dissolved animal carcasses <b>is</b> considered <b>food,</b> one can raise an additional dilemma. If <b>a creeping animal</b> was placed <b>on top of semen,</b> which is certainly liquid, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is this creeping animal considered a floating impurity? <b>And if you say</b> that <b>once</b> semen <b>is ejaculated</b> from the body <b>it is considered like food</b> rather than drink, as it is viscous, one can raise an additional dilemma. If <b>a creeping animal</b> was placed <b>atop waters of purification,</b> i.e., the water into which the ashes of the red heifer are mixed, which becomes highly viscous, <b>and</b> the <b>waters of purification are floating on water, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara responds: <b>We do not know</b> the answer to any of these questions, and therefore the dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC