
### Part 1
<b>Rava said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer,</b> according to Ulla’s explanation? <b>The verse states:</b> “But the first days shall be void <b>because his consecration was ritually impure”</b> (Numbers 6:12), which he explains as follows: Why are his first days rendered void? They are void <b>because he took a vow of naziriteship,</b> consecrating himself, <b>when</b> he was <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava from a <i>baraita</i> that is not in accordance with the opinion of Ulla: One who said: <b>I am hereby a nazirite</b> for <b>one hundred days, and he became ritually impure</b> immediately, <b>at the beginning</b> of the <b>one hundred</b> days, one <b>might</b> have thought <b>it should negate</b> the time he spent as a nazirite. <b>The verse</b> therefore <b>states: “But the first days shall be void”</b> (Numbers 6:12), which indicates that this <i>halakha</i> does not apply <b>until he will have “first days”</b> as a nazirite, <b>and</b> in <b>this</b> case the nazirite <b>does not have</b> his <b>first</b> days completed, as he became ritually impure right away.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If one <b>became ritually impure at the end of one hundred</b> days, that is, on the hundredth day, one <b>might</b> have thought <b>it should negate</b> the days he had counted. <b>The verse</b> therefore <b>states: “But the first days shall be void,”</b> indicating <b>by inference that there are</b> other days that can be called the <b>last</b> ones, <b>while this</b> nazirite <b>does not have last</b> days, as he has already completed the tally of his naziriteship. If <b>he became impure on the one hundredth day less one,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought <b>it should not negate</b> the days he had counted. <b>Therefore, the verse states: “But the first days shall be void,”</b> indicating <b>by inference that there are last</b> ones, <b>and this</b> nazirite <b>has first</b> ones <b>and last</b> ones.

### Part 4
Abaye now concludes his objection to Rava: <b>But</b> with regard to <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>you cannot say</b> it is referring <b>to an impure</b> person <b>who took a vow of naziriteship from</b> the fact <b>that it teaches: I am hereby a nazirite</b> for <b>one hundred</b> days, <b>and he became impure</b> immediately <b>at the beginning</b> of the <b>one hundred,</b> indicating that it is discussing one who became impure after his term had already started. <b>And it</b> further <b>teaches: Until he will have “first days,”</b> which proves that Rabbi Eliezer states his <i>halakha</i> even with regard to a pure nazirite who later became impure. This is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Ulla, and his opinion is rejected.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: Those</b> first <b>days that we said</b> he must observe in ritual purity according to Rabbi Eliezer, does it mean <b>that one</b> day <b>has finished and a second has started,</b> so that if he became impure on the second day it negates his tally, <b>or perhaps</b> it means <b>that two</b> days <b>have finished, and a third has started,</b> which would mean it negates his tally only if he became impure after the beginning of the third day? An answer <b>was not available to him,</b> so Rav Pappa <b>went</b> to <b>ask Rava,</b> who <b>said to him:</b> It <b>is written:</b> “But the former days <b>shall be void [<i>yippelu</i>]”</b> (Numbers 6:12) in the plural, which means at least two days need to have passed.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>And it was necessary</b> for the verse <b>to write “days” and it was</b> also <b>necessary</b> for it <b>to write “shall be void”</b> in the plural. <b>For if the Merciful One wrote</b> in the Torah only <b>“days” and had not</b> also <b>written “shall be void”</b> in the plural, <b>I would say that</b> the <i>halakha</i> applies only <b>if two</b> days <b>have finished and a third has started. The Merciful One</b> therefore <b>wrote</b> in the Torah the plural form of <b>“shall be void.” And if</b> the Merciful One <b>wrote</b> in the Torah <b>“shall be void” and had not</b> also <b>written “days,” I would say even one</b> day, that is, the <i>halakha</i> applies even if he became ritually impure on the first day. <b>The Merciful One</b> therefore <b>wrote</b> in the Torah <b>“days,”</b> indicating that he must have observed at least part of the second day.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who vowed many</b> days of <b>naziriteship</b> while outside Eretz Yisrael, <b>and completed his naziriteship, and afterward came to Eretz</b> Yisrael, in order to bring the offerings at the end of his naziriteship, <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He must be <b>a nazirite</b> for <b>thirty days,</b> so that he has observed a term of naziriteship in ritual purity in Eretz Yisrael, <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> He is <b>a nazirite from the beginning,</b> that is, he must observe his entire naziriteship again.

### Part 8
The mishna cites a related story: <b>An incident</b> occurred <b>with regard to Queen Helene, whose son had gone to war, and she said: If my son will return from war safely, I will be a nazirite</b> for <b>seven years. And her son returned</b> safely <b>from the war, and she was a nazirite</b> for <b>seven years. And at the end of seven years, she ascended to Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>and Beit Hillel instructed her,</b> in accordance with their opinion, <b>that she should be a nazirite for an additional seven years. And at the end of</b> those <b>seven years she became ritually impure,</b> and was therefore required to observe yet another seven years of naziriteship, as ritual impurity negates the tally of a nazirite. <b>And she was found to be a nazirite</b> for <b>twenty-one years. Rabbi Yehuda said: She was a nazirite</b> for <b>only fourteen years</b> and not twenty-one.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The first clause</b> of the mishna <b>teaches</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He must be <b>a nazirite</b> for <b>thirty days, and Beit Hillel say:</b> He is <b>a nazirite from the beginning.</b> The Gemara suggests a possible explanation of their dispute: <b>Let us say that they disagree about this,</b> that <b>Beit Shammai hold</b> that when the Sages declared that the <b>land of the nations</b> outside of Eretz Yisrael is impure, <b>they decreed</b> so <b>with regard to its earth.</b> In other words, they decreed that only the earth of the land of the nations is impure, but its airspace remains pure. If so, it is not a severe level of ritual impurity, and one who observed a vow of naziriteship outside of Eretz Yisrael is not considered to be impure to the extent that he would be required to start his naziriteship afresh once entering Eretz Yisrael,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC