
### michna 1
They brought out to him the ladle and the coal-pan, and he took two hands full [of incense] and put it into the ladle: a large [high priest] according to his size, a small one according to his size, and thus was its measure. He took the coal-pan in his right hand and the ladle in his left hand. He walked through the Heikhal [sanctuary] until he came to the place between the two curtains which separated the Holy from the Holy of Holies; between them was [a space of] one cubit. Rabbi Yose says: there was but one curtain, as it is said: “And the curtain shall serve you as a partition between the Holy and the Holy of Holies” (Exodus 26:33). The outer curtain was looped on the south side and the inner curtain on the north side. He walked along between them until he reached the north side. When he reached the north side he turned around to the south and went on along the curtain, to his left, until he reached the Ark. When he reached the Ark he put the coal-pan between the two poles. He heaped up the incense upon the coals and the whole house became full with smoke. He came out by the way he entered and in the outer house he uttered a short prayer. He did not make the prayer long so as not to frighten Israel.

### michna 2
After the Ark was taken away, there was a stone there, from the days of the earlier prophets, called Shtiyah, three fingers above the ground, on which he would place [the coal-pan].

### michna 3
He would take the blood from the one who was stirring it, and enter [again] into the place where he had entered, and stand [again] on the place on which he had stood, and sprinkle once upwards and seven times downwards, and he did not intend to sprinkle [simply] upwards nor downwards but rather like one who cracks a whip. And thus would he count: one, one and one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five, one and six, one and seven. Then he would go out and put it on the golden stand in the Heikhal.

### michna 4
They would bring him the goat. He would slaughter it and receive its blood in a bowl. He entered [again] into the place where he had entered, and stood [again] on the place on which he had stood, and sprinkled once upwards and seven times downwards, and he did not intend to sprinkle [simply] upwards or downwards but rather like one who cracks a whip. And thus would he count: one, one and one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five, one and six, one and seven. Then he would go out and place [the bowl] on the second stand in the Heikhal. Rabbi Yehudah said: there was only one stand there. He would take the blood of the bull and put down the blood of the goat, and sprinkle from it upon the curtains facing the Ark outside, once upwards, seven times downward, intending to sprinkle neither [simply] upwards nor downwards, but rather like one who cracks a whip. Thus would he count [as above]. Then he would take the blood of the goat, and put down the blood of the bull, and sprinkle from it upon the curtain facing the ark outside once upwards, seven times downwards [as above]. Then he would pour the blood of the bull into the blood of the goat, emptying the full vessel into the empty one.

### michna 5
“And he shall go out to the altar that is before the Lord” (Leviticus 16:18): that is the golden altar. He then began to purify [the altar by sprinkling] in downward motion. From where does he begin? From the northeast horn [of the altar], then the northwest, then the southwest, then the southeast. From the place where he begins [sprinkling when offering] a sin-offering on the outer altar, there he completes [sprinkling] on the inner altar. Rabbi Eliezer says: he remained in his place and sprinkled. And on every horn he would sprinkle from below upwards, with the exception of the horn at which he was standing, which he would sprinkle from above downwards.

### michna 6
Then he sprinkled the body of the altar seven times. And he would pour out the remainder of the blood at the western base of the outer altar. And [the remainder of the blood sprinkled] on the outer altar he poured out at the southern base. Both mingled in the aqueduct and flowed into Nahal Kidron; and they were sold to gardeners as fertilizer, and are subject to meilah [misappropriation of sanctified property].

### michna 7
Concerning every act of Yom Kippur mentioned in the prescribed order [in the Mishnah]: if he performed one [later] act before an [earlier] one, it is as if it had not been done at all. If he dealt with the blood of the goat before the blood of the bull, he must start over again, and sprinkle the blood of the goat after the blood of the bull. If before he had finished the sprinklings within [the Holy of Holies] the blood was poured out, he must bring other blood, and start over again and sprinkle again within [the Holy of Holies]. Similarly, in the Heikhal and at the golden altar, since they are each a separate act of atonement. Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon say: wherever he stopped, there he may begin again.

>Credit : Sefaria Community Translation
>License : CC0