
### michna 1
He shook the urn and brought up the two lots. On one was inscribed: “For Hashem,” and on the other: “For Azazel.” The deputy High Priest was at his right hand, the head of the [ministering] family at his left. If the lot “For Hashem” came up in his right hand, the deputy high priest would say to him: “My master, High Priest, raise your right hand!” And if the lot “for Hashem” came up in his left hand, the head of the [ministering] family would say: “My master, High Priest, raise your left hand!” Then he placed them on the two goats and said: “A sin-offering for Hashem!” Rabbi Ishmael said: he did not need to say, “a sin-offering”, but just “for Hashem." And they answered after him: “Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever!”

### michna 2
He bound a thread of crimson wool on the head of the goat which was to be sent away, and he placed it at the gate where it was to be sent away, and for the goat that was to be slaughtered [he placed a thread of crimson wool on its neck] at the place of the slaughtering. He came to his bull a second time, laid his two hands upon it and made confession. And thus he would say: “Please, ‘Hashem’! I have done wrong, I have transgressed, I have sinned before You, I and my house and the sons of Aaron, Your holy people. Please, ‘Hashem’! Forgive the wrongdoings, the transgressions, the sins which I have committed and transgressed and sinned before You, I and my house and the sons of Aaron, Your holy people, as it is written in the Torah of Moses Your servant: “For on this day shall atonement be made for you," etc. [to cleanse you of all your sins; you shall be clean before the Lord”] (Leviticus 16:30). And they answered after him: “Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom for ever and ever!”

### michna 3
He slaughtered it [the bull] and received its blood in a bowl, and he gave it to the one who stirs it up on the fourth terrace within the sanctuary so that it should not congeal. He took the coal-pan and went up to the top of the altar, cleared the coals to both sides, took out coals from the glowing middle [of the fire on the altar], came down and placed it [the coal-pan] on the fourth terrace in the Temple courtyard.

### michna 4
On every [other] day he would take out [the coals] with a silver coal-pan, and empty it into one of gold, but this day he took them out with a golden coal-pan and in it he brought them [into the Heikhal]. On other days he would take them up with a coal-pan containing four kavin, and empty it into one containing three kavin, but this day he took them out with one containing three kavin, and in it he brought them in. Rabbi Yosi says: on other days he would take them out with a coal-pan containing one se’ah [six kavin ], and empty it into one containing three kavin, this day he took them out with one containing three kavin, and in it he brought them in. On other days the pan was heavy, on this day it was light. On other days its handle was short, on this day it was long. On other days it was of yellowish gold, on this day, of reddish gold, the words of Rabbi Menachem. On other days he would offer half a p'ras in the morning and half a p'ras in the afternoon, today he adds also the two handfuls [of incense]. On other days [the incense] was finely ground, but today it was the most finely ground possible.

### michna 5
On every [other] day the priests would go up on the east side of the ramp and come down on the west side, but on this day the High Priest goes up in the middle and comes down in the middle. Rabbi Yehudah says: the High Priest always goes up in the middle and comes down in the middle. On other days the high priest washed his hands and feet from the laver, but on this day from a golden ladle. Rabbi Yehudah says: the High Priest always sanctifies his hands and feet from a golden ladle.

### michna 6
On every [other] day there were four wood-piles there [on the altar], but on this day five, the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosi says: on other days three, but on this day four. Rabbi Yehudah says: on other days two, but on this day three.

>Credit : Sefaria Community Translation
>License : CC0