
### Part 1
in the context of the mitzva to honor one’s parents, the word <b>good is stated there:</b> “In order that it shall be good for you” (Deuteronomy 5:16)? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba <b>said to him: Before you ask me why</b> the word <b>good is stated, ask me if</b> the word <b>good is</b> actually <b>stated there or not, since</b> I am not sufficiently proficient in my knowledge of the biblical verses to remember the precise wording, and <b>I do not know if</b> the word <b>good is stated there or not. Go to Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai, who was</b> commonly <b>found at</b> the academy of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, who was an expert in <i>aggada</i>.</b> Perhaps he heard something from him on this matter and can answer your question.

### Part 2
Rabbi Ḥanina ben Agil <b>went to him</b> and asked him. Rabbi Tanḥum <b>said to him: I did not hear</b> anything on this matter <b>from</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>himself. But this</b> is what <b>Shmuel bar Naḥum, the brother of the mother of Rav Aḥa, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said to me, and some say</b> it was <b>the father of the mother of Rav Aḥai, son of Rabbi Ḥanina:</b> It does not mention the word good in the first tablets, <b>since they</b> were <b>ultimately</b> destined <b>to be broken</b> after the Jews made the Golden Calf.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> even <b>if</b> it had mentioned the term good, and <b>they were ultimately</b> destined <b>to break, what of it? Rav Ashi said:</b> If this term had been mentioned in the first tablets, all <b>good</b> would have, <b>God forbid, ceased from Israel</b> once they were broken. Therefore, only the second version, which was written after the breaking of the tablets, contains the word good, so that there would always be good for the Jewish people.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> If <b>one sees</b> the letter <b><i>tet</i> in his dream,</b> it is <b>a good sign for him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason? If we say</b> that it is <b>because</b> the word <b>good [<i>tov</i>] is written</b> in the Torah and begins with the letter <i>tet</i>, then one could <b>say</b> instead that it is an allusion to the verse: <b>“And I will sweep it with the broom [<i>vetetetiha bemate’ateh</i>] of destruction”</b> (Isaiah 14:23), which also contains the letter <i>tet</i> several times but is referring to punishment. The Gemara answers: <b>We mean</b> that when someone sees <b>one <i>tet</i></b> in his dream, it is a good sign, but this latter verse contains several.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: This latter statement is problematic, as even according to this explanation, one can <b>say</b> that a single letter <i>tet</i> alludes to the verse: <b>“Her filthiness [<i>tumatah</i>] is in her skirts”</b> (Lamentations 1:9), which begins with the letter <i>tet</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>We mean</b> that when one sees the letter <b><i>tet</i></b> together with the letter <b><i>bet</i></b> in his dream, it is a good sign for him, as the word <i>tov</i> is written with both. The Gemara asks further: According to this, <b>say</b> that it alludes to the verse: <b>“Her gates are sunk [<i>tave’u</i>] into the ground”</b> (Lamentations 2:9), which begins with the letter <i>tet</i> followed by the letter <i>bet</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> it is not merely because it is the first letter of the word good [<i>tov</i>] that it is considered a good omen. <b>Since the Torah initially introduces</b> the letter <i>tet</i> in a context <b>of good,</b> with the word good [<i>tov</i>] itself, it is a good omen. <b>As from</b> the word <b><i>bereshit</i>,</b> the first word in the Torah, <b>until</b> the verse: <b>“And God saw that the light</b> was good [<i>tov</i>]” (Genesis 1:4), the letter <b><i>tet</i> is not written</b> anywhere.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> If <b>one sees a eulogy [<i>hesped</i>] in his dream,</b> it is an allusion that <b>in Heaven they had pity [<i>ḥasu</i>] on him and saved him [<i>peda’uhu</i>]</b> from actually being eulogized. The Gemara notes: <b>This statement</b> applies specifically when he actually saw the word: Eulogy [<i>hesped</i>], <b>in writing.</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And similarly, undomesticated animals and birds</b> are subject to the same <i>halakhot</i> <b>as</b> domesticated animals. <b>Reish Lakish says: Here Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught</b> a ruling from the <i>Tosefta</i> that illustrates the statement that birds and undomesticated animals are also subject to the prohibition of diverse kinds: <b>A cock, a peacock [<i>tavvas</i>], and a pheasant [<i>ufasyonei</i>]</b> are <b>diverse kinds with</b> respect to <b>each other,</b> since this <i>halakha</i> applies to birds as well.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious;</b> what novelty is stated here? <b>Rav Ḥaviva said:</b> The novelty here is <b>because</b> they are <b>reared together. Lest you say:</b> Since they are reared together, they <b>are</b> essentially <b>one species,</b> and not considered diverse kinds. Therefore, it <b>teaches us</b> that they are actually separate species, and the <i>halakhot</i> of diverse kinds do apply to them.

### Part 10
Following the discussion of the prohibition of diverse kinds as it relates to birds, <b>Shmuel says:</b> The domestic <b>goose and</b> the <b>wild goose</b> are <b>diverse kinds</b> with respect <b>to each other</b> and are not one species. <b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan objects to this: What is the reason? If we say</b> it is <b>because the beak of this one</b> is <b>long and the beak of that one</b> is <b>short, if that is so,</b> then with regard to <b>a Persian camel and an Arabian camel, where the neck of this one</b> is <b>thick and the neck of that one</b> is <b>thin,</b> they <b>should indeed be</b> considered <b>diverse kinds</b> with respect <b>to one another.</b> Clearly, though, the camels are in fact two variants of a single species.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, Abaye says:</b> That is not the reason, but rather another difference exists between the domestic goose and the wild goose, concerning the male: With regard to <b>this</b> type, i.e., the wild goose, <b>its testicles</b> are visible <b>from the outside, and</b> with regard to <b>that</b> one, i.e., the domestic goose, <b>its testicles are inside. Rav Pappa said</b> that another difference exists between them, concerning the female: <b>This</b> one, i.e., the wild goose, <b>releases</b> only <b>one egg in</b> its <b>ovary</b> and later releases another, <b>and that</b> one, i.e., the domestic goose, <b>releases several eggs</b> at once <b>in</b> its <b>ovary.</b> Consequently, they are not considered to be the same species.

### Part 12
In connection with the prohibition of diverse kinds, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya says</b> that <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> One <b>who crossbreeds two species</b> of creatures <b>that</b> live <b>in the sea is flogged</b> for transgressing the prohibition of crossbreeding diverse kinds. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason,</b> i.e., where is there an allusion to this in the Torah? <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said in the name of Ulla:</b> It <b>is derived</b> from a verbal analogy between the term: <b>“According to its species [<i>leminehu</i>]”</b> (Genesis 1:21), referring to animals living <b>on dry land,</b> and the same term: <b>“According to its species [<i>leminehu</i>]”</b> (Genesis 1:25), referring to sea creatures. In the same way that the former may not be crossbred, similarly, the latter may not be crossbred.

### Part 13
The Sage <b>Raḥava raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to one <b>who drives</b> a wagon on the seashore <b>with a goat and a <i>shibbuta</i>,</b> a certain species of fish, together, pulled by the goat on land and the fish at sea, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Has he violated the prohibition against performing labor with diverse kinds, in the same way that one does when plowing with an ox and a donkey together, or not? The two sides of the question are as follows: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since the goat does not descend into the sea and the <i>shibbuta</i> does not ascend onto the land,</b> they are not working together at all, and so he <b>has not done anything</b> forbidden? <b>Or perhaps,</b> since <b>in any event,</b> he is <b>now driving</b> the wagon with both of them, he thereby transgresses the prohibition?

### Part 14
<b>Ravina objects to this: But if that is so</b> that one is liable, then if a person <b>joined wheat and barley</b> together <b>in his hand and sowed the wheat in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and the barley outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, where the prohibition of diverse kinds does not apply to seeds, <b>so too</b> he <b>should be liable.</b> Clearly, however, they are two distinct regions, and the seeds are not considered to be mixed together.

### Part 15
The Sages <b>said</b> in response to this objection: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the case of planting diverse kinds of seeds, it is specifically <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael that is <b>the location</b> subject to this <b>obligation,</b> whereas <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael is <b>not a location</b> subject to this <b>obligation. Here,</b> by contrast, in the case of the person driving a wagon, both <b>this</b> location, i.e., the land, <b>and that</b> location, i.e., the sea, are <b>locations</b> subject to this <b>obligation.</b> Consequently, if one works together two different species either on the land or in the sea, he is liable. Therefore, the question is a valid one.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC