
### Part 1
<b>exempt,</b> as it is impossible to sentence any one of them to death since no one person killed the victim and there is no death penalty for partially killing a person. <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> If they beat him <b>sequentially the last one</b> to beat him is <b>liable</b> for the death of the victim, <b>because he brought</b> the victim’s <b>death closer.</b> So too, in this case, although the first one threw the child, the one to impale him on his sword was the one to hasten his death, and therefore according to Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira he would be liable to receive the death penalty.

### Part 2
The Gemara discusses a similar scenario: If one threw a child from a roof and a forewarned <b>ox came</b> along <b>and impaled</b> the child <b>on its horns</b> and the child died, the question of whether or not the owner of the ox is liable to pay ransom is dependent upon <b>the dispute between Rabbi Yishmael, son of</b> Rabbi <b>Yoḥanan ben Beroka, and the Rabbis. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse: <b>“He shall give for the redemption of his life”</b> (Exodus 21:30), indicates that he must pay <b>the value of the injured</b> party, i.e., the one who was killed. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says:</b> He must pay <b>the value of the one responsible for the damage.</b> Since the child that was thrown off the roof had no monetary value at the time he was gored by the ox, as it was as if he were already dead, the Rabbis would exempt the owner of the ox from paying ransom. According to Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, the owner of the ox must pay his own value to the family of the victim.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rabba says</b> another similar <i>halakha</i>: If a man <b>fell from a roof and</b> while falling <b>was inserted into a woman</b> due to the force of the fall, but he did not have the intention to engage in sexual intercourse, he is <b>liable to</b> pay <b>the four types of indemnity. And if</b> this woman was <b>his <i>yevama</i></b> waiting for him to perform levirate marriage, <b>he has not acquired</b> her as his wife through this act of intercourse. This is true even though a levirate marriage is ordinarily effected through sexual intercourse, even if unintentional, i.e., if he thought she was someone else. Nevertheless, since in this case he did not intend to engage in intercourse at all, the levirate marriage is not effected.

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: What are the four types of indemnity that he is liable to pay? <b>He is liable</b> to pay <b>for the damage, for the pain, for the medical costs,</b> and <b>for the loss of livelihood. But</b> he is <b>not</b> liable to pay compensation for <b>humiliation, as we learned</b> in a mishna (86a): <b>One is not liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for humiliation unless he intends</b> to humiliate the injured party, and that was certainly not the case in this situation.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabba says</b> another, similar <i>halakha</i>: If one <b>fell from a roof due to an atypical wind,</b> such that it could not have been anticipated in advance that he would fall, <b>and</b> while falling <b>he caused damage and humiliated</b> the injured party, he is <b>liable for the damage</b> but <b>exempt from</b> paying <b>the four types of indemnity,</b> as he did not intend to fall. If he fell <b>due to a typical wind and caused damage and humiliated</b> the injured party while falling, he is <b>liable to</b> pay <b>the four types of indemnity,</b> as his fall was caused by negligence. <b>But</b> he is nevertheless <b>exempt from</b> paying compensation for <b>humiliation,</b> as he did not intend to fall. <b>But if he tumbled</b> while falling so he could fall on this person in order to protect himself from the impact with the ground, he is <b>liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for humiliation as well,</b> because although he did not intend to cause shame he did intend to land on the person.

### Part 6
The <i>halakha</i> that one is exempt from paying compensation for humiliation unless he intended to strike his victim is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From the fact that it is stated: “And she extended her hand”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:11), <b>do I not know that she took</b> hold of something? Consequently, <b>what</b> is the meaning when further on in <b>the verse</b> it <b>states: “And she took</b> him by his genitals”? It is <b>to teach you that one who intends to cause damage, even if he does not intend to humiliate</b> the injured party, is nevertheless liable to pay compensation for humiliation.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabba says:</b> If one <b>placed</b> a hot <b>coal over another’s heart and</b> the latter was burnt and <b>died,</b> the one who placed the coal is <b>exempt</b> because the victim should have removed the coal from himself, and the one who placed it there did not need to assume that the victim might not remove it. If he placed the coal <b>on</b> the other’s <b>garment and</b> the garment <b>was burnt,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to pay for the damage, as it is possible that the one whose garment was burnt thought to sue the one who placed the coal on his clothes for the cost of the garment, and that is why he did not bother to remove it.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said: We have learned both</b> of these rulings through intimation in <i>mishnayot</i> elsewhere. With regard to the case of the coal placed <b>over his heart,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 76b): If one <b>held another in a fire or in water, and</b> the victim <b>is unable to extricate himself from there and he dies</b> as a result, the one who attacked him is <b>liable</b> to receive the death penalty as a murderer. If he <b>pushed him into fire or into the water, and</b> the victim <b>is able to extricate himself from there but he dies</b> anyway, the one who attacked him is <b>exempt</b> from the death penalty. The case of one who places a coal on another’s chest is similar to the one where he pushes the victim into the fire or the water in a situation where the victim has the ability to escape.

### Part 9
With regard to the case of one who placed a coal on <b>the garment</b> of another, it is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (92a): If one said to another: <b>Tear my garment,</b> or: <b>Break my jug,</b> and the other person does so, the latter is <b>liable</b> for the damage. But if one said to another: Tear my garment <b>on the condition that</b> you will be <b>exempt</b> from all liability, he is <b>exempt.</b> It is therefore clear that even when one is granted permission by the owner of an item to damage it, that does not grant him an exemption from liability for the damage caused unless that exemption was stated explicitly. Consequently, in a case where the owner did not grant permission, the one who caused the damage is certainly liable.

### Part 10
<b>Rabba raises a dilemma</b> in summation of this discussion: If <b>he placed a coal over the heart of</b> another’s Canaanite <b>slave</b> and the slave died as a result, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is the body of the slave <b>comparable to the body</b> of any other person and therefore the assailant would be exempt from liability, <b>or</b> is it <b>comparable to</b> other <b>property</b> owned by the master and therefore the assailant would be liable? Furthermore, <b>if you say</b> that the body of the slave is <b>comparable to the body</b> of any ordinary person, as the slave had the ability to remove the coal from himself and therefore the assailant would be exempt, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in a case where he placed the coal on the other’s <b>ox?</b>

### Part 11
After raising the dilemma Rabba <b>then resolves it:</b> The body of <b>the slave is comparable to the body</b> of any other person, as the slave possesses an intellect and should have the sense to remove the coal from himself, whereas <b>the ox is comparable to</b> other <b>property.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC