
### Part 1
the value of one <i>peruta</i> <b>for</b> each priest on the <b>priestly watch of Jedaiah,</b> which had fewer priests, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> with regard to which Rava raised his dilemma? <b>If we say</b> that the dilemma is raised in a case <b>where he gave</b> the money <b>to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Jedaiah, during</b> the time of the Temple service of the <b>priestly watch of Jedaiah,</b> there would be no dilemma. <b>There is in</b> this payment enough value for each priest to receive one <i>peruta</i>.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to raise the dilemma in a case <b>where he gave it to</b> the <b>Jedaiah</b> priestly watch <b>during</b> the time of the Temple service of the <b>priestly watch of Joiarib;</b> in that case, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains the two possibilities: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since it is not</b> during Jedaiah’s <b>priestly watch, it is nothing,</b> i.e., it is not a fulfillment of the mitzva to return the stolen item? <b>Or perhaps</b> we say that <b>since it was not fit for</b> the Joiarib priestly watch, as it was of insufficient value, <b>from the outset it stands</b> ready <b>for</b> the <b>Jedaiah</b> priestly watch, and by giving it to them he fulfilled the mitzva? The Gemara comments: The question <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 4
<b>Rava raises</b> another <b>dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>priests, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>whether they may divide</b> among themselves the restitution for <b>robbery of a convert,</b> with some priests taking a larger share <b>in exchange for</b> taking a smaller share in the restitution for another <b>robbery of a convert?</b> In other words, can the priests arrange that one priest or several priests will receive the restitution for one robbery and another priest or several priests will receive the restitution for a different robbery another time?

### Part 5
He explains the two possibilities: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>the Merciful One labeled</b> the stolen item with the term <b>“guilt,”</b> and therefore, <b>just as</b> with <b>a guilt-offering</b> the priests <b>may not divide</b> portions of <b>a guilt-offering,</b> with some priests taking a larger share <b>in exchange for</b> taking a smaller share in other portions of <b>a guilt-offering,</b> but rather all priests of the watch share in the sacrificial flesh, <b>so too</b> with the restitution for <b>robbery:</b> The priests <b>may not divide</b> the restitution for <b>robbery of a convert,</b> with some priests taking a larger share <b>in exchange for</b> taking a smaller share in the restitution for another <b>robbery of a convert? Or perhaps</b> the restitution for <b>robbery of a convert</b> paid to priests is not in fact an offering, but it <b>is monetary restitution,</b> and monetary restitution may be divided in this manner among the priests?

### Part 6
Rava <b>then resolves it</b> himself: <b>The Merciful One labeled</b> the stolen item with the term <b>“guilt,”</b> so it may not be divided in this manner. <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, teaches it explicitly</b> as a ruling, and not as a dilemma and solution, that <b>Rava says: Priests may not divide</b> the restitution for <b>robbery of a convert</b> with some priests taking a larger share <b>in exchange for</b> taking a smaller share in the restitution for another <b>robbery of a convert. What is the reason? The Merciful One labeled</b> the stolen item with the term <b>“guilt.”</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> What is the status of <b>priests with regard to</b> the restitution for <b>robbery of a convert? Are they</b> considered <b>heirs</b> of the convert <b>or are they recipients of gifts?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference?</b> The Gemara answers: The difference would be in a case <b>where one robbed</b> a convert of <b>leavened bread, and</b> then <b>Passover elapsed over it,</b> rendering it an item from which one is prohibited to derive benefit and therefore valueless. <b>If you say</b> that the priests <b>are heirs, this is what they inherit:</b> Only that which the robber <b>bequeaths</b> to them, and the priests receive the valueless leavened bread as is. <b>And if you say</b> that <b>they are recipients of gifts,</b> it is <b>a gift that the Merciful One is saying that</b> the robber <b>should give to them, and this</b> robber <b>is not giving them anything, for it is merely dust.</b> Therefore, the robber should have to pay the priests what the value of the bread had been at the time of the robbery.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Zeira raises the dilemma like this: Even if you say</b> that <b>they are recipients of gifts, this</b> question, i.e., whether a robber of leavened bread over which Passover then elapsed fulfills the mitzva to return the stolen item even in this devalued state, <b>is not our dilemma,</b> as this is certainly a fulfillment of the obligation. <b>For this</b> stolen item is the <b>gift</b> with regard to which <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah <b>that</b> the robber <b>should give</b> it <b>to</b> the priests.

### Part 10
Rav Zeira continues: <b>Rather, when we have a dilemma</b> whether the priests are considered as heirs or as recipients of gifts, the practical difference arises in a case <b>where ten animals came into</b> the priest’s possession <b>for</b> payment of <b>robbery of a convert.</b> The dilemma is: <b>Are they obligated to separate tithe from them, or not?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara explains the two possibilities: Perhaps <b>they are heirs,</b> in which case they will be obligated, <b>for the Master said</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 56b) that if heirs <b>acquired</b> animals <b>in</b> the jointly <b>held</b> property <b>of the estate,</b> i.e., the heirs jointly owned the animals as the inheritance had yet to be divided, <b>they are obligated</b> to separate tithes from animals born to those animals, and the same will apply to the priests. <b>Or perhaps they are recipients of gifts, and we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 55b): <b>One who purchases</b> an animal <b>or one who</b> has an animal <b>given to him as a gift</b> is <b>exempt from</b> the obligation to separate the <b>animal tithe,</b> and the same will apply to the priests. <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> in this case?

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ḥalla</i> 2:7–10): <b>Twenty-four priestly gifts were given to Aaron and to his sons, and all of them were given with</b> a derivation from <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization; and</b> with <b>a covenant of salt.</b> The verses in the book of Numbers, chapter 18, detail the gifts of the priesthood. The first verse (18:8) is written in general terms, followed by verses listing the actual gifts (9–18), followed by a final verse written in general terms. The method of interpreting verses written in this manner is one of the thirteen hermeneutical principles. Additionally, the phrase: “Covenant of salt,” is written in the final verse (18:19), and is referring to all of the gifts of the priesthood.

### Part 13
This serves to teach that <b>anyone who fulfills</b> the mitzva of giving the gifts of the priesthood is considered <b>as if he fulfills</b> the entire Torah, which is interpreted using the principle of <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization; and</b> as if he has brought all of the offerings, concerning which there is <b>a covenant of salt. And anyone who violates</b> the mitzva of giving the gifts of the priesthood is considered <b>as if he violates</b> the entire Torah, which is interpreted using the principle of <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization; and</b> as if he has not brought all of the offerings, concerning which there is <b>a covenant of salt.</b>

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And these are</b> the twenty-four gifts: There are <b>ten in the Temple, and four in Jerusalem, and ten in the boundaries</b> of Eretz Yisrael. The <b>ten</b> gifts that the priests consume only <b>in the Temple</b> are <b>an animal sin-offering; and a bird sin-offering; and a definite guilt-offering; and a provisional guilt-offering; and communal peace-offerings,</b> i.e., lambs offered on <i>Shavuot</i>; <b>and a <i>log</i> of oil</b> that accompanies the guilt-offering <b>of</b> a recovered <b>leper; and the surplus of the <i>omer</i>,</b> i.e., what remains of the measure of barley brought as a communal offering on the sixteenth of Nisan; <b>and the two loaves,</b> i.e., the public offering of two loaves from the new wheat offered on <i>Shavuot</i>; <b>and the shewbread; and the leftovers of grain-offerings,</b> after the priests have offered the required handful.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the <b>four</b> gifts that the priests consume anywhere <b>in Jerusalem: The firstborn</b> of kosher animals; <b>and the first fruits; and the</b> portions <b>separated</b> for the priests <b>from the thanks-offering and the nazirite’s ram; and hides of consecrated</b> animals.

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And ten</b> gifts that the priests consume anywhere <b>in the boundaries</b> of Eretz Yisrael: <b><i>Teruma</i>,</b> i.e., the portion of the produce designated for the priest; <b>and <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> which the Levite separates from the tithe he receives and gives to a priest; <b>and <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> i.e., the portion of dough of the five main grains designated for the priest; <b>and the first of the sheared</b> wool; <b>and the gifts</b> of non-sacrificial, slaughtered animals, namely, the right foreleg, the cheeks, and the maw; <b>and</b> money given for the <b>redemption of</b> the firstborn <b>son; and</b> a sheep or goat given as <b>redemption of the firstborn donkey; and</b> a consecrated <b>ancestral field</b> the priests receive in the Jubilee Year; <b>and a dedicated field; and</b> payment for <b>robbery of a convert</b> who died without heirs.

### Part 17
The Gemara infers from the wording of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> this <i>baraita</i>, <b>in any event, labels</b> the payment for robbery of a convert <b>a gift.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Conclude from</b> this <i>baraita</i> that the priests who receive it <b>are</b> considered <b>recipients of gifts,</b> and not heirs. The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 18
§ The mishna teaches: If he <b>gave the money to the members of the priestly watch</b> and then died before they sacrificed his guilt-offering, the heirs cannot remove the money from the priests’ possession. <b>Abaye said: Learn from</b> this mishna that <b>monetary restitution</b> for the robbery <b>atones</b> for <b>half</b> of the sin, <b>for if</b> it <b>does not atone</b> at all, and atonement is not achieved until the guilt-offering is sacrificed, <b>I would say</b> that in the case of robbery of a convert, if the guilt-offering is not brought the priest <b>returns</b> the money <b>to the</b> robber’s <b>heirs. What is the reason</b> I would say this? Because <b>he did not give</b> the money <b>to</b> the priests <b>with this intention</b> of giving the money and not achieving atonement at all, and it would be a mistaken transaction.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> it would follow that <b>a sin-offering whose owners have died,</b> leaving no one to bring the offering, <b>should be transferred to non-sacred</b> status, <b>as</b> the robber <b>did not separate</b> the animal as an offering <b>with this intention</b> of its not being sacrificed to atone for his sin. The Sages <b>say</b> in response: In the case of <b>a sin-offering whose owners have died,</b> the Sages <b>learned this <i>halakha</i> through tradition that</b> the animal <b>is left to die.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so, a guilt-offering whose owner has died should be transferred to non-sacred</b> status, <b>as</b> the owner <b>did not separate</b> the animal as an offering <b>with this intention</b> of it not being sacrificed to atone for his sin. The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>a guilt-offering,</b> the Sages <b>also learned this <i>halakha</i> through tradition: Any</b> occurrence <b>that,</b> if it occurs <b>with regard to a sin-offering</b> the animal is placed in isolation for it to <b>die,</b> if it occurs <b>with regard to a guilt-offering</b> the animal is left to <b>graze</b> until it develops a blemish precluding its use as an offering, at which point it can be redeemed.

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> then in the case of <b>a woman whose husband died childless [<i>yevama</i>], who happened before</b> her late husband’s brother who was <b>afflicted with boils</b> to enter levirate marriage with him, <b>should go out</b> free to marry <b>without</b> being required to perform <b>the ritual through which the <i>yavam</i> frees the <i>yevama</i> of her levirate bonds [<i>ḥalitza</i>]. For she did not betroth herself</b> to this man’s deceased brother <b>with this intention</b> of having a levirate bond with a man afflicted with boils. The Gemara answers: <b>There, it is clear to us</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC