
### Part 1
Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and ben Azzai <b>disagree</b> over whether the hermeneutical principle of a generalization and a detail is applied <b>with regard to a generalization and a detail that are distant from each other.</b> When a generalization is followed by a detail, the <i>halakha</i> applies only in the case specified in the detail. The verse states: “<i>Keviyya</i> for <i>keviyya</i>, a wound for a wound, <i>ḥabura</i> for <i>ḥabura</i>” (Exodus 21:25). The word “<i>keviyya</i>,” as stated in the beginning of the verse, is a generalization that includes burns not accompanied by bruises as well as burns accompanied by bruises. “<i>Ḥabura</i>,” as stated at the end of the verse, is a detail of a burn that is accompanied by a bruise. The Torah distances the detail, “<i>ḥabura</i>,” from the generalization, “<i>keviyya</i>,” by stating the <i>halakha</i> of: “A wound for a wound” between them.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that since there is an intervening phrase between the generalization and the detail, one <b>does not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> from the verse concerning burns and bruises by <b>employing</b> the principle of <b>a generalization and a detail.</b> Therefore, the one who caused the injury is liable to pay compensation for pain in all cases of burns, even those that are not accompanied by bruises. <b>And ben Azzai holds</b> that one <b>does derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> from the verse concerning burns and bruises by <b>employing</b> the principle of <b>a generalization and a detail,</b> and therefore the one who caused the injury is liable to pay compensation for pain only if the burn is accompanied by a bruise. <b>And if you would say: According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>why do I</b> need the Torah to state the <i>halakha</i> of <b>“<i>ḥabura</i></b> for <i>ḥabura</i>,” as that is included as a subset of “<i>keviyya</i>”? The phrase mentioning “<i>ḥabura</i>” is necessary <b>to</b> teach the <i>halakha</i> of <b>additional money,</b> i.e., in a case where someone caused a burn with a bruise, he pays additional compensation for the bruise beyond that for the burn.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: How is the payment for pain assessed? The court <b>evaluates how much</b> money <b>a person</b> with <b>a similar</b> threshold for pain <b>as</b> the victim <b>is willing to take</b> in order to be made to suffer in this way. The one who burned the victim must then pay this amount. The Gemara asks: <b>How do we appraise pain in a case</b> where the injured party also suffered personal <b>injury?</b>

### Part 4
<b>Shmuel’s father says:</b> The court <b>evaluates how much</b> money <b>a person is willing to take</b> to allow someone <b>to sever his hand.</b> The Gemara objects: Do you really mean <b>to sever his hand?</b> Wouldn’t this evaluation <b>be not just for pain, but</b> to <b>include all five types</b> of indemnity? <b>Moreover, are we dealing with fools,</b> who would accept money to have their hands severed? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the court evaluates how much money a person would accept to allow someone <b>to sever his</b> already <b>severed hand,</b> which is of no use. The Gemara objects: In the case of <b>his severed hand also, there is not pain alone, but there is</b> both <b>pain and humiliation, because it is an embarrassing matter for him</b> if someone were <b>to take</b> a part <b>of his flesh to throw it to dogs.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the court <b>evaluates how much a person is willing to take</b> to allow someone <b>to sever his hand, which is</b> already condemned by <b>a written</b> decree <b>from the government</b> to be severed, changing the decree <b>from</b> having it severed by means of <b>a drug,</b> which is not accompanied by pain, <b>to</b> having it severed by means of <b>a sword,</b> which is accompanied by pain. The amount of money he would accept to have his hand severed by a sword instead of by the drug is his compensation. The Sages <b>say</b> in objection: <b>Here too,</b> one would <b>not take</b> money <b>and cause himself pain</b> in this way, so there is no indemnity to evaluate.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the court <b>evaluates how much a person would give to</b> have someone <b>sever his hand, which is</b> already <b>condemned</b> by <b>a written</b> decree <b>from the government</b> to be severed, changing the decree <b>from</b> having it be severed by means of <b>a sword,</b> which is accompanied by pain, <b>to</b> having it be severed by means of <b>a drug,</b> which is not accompanied by pain.

### Part 7
The Gemara objects: If this is the case, then <b>this</b> wording of the mishna: <b>To take,</b> is imprecise; <b>it should have</b> said: <b>To give. Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> The mishna means that the court evaluates how much <b>this</b> one, the injured party, <b>will take from that</b> one, i.e., the one who caused the injury, based on <b>what this</b> man, the injured party, would have <b>given</b> to the government to have his hand severed by a drug rather than with a sword.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: How is payment for <b>medical costs</b> assessed? If one <b>struck</b> another, then he is <b>liable to heal him</b> by paying for his medical costs. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 9:4): If <b>growths appeared on</b> the injured area <b>due to the injury, and the wound reopened,</b> then the one who caused the injury is again <b>liable to heal him</b> by covering his medical costs, <b>and is liable to give him the value of his loss of livelihood</b> while he recovers from the reopened wound. But if the growths that appeared <b>are not due to the injury, he is not liable to heal him</b> by covering his medical costs, <b>and he is not liable to give him the value of his loss of livelihood.</b>

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that <b>even</b> if the growths appeared <b>due to the injury, he is liable to heal him</b> by covering his medical costs, <b>but he is not liable to give him the</b> value <b>of his loss of livelihood. And the Rabbis say:</b> The one who caused the injury is not liable at all, because the Torah states the <i>halakhot</i> of compensation for <b>his loss of livelihood and his medical costs</b> together. This teaches that <b>anyone who is liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for loss of livelihood is</b> also <b>liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for medical costs, and</b> anyone <b>who is not liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for loss of livelihood is</b> also <b>not liable to</b> pay compensation <b>for medical costs.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do they disagree? Rabba said: I found the Sages in the study hall of Rav when they were sitting and were stating</b> an explanation: <b>Here,</b> Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis <b>disagree about</b> whether <b>a wound may be</b> wrapped in a <b>bandage,</b> i.e., whether one is permitted to bandage his wound to lessen the pain, at the risk of causing damaging side effects.

### Part 11
Rabba explains: <b>The Rabbis,</b> i.e., the first <i>tanna</i> in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>hold</b> that <b>a wound may be</b> wrapped <b>in a bandage.</b> Consequently, if the bandage causes side effects which lead the injured party to incur additional medical expenses, those expenses are considered to have resulted from the original injury. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>a wound may not be</b> wrapped <b>in a bandage.</b> Therefore, with regard to <b>medical costs,</b> about <b>which the verse repeated</b> the obligation to pay them, by stating: “And shall cause him to be thoroughly healed [<i>verappo yerappe</i>]” (Exodus 21:19), the one who caused the injury <b>is liable</b> to pay compensation. But for <b>loss of livelihood,</b> about <b>which the verse did not repeat</b> the obligation to pay it, the one who caused the injury <b>is not liable</b> to pay compensation.

### Part 12
Rabba continues: <b>And I said to them</b> that <b>if</b> Rabbi Yehuda were to hold that <b>a wound may not be</b> wrapped <b>in a bandage,</b> then the one who caused the injury should <b>also not be liable</b> to pay compensation for <b>medical costs,</b> as he is not liable to compensate the injured party for damage resulting from his own irresponsible behavior. <b>Rather,</b> the disagreement is as follows: <b>Everyone</b> agrees that <b>a wound may be</b> wrapped <b>in a bandage, but may not be</b> wrapped <b>in an excessive bandage.</b>

### Part 13
He explains the dispute: <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>since</b> a wound <b>may not be</b> wrapped <b>in an excessive bandage,</b> then with regard to <b>medical costs,</b> about <b>which the verse repeated</b> the obligation to pay them, by stating: “<i>Verappo yerappe</i>” (Exodus 21:19), the one who caused the injury <b>is liable</b> to pay compensation. But for <b>loss of livelihood,</b> about <b>which the verse did not repeat</b> the obligation to pay, the one who caused the injury <b>is not liable</b> to pay compensation. <b>And the Rabbis,</b> i.e., the first <i>tanna</i> in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>hold: Since the verse repeated</b> the obligation to pay compensation <b>for medical costs, one is also liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for loss of livelihood, which is juxtaposed to</b> the obligation to pay for <b>medical costs,</b> as the verse states: “Only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.”

### Part 14
The Gemara comments: <b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that even though medical costs and loss of livelihood are juxtaposed, the one who caused the injury is <b>not liable</b> to pay compensation for <b>loss of livelihood</b> in this case, <b>because the Merciful One restricted it</b> in the Torah, as the verse states: <b>“Only</b> he shall pay for his loss of livelihood, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed” (Exodus 21:19). “Only” is a restricting term. <b>And the Rabbis,</b> who hold that one must pay for loss of livelihood in this case as well, hold that the word <b>“only” is coming</b> to exclude growths <b>that were not due to the injury,</b> with regard to which the one who caused the injury is exempt from liability.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>the latter Rabbis</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>who say: Anyone who is liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for loss of livelihood is liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for medical costs, and anyone who is not liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for loss of livelihood is not liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for medical costs, why do I</b> need, i.e., how do I account for, the fact <b>that the verse repeated</b> the obligation to pay <b>medical costs?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is necessary for that which the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael says:</b> When the verse states: <b>“And shall cause him to be thoroughly healed [<i>verappo yerappe</i>]”</b> (Exodus 21:19), it is derived <b>from here that permission is granted to a doctor to heal,</b> and it is not considered to be an intervention counter to the will of God.

### Part 16
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that if growths appeared due to the injury, and the wound reopened,</b> then the one who caused the injury is again <b>liable to heal him</b> by covering his medical costs, <b>and is liable to give him</b> the value <b>of his loss of livelihood</b> while he recovers from the reopened wound? <b>The verse states: “And he shall cause him to be thoroughly healed”</b> (Exodus 21:19). One <b>might</b> have thought that this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if the growths <b>were not due to the injury.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Only</b> he shall pay for his loss of livelihood,” in order to exclude this case. This is in accordance with the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> in the previous <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: Even</b> if the growths appeared <b>due to the injury,</b> the one who caused the injury is <b>exempt, as it is stated: “Only.”</b>

### Part 17
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: <b>Even</b> if the growths appeared <b>due to the injury,</b> the one who caused the injury is <b>completely exempt</b> from paying compensation, both for medical costs and loss of livelihood. And this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the latter Rabbis</b> in the previous <i>baraita</i>. <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: <b>Even</b> if the growths appeared <b>due to the injury,</b> the one who caused the injury is <b>exempt from</b> paying compensation for <b>loss of livelihood, but is liable</b> to pay compensation <b>for medical costs. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this statement? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>his father,</b> Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 18
The Gemara analyzes the statement of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Master said:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if the growths <b>were not due to the injury.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Only</b> he shall pay for his loss of livelihood,” to teach that he is exempt in this case. The Gemara asks: <b>Is there a need</b> for the <b>verse</b> to teach that he is exempt in the case of growths <b>that were not due to the injury?</b>

### Part 19
The Sages <b>say: What</b> did the <i>baraita</i> mean when it said that the growths <b>were not due to the injury? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who violated</b> his <b>doctor’s instructions and ate honey or any type of sweet</b> food, which the doctor had instructed him not to eat <b>because</b> of the fact <b>that honey or any type of sweet</b> foods <b>are detrimental to</b> the recovery from <b>the injury; and his injury developed <i>garguteni</i>;</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the one who caused the injury <b>should be liable to heal him</b> by covering his medical costs. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Only,”</b> to teach that he is exempt in this case. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>garguteni</i>? Abaye said: Necrosis. What is its remedy? Crystalline ice plant, and wax, and wine dregs.</b>

### Part 20
§ The Gemara presents several <i>halakhot</i> concerning compensation for medical costs: <b>And if</b> the one who caused the injury <b>says to</b> the injured party: <b>I will heal you</b> myself, as I am a doctor; the injured party may <b>say to him: You are to me as a predatory lion,</b> in that I fear you and do not trust you to heal me. <b>And if</b> the one who caused the injury <b>says to</b> the injured party: <b>I will bring a doctor who heals for no cost,</b> so that I will not need to pay for your medical costs; the injured party may <b>say to him: A doctor who heals for no cost</b> is <b>worth nothing.</b>

### Part 21
<b>And if</b> the one who caused the injury <b>says to</b> the injured party: <b>I will bring you a doctor</b> from <b>a distant</b> place, the injured party may <b>say to him: A doctor</b> from <b>a distant</b> place <b>blinds the eye.</b> A local doctor has an incentive to ensure that the patient fully heals, while a doctor from a distant place has no incentive to monitor the patient once he has received his fee.

### Part 22
<b>And if that one,</b> the injured party, <b>says to</b> the one who caused him injury: <b>Give</b> the money <b>to me and I will</b> take responsibility for <b>healing myself;</b> the one who caused him the injury may <b>say to him: You will be negligent with yourself and you will take more from me</b> than was originally necessary. <b>And if</b> the injured party <b>says to</b> the one who caused him injury: <b>Settle a fixed</b> sum <b>for me</b> to cover my medical costs, and I will take care of my own recovery; the one who caused him the injury may <b>say to him: All the more so</b> with this proposal is there a concern <b>that you will be negligent with yourself,</b> as you will wish to profit and you will not spend the money on your recovery, <b>and</b> people <b>will call me: An ox that causes damage,</b> because I caused an injury from which you did not recover.

### Part 23
§ With regard to compensation for pain, medical costs, loss of livelihood, and humiliation, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And all of these</b> types of indemnity <b>are paid in a case</b> where the one who caused injury must also pay compensation for <b>damage.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava: The verse states: “A wound for a wound”</b> (Exodus 21:25), to teach that the one who caused injury is liable <b>to give</b> compensation for <b>pain in a case of damage.</b>

### Part 24
The Gemara asks: But isn’t <b>this</b> verse <b>necessary</b> to teach an additional <i>halakha</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC