
### Part 1
<b>here too, teach</b> the mishna: And with regard to <b>man,</b> responsibility for <b>safeguarding his body is</b> incumbent <b>upon him.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Mari objects to</b> the Gemara’s initial suggestion that the dispute between Rav and Shmuel with regard to the meaning of <i>Maveh</i> is based on biblical terms with similar etymology. He suggests: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that <b><i>Maveh</i>, this</b> is <b>the</b> primary category of damage caused by <b>water, as it is written: “As when fire ignites brushwood; fire boils [<i>tiveh</i>] water”</b> (Isaiah 64:1). The terms <i>tiveh</i> and <i>maveh</i> share a common root, and the reference is to water. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Is it written</b> in the verse: <b>Water boils [<i>nivu</i>]</b> from fire, with water, a plural noun in Hebrew, the subject of the intransitive plural verb, <i>nivu</i>? No, <b>“fire boils [<i>tiveh</i>] water” is written,</b> and since <i>tiveh</i> is a transitive singular verb, the subject is fire, which is a singular noun. Therefore, no proof can be adduced from this verse that <i>Maveh</i> refers to an action performed with water.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Zevid objects to</b> the Gemara’s initial suggestion that the dispute between Rav and Shmuel with regard to the meaning of <i>Maveh</i> is based on biblical terms with similar etymology. He suggests: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that <b><i>Maveh</i>, this is the</b> primary category of <b>Fire, as when</b> the term <b>“<i>tiveh</i>” is written</b> in the verse cited by Rav Mari, <b>it is written with regard to Fire.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when the mishna enumerates the primary categories of damage: <b>The</b> category of <b><i>Maveh</i> and the</b> category of <b>Fire,</b> indicating that they are two distinct categories? <b>And if you would say</b> that these are not two distinct categories but rather the mishna <b>is explaining</b> the meaning of <i>Maveh</i>, <b>if so,</b> why does the mishna say: There are <b>four</b> primary categories of damage? <b>There are</b> only <b>three.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And if you would say</b> that <i>Maveh</i> is Fire, and there are four categories in the mishna, as the mishna <b>teaches</b> the primary category of <b>Ox, in which there are two</b> primary categories of damage, Eating and Trampling, the mishna remains difficult. <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that <i>Maveh</i> in the mishna is referring to Fire, what is the meaning of that which the mishna states with regard to the common denominator of <i>Maveh</i> and Ox: <b>And</b> the defining characteristics of <b>this</b> category of Ox <b>and that</b> category of <i>Maveh</i>, <b>in which there is a living spirit,</b> are <b>not</b> similar to the defining characteristic of the next category in the mishna, in which there is no living spirit. Accordingly, how can <i>Maveh</i> mean Fire; <b>what living spirit is there in Fire? And furthermore,</b> if <i>Maveh</i> is Fire, what is the meaning of the next phrase in the mishna: They <b>are not similar to</b> the defining characteristic of <b>the</b> category of <b>Fire,</b> in which there is no living spirit. Clearly, <i>Maveh</i> is not Fire.

### Part 5
§ Contrary to the mishna, where four primary categories of damage were enumerated, <b>Rabbi Oshaya taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 9:1) that there are <b>thirteen primary categories of damage.</b> The thirteen categories consist of four bailees, five types of indemnity, and the four primary categories listed in the mishna. The four bailees are: The <b>unpaid bailee,</b> who is liable for damage caused by his negligence; <b>and the borrower,</b> who is liable for all damage; the <b>paid bailee, and the renter,</b> who is liable if the object is lost or stolen. The five types of indemnity one is liable to pay for injuring another person are: <b>Damage,</b> i.e., the decrease in the injured party’s value; <b>pain; and medical costs; loss of livelihood; and humiliation</b> that the injured party suffered from the assault. <b>And</b> with <b>the four</b> primary categories enumerated in <b>the mishna, that</b> is a total of <b>thirteen.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason the <i>tanna</i> of our</b> mishna <b>does not teach these</b> nine categories and enumerates only four? <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel,</b> who says that <i>Maveh</i> is Eating, it is <b>with regard to</b> the categories of <b>damage</b> caused by one’s <b>property</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>speaks. With regard to</b> categories of <b>damage</b> caused by <b>one’s body,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>does not speak,</b> and the additional categories of Rabbi Oshaya are damage caused by one’s body. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> who says that <i>Maveh</i> is Man, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>teach</b> these nine categories as well. The Gemara answers: According to Rav, the mishna <b>teaches</b> the primary category of <b>Man, and</b> included in that category are <b>all matters</b> of damage that are caused by <b>man,</b> among them the categories added by Rabbi Oshaya.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Oshaya too, doesn’t</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> the primary category of <b>Man?</b> Why then did he enumerate the four bailees and the five types of indemnity? The Gemara answers: In his enumeration, Rabbi Oshaya distinguishes between <b>two types of</b> damage caused by <b>a man:</b> He <b>teaches</b> cases involving <b>a man who injures</b> another <b>person, and</b> he <b>teaches</b> the primary category of <i>Maveh</i>, which involves the cases of <b>a man who damages an ox</b> or damages other property belonging to another person.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> with regard to <b>Ox as well, let him teach two categories of Ox. Let him teach</b> the case of <b>an ox that damages an ox</b> or other property belonging to another person, <b>and let him teach</b> the case of <b>an ox that injures a person.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>What is this</b> comparison? <b>Granted,</b> in the case of <b>a man who damages</b> another’s <b>ox</b> or other property, <b>he pays</b> merely for the <b>damage;</b> in the case of <b>a man who injures</b> another <b>person, he pays</b> an additional <b>four types</b> of indemnity payments: Pain, medical costs, loss of livelihood, and humiliation. <b>But</b> with regard to damage caused by <b>an ox, what</b> difference is there <b>to me</b> if it is <b>an ox that damages an ox</b> or other property belonging to another person and <b>what</b> difference is there <b>to me</b> if it is <b>an ox that injures a person?</b> In both <b>this</b> case <b>and that</b> case the owner of the ox <b>pays</b> merely for the <b>damage.</b> Therefore, unlike a case where a person causes the damage, there is no reason to distinguish between cases where an ox causes damage based on the victim of that damage.

### Part 10
With regard to the assertion that Rabbi Oshaya added only cases involving a man who injures another person, the Gemara asks: <b>But aren’t</b> there the categories of the <b>unpaid bailee and the borrower,</b> the <b>paid bailee and the renter, which are</b> categories that describe <b>a man who damages</b> another’s <b>ox</b> or other property, as the cases referred to by Rabbi Oshaya are those where the bailee fails to return the deposit that he was entrusted to safeguard? <b>And</b> yet Rabbi Oshaya <b>teaches</b> each type of bailee as distinct categories and does not include them under the rubric of Man, one of the four categories enumerated in the mishna.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers that the reason why Rabbi Oshaya enumerates Man separately from the bailees is that he <b>teaches</b> one category, Man, referring to <b>damage that</b> is engendered <b>by</b> direct <b>action,</b> e.g., the five types of indemnity payments, <b>and</b> he <b>teaches</b> the four bailees, referring to <b>damage that occurs on its own,</b> e.g., failure of the four bailees to safeguard the deposit.

### Part 12
The Gemara cites a third listing of primary categories of damage. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> that there are <b>twenty-four primary categories of damage: Payment of double</b> the principal, paid by a thief who is apprehended and convicted based on the testimony of witnesses and who does not admit his crime; <b>and payment of four or five</b> times the principal, paid by a thief who steals an ox or sheep, respectively, and then slaughters or sells it; <b>and</b> payment of the principal, by <b>a thief</b> who admits his crime; <b>and a robber, who</b> steals openly and by force or threat of violence; <b>and conspiring witnesses</b> who pay the individual against whom they falsely testified with regard to a sum that they conspired to cause him to lose.

### Part 13
<b>And the rapist, and the seducer,</b> who seduces an unmarried young woman, who pay a fine of fifty <i>sela</i>; <b>and the defamer,</b> i.e., one who defames his wife by claiming falsely in court that he discovered that she was not a virgin when he consummated the marriage and alleges that she engaged in intercourse with another man while betrothed, who pays a fine of one hundred <i>sela</i>; <b>and one who causes</b> another’s <i>teruma</i> <b>to become ritually impure,</b> rendering it prohibited to partake of that <i>teruma</i>; <b>and one who mixes</b> <i>teruma</i> with another’s non-sacred food, rendering it prohibited for any non-priest to partake of it; <b>and one who pours</b> another’s wine <b>as a libation</b> for idolatry. When one combines the eleven categories enumerated by <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya and these thirteen</b> categories enumerated by Rabbi Oshaya, <b>this</b> totals <b>twenty-four</b> principal categories of damage.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Oshaya, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not teach these</b> eleven additional categories? The Gemara answers: It is <b>with regard to</b> cases where one is liable to pay <b>monetary restitution</b> that Rabbi Oshaya <b>speaks. With regard to</b> cases where one is liable to pay <b>a fine,</b> Rabbi Oshaya <b>does not speak.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: What of the cases of <b>a thief and a robber, which</b> are cases where one is liable to pay <b>monetary restitution? Let</b> Rabbi Oshaya also <b>teach</b> those cases and include them in his list. The Gemara answers: <b>Doesn’t he teach</b> those cases, as he enumerates in his list the <b>unpaid bailee and the borrower?</b> An unpaid bailee who takes a false oath that the deposit was stolen, when in fact it remained in his possession, is liable to pay restitution like a thief.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya too, doesn’t he teach</b> those cases; as he enumerates in his list the <b>unpaid bailee and the borrower?</b> Why does Rabbi Ḥiyya list them separately? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Ḥiyya makes a distinction between different types of theft: He <b>teaches</b> cases of theft with regard to <b>property that came into</b> one’s <b>possession in a permitted</b> manner, e.g., an unpaid bailee who was entrusted with a deposit and later misappropriated it, <b>and</b> he <b>teaches</b> cases of theft with regard to <b>property that came into</b> one’s <b>possession in a prohibited</b> manner, e.g., the actions of a thief and a robber.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC