
### Part 1
<b>require denial of a part of</b> the claim <b>and admittance of a part of</b> the claim in order to be obligated to take an oath when someone claims to have given them an item as a deposit, <b>and these are they: An unpaid bailee, and a borrower, a paid bailee, and a renter.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara quotes the source for this statement. <b>Rava said: What is the reasoning</b> for the statement <b>of Rami bar Ḥama?</b> Concerning <b>an unpaid bailee, it is explicitly written with regard to him: “This is it,”</b> as explained earlier. Concerning <b>a paid bailee,</b> Rami bar Ḥama <b>learns</b> by means of a verbal analogy to the term <b>giving</b> used with regard to a paid bailee <b>from</b> the term <b>giving</b> used with regard to <b>an unpaid bailee,</b> since the verses about both a paid and an unpaid bailee begin: “If a man gives his neighbor” (Exodus 22:6, 9).

### Part 3
Rava continues: Rami bar Ḥama learns the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a borrower</b> from the verse: <b>“And if [<i>vekhi</i>] a man borrow”</b> (Exodus 22:13). There is a principle that the conjunction “and,” represented by the letter <b><i>vav</i>, adds to the previous topic.</b> Based on this principle, the <i>halakhot</i> of a borrower are connected to those of the subject of the previous verse, the bailee. Concerning <b>a renter, if</b> Rami bar Ḥama is stating his ruling <b>according to the one who says</b> that a renter is <b>like a paid bailee,</b> this <b>is</b> the same as <b>a paid bailee; if</b> he is stating his ruling <b>according to the one who says</b> that a renter is <b>like an unpaid bailee,</b> this <b>is</b> the same as <b>an unpaid bailee.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosef says:</b> With regard to an unpaid bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim, with regard to a deposit,</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole it, and is discovered to have lied, <b>he is not liable</b> to pay double payment <b>unless he misappropriates it,</b> i.e., uses it for his own needs, before taking his oath. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? The verse states: “If the thief shall not be found, <b>the owner of the house shall approach the judges to determine if he misappropriated his neighbor’s goods”</b> (Exodus 22:7), and the following verse concludes: “The one whom the judges convict shall pay double to his neighbor.” <b>By inference,</b> one can learn <b>that if he misappropriated it, he is liable</b> for double payment; <b>that is to say that we are dealing</b> only <b>with</b> a case <b>where he misappropriates it.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said to</b> his students: <b>This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> that one who falsely claims that the deposit was stolen is liable for double payment <b>with regard to</b> an animal still <b>standing over its</b> feeding <b>trough,</b> i.e., the bailee is still safeguarding it for its owner. <b>Rabbi Zeira said to Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: Is he stating</b> his ruling <b>specifically with regard to</b> an animal <b>standing over its</b> feeding <b>trough, but if the</b> bailee <b>misappropriated it</b> before taking an oath, he has <b>acquired</b> it, <b>and an oath is not effective for him at all,</b> not even to cause him to be liable to pay double payment? <b>Or perhaps he is stating</b> his ruling <b>even with regard to</b> an animal <b>standing over its</b> feeding <b>trough,</b> in addition to an animal that the bailee misappropriated?

### Part 6
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba <b>said to him: I did not hear this</b> ruling, so I cannot transmit Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion, but <b>I did hear</b> something <b>similar to it, as Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to an unpaid bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that the deposit <b>was lost and takes an oath</b> to that effect, <b>and retracted and</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit <b>and takes an oath</b> to that effect, <b>and witnesses came</b> and testified that he lied, he is <b>exempt</b> from double payment for the second claim. <b>What is the reason; is it not due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> he already <b>acquired</b> the item <b>with</b> the <b>first oath,</b> and therefore the second oath is disregarded, which is why he is not liable for double payment for a false claim of theft? So too, one who misappropriates the deposit thereby acquires it and is no longer obligated to take an oath.

### Part 7
Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: No,</b> there is no proof from there, because one could argue that the reason is not because he acquired the item with the first oath; rather, <b>since it left the owner’s possession with</b> the bailee taking the <b>first oath,</b> he is exempt from taking an additional oath with regard to the same claim, but his oath will be significant even after having misappropriated the item.

### Part 8
It <b>was also stated: Rabbi Avin says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ile’a says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to <b>one who</b> falsely <b>states the claim, with regard to a deposit, that</b> it is now <b>lost, and takes an oath</b> to that effect, <b>and retracts and</b> falsely <b>states the claim that</b> the deposit was taken through <b>theft and takes an oath</b> to that effect, <b>and witnesses come</b> and testify that he lied with regard to the claim of theft, he is <b>exempt</b> from double payment for the second claim, <b>since it left the owner’s possession with</b> the bailee taking the <b>first oath.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara cites an <i>amora</i> who disputes the ruling of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosef. <b>Rav Sheshet says:</b> With regard to an unpaid bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim, with regard to a deposit,</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole it, and is discovered to have lied, <b>once he misappropriated it</b> before he took an oath he is <b>exempt. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>This is</b> what <b>the Merciful One is saying,</b> i.e., this is how the verse is to be understood: “If the thief shall not be found, <b>the owner of the house shall approach the judges if he has not misappropriated</b> his neighbor’s goods” (Exodus 22:7), indicating that this verse speaks specifically with regard to a case where he did not misappropriate the deposit; <b>consequently,</b> if <b>he misappropriated it,</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from double payment.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Naḥman said to</b> Rav Sheshet: <b>But aren’t three oaths administered</b> by the court <b>to</b> any unpaid bailee who claims that the deposit was stolen from him? The first is: <b>An oath that I was not negligent in</b> safeguarding <b>it,</b> thereby enabling it to be stolen; the second is: <b>An oath that I did not misappropriate it;</b> the third is: <b>An oath that it is not in my possession. What, is it not</b> so that: <b>An oath that I did not misappropriate it,</b> is <b>similar to: An oath that it is not in my possession,</b> in the following manner: <b>Just as</b> with regard to: <b>An oath that it is not in my possession, when the matter becomes revealed that it is in his possession,</b> he is <b>liable, so too,</b> with regard to: <b>An oath that I did not misappropriate it, when the matter becomes revealed that he did misappropriate it,</b> he should be <b>liable?</b>

### Part 11
Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: No,</b> there is no proof from there, because one could say that the <i>halakha</i> of: <b>An oath that I did not misappropriate it,</b> is <b>similar to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of: An oath <b>that I was not negligent in</b> safeguarding <b>it,</b> in the following manner: <b>Just as</b> with regard to: <b>An oath that I was not negligent in</b> safeguarding <b>it, when the matter becomes revealed that he was negligent in</b> safeguarding <b>it,</b> he is <b>exempt from double payment, so too,</b> with regard to: <b>An oath that I did not misappropriate it, when the matter becomes revealed that he did misappropriate it,</b> he is <b>exempt from double payment.</b> Since the comparison can be made between different pairings of the oaths to suggest opposite conclusions, none of these comparisons are definitive.

### Part 12
§ The <i>baraita</i> quoted earlier (65b) teaches that a bailee who would be liable for double payment if witnesses were to testify that he had in fact stolen a deposit about which he had taken an oath attesting to its theft does not pay the additional one-fifth payment normally imposed upon one who takes a false oath with regard to a monetary claim. The Gemara explores the reason for this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rami bar Ḥama raises a dilemma:</b> Is it the <b>monetary</b> obligation <b>that renders him liable</b> for <b>double payment</b> which <b>exempts him from the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, <b>or perhaps</b> is it the taking of the <b>oath that renders him liable for double payment</b> which <b>exempts him from the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment?

### Part 13
The Gemara explains: <b>What are the circumstances</b> in which there is a practical difference between these possibilities? It is in a case <b>where he</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit <b>and takes an oath</b> to that effect, <b>and retracts and</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that it <b>was lost and takes an oath</b> to that effect,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC