
### Part 1
in the verse that recounts the thirteen attributes of mercy: <b>“Long-suffering [<i>erekh appayim</i>]”</b> (Exodus 34:6), using the plural form, <b>and it is not written</b> as <b><i>erekh af</i>,</b> in the singular? In order to teach that He is <b>long-suffering for</b> both <b>the righteous and for the wicked</b> and does not punish them immediately for their transgressions.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught: A person should not throw stones from his property into the public domain. An incident</b> occurred <b>involving a certain individual who was throwing stones from his property into the public domain, and a certain pious man found him.</b> The latter <b>said to him: Lowlife [<i>reika</i>], for what</b> reason <b>are you throwing stones from property that is not yours into your property?</b> The man <b>mocked him,</b> as he did not understand what he meant, as the property from which he was throwing stones was his.

### Part 3
<b>Some days</b> later, <b>he was forced to sell his field</b> from which he had thrown the stones. <b>And he was walking in the same public domain</b> into which he had thrown them, <b>and he stumbled on those same stones. He said: That pious man said</b> it <b>well to me</b> when he said: <b>For what</b> reason <b>are you throwing stones from property that is not yours into your own property,</b> since that property no longer belongs to me, and only the public domain remains mine to use.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who digs a pit in the public domain and an ox or a donkey fell into it,</b> he is <b>liable.</b> The <i>halakha</i> is the <b>same</b> for <b>one who digs</b> either <b>a pit; a ditch,</b> which is narrow and long; <b>or a cave,</b> which is rectangular and roofed; <b>trenches and</b> water <b>channels.</b> In all these cases he is <b>liable. If so, why is</b> the verse <b>stated</b> as referring to <b>a pit,</b> as it states: “And if a man shall open a pit” (Exodus 21:33)? To teach that <b>just as a pit that has sufficient</b> depth <b>to cause death</b> when falling into it is at least <b>ten handbreadths</b> deep, <b>so too, any</b> other excavations <b>that have sufficient</b> depth <b>to cause death</b> may be no less than <b>ten handbreadths.</b> If any of the types of excavations <b>were less than ten handbreadths</b> deep, <b>and an ox or a donkey fell into</b> one of <b>them and died,</b> the digger of the excavation is <b>exempt. But if it was injured in it,</b> not killed, he is <b>liable</b> to pay damages.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav says:</b> Damage by <b>Pit for which the Torah obligates one</b> to pay is referring specifically <b>to</b> damage caused by the pit’s lethal <b>fumes,</b> i.e., suffocation, <b>but not to</b> damage caused by <b>the impact</b> of hitting the ground, for which the digger of the pit is exempt from paying compensation. The Gemara continues to explain: <b>Apparently,</b> it can be inferred that Rav <b>maintains</b> that with regard to the <b>impact</b> of hitting the bottom of the pit, <b>it is merely the ground that injures him.</b> The digger of the pit does not own the ground, so it is not a case where his property caused damage. Therefore, he does not bear responsibility for the damage.

### Part 6
<b>And Shmuel says:</b> The Torah renders one liable for damage caused <b>by its</b> lethal <b>fumes, and all the more so for</b> damage resulting from <b>the impact.</b> Shmuel adds: <b>And if you say</b> that the <b>Torah spoke</b> only <b>about</b> liability for <b>its impact and not for its</b> lethal <b>fumes,</b> one could respond that <b>the Torah testifies about a pit</b> without specifying for which type of pit one is liable, <b>and</b> this includes <b>even</b> a pit <b>full of woolen sponges [<i>sefogin</i>],</b> which would completely absorb the impact.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Rav and Shmuel, given that falling into any pit involves injury due to both the lethal fumes and the impact? The Gemara answers: The practical difference <b>between them</b> is in the case <b>where</b> one <b>fashioned a mound</b> with a height of ten handbreadths <b>in the public domain</b> without digging, and an animal fell from this raised platform and died. <b>According to Rav,</b> the one who fashioned the mound <b>is not liable for</b> damage by Pit in the case of <b>a mound,</b> since there are no fumes, as the animal fell to the level ground. By contrast, <b>according to Shmuel, he is also liable for</b> damage by Pit in the case of <b>a mound,</b> since there is nevertheless an impact when hitting the ground.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the source for <b>the reasoning of Rav,</b> that one is not liable in that case? The Gemara answers: <b>Since the verse states: “And</b> an ox or a donkey <b>fall</b> therein” (Exodus 21:33), indicating that there is no liability for damage by Pit <b>unless</b> the animal <b>falls</b> in the <b>normal manner of falling,</b> but not where it first climbed onto an elevated surface and then fell from there to the level ground. <b>And according to Shmuel,</b> the term: <b>“And</b> an ox or a donkey <b>fall,” indicates any manner</b> of falling, regardless of whether the animal fell into a hole or fell to the ground from an elevated surface.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges Rav’s opinion: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>If so, why is</b> the verse <b>stated</b> as referring to <b>a pit,</b> as it states: “And if a man shall open a pit” (Exodus 21:33)? To teach that <b>just as a pit that has sufficient</b> depth <b>to cause death</b> when falling into it is at least <b>ten handbreadths</b> deep, <b>so too, any</b> other excavations <b>that have sufficient</b> depth <b>to cause death</b> may be no less than <b>ten handbreadths.</b> Now, <b>granted</b> that according <b>to Shmuel,</b> the term: <b>So too, any</b> other, serves <b>to include</b> the case where the animal fell from <b>a height</b> of ten handbreadths, in which case the one who fashioned the mound would also be liable. <b>But according to Rav,</b> who exempts him in that case, <b>what</b> does the term: <b>So too, any</b> other, <b>add?</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: According to Rav, it serves <b>to include trenches and</b> water <b>channels.</b> The Gemara asks: But <b>trenches and</b> water <b>channels are explicitly taught</b> in the mishna. Why does the mishna then allude to them again? The Gemara answers: It first <b>teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> about them <b>and then explains</b> its source in the Torah.

### Part 11
Having mentioned these details, the Gemara asks: <b>And why do I</b> need <b>all these</b> cases <b>that are taught</b> by the mishna? The Gemara answers: They are <b>necessary, for had</b> it <b>taught</b> only the case of <b>a pit, I would say</b> that it <b>is</b> specifically <b>a pit</b> of <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>that contains</b> lethal <b>fumes, because it is constricted and round.</b> Therefore, this measurement suffices to cause death. <b>But</b> concerning <b>a ditch, which is long, say</b> that <b>in</b> a case where it is <b>ten</b> handbreadths deep, <b>there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes</b> and there is no liability. Therefore, the mishna teaches both the case of a pit and a ditch.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> furthermore, <b>had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> the case of <b>a ditch</b> in addition to the pit, <b>I would say</b> that it <b>is</b> specifically <b>a ditch</b> of <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>that contains</b> the necessary lethal <b>fumes, because it is narrow. But</b> concerning <b>a cave, which is rectangular</b> and not narrow, <b>say</b> that <b>in</b> a case where it is <b>ten</b> handbreadths deep, <b>there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes</b> and there is no liability. Therefore, the mishna teaches the case of a cave as well.

### Part 13
<b>And</b> furthermore, <b>had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> the case of <b>a cave</b> in addition to the previous two, <b>I would say</b> that it <b>is</b> specifically <b>a cave of ten</b> handbreadths <b>that contains</b> lethal <b>fumes, because it is covered. But</b> concerning <b>trenches, which are not covered, say</b> that at a depth <b>of ten</b> handbreadths, <b>there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes</b> and there is no liability. Therefore, the mishna also teaches the case of trenches.

### Part 14
<b>And</b> finally, <b>had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> the case of <b>trenches</b> in addition to the previous three, <b>I would say</b> that it <b>is</b> specifically <b>trenches</b> of <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>that contain</b> lethal <b>fumes, since they are no wider at the top than at the bottom. But with regard to channels, which are wider at the top than at the bottom, say</b> that at a depth <b>of ten</b> handbreadths <b>there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes</b> and there is no liability. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> the case of channels as well, and each subsequent case listed contains a novel aspect.

### Part 15
The Gemara raises a further challenge from that which <b>we learned</b> in the mishna: If any of the types of excavations <b>were less than ten handbreadths</b> deep, <b>and an ox or a donkey fell into</b> one of <b>them and died,</b> the digger of the excavation is <b>exempt. But if it was injured,</b> not killed, he is <b>liable</b> to pay damages. <b>What is the reason</b> for the ruling of: If <b>an ox or a donkey fell into it and died,</b> he is <b>exempt? Is it not because</b> at this height <b>there is not</b> sufficient <b>impact,</b> although there are lethal fumes?

### Part 16
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> he is exempt <b>because there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes.</b> The Gemara challenges this: <b>If that is so,</b> that a pit less than ten handbreadths deep lacks sufficient lethal fumes, why is the one who dug it <b>liable if</b> the animal <b>is injured; but there are no</b> lethal <b>fumes?</b> The Gemara <b>answers: There are not</b> sufficient <b>fumes to</b> cause <b>death, but there are</b> sufficient <b>fumes to</b> cause <b>damage.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain ox that fell into a water channel [<i>la’arita dedala’ei</i>]</b> whose depth was one cubit, i.e., six handbreadths. Because it suffered the impact of the fall, <b>its owner</b> assumed it would die and <b>slaughtered it</b> first, in order to eat the meat. <b>Rav Naḥman,</b> who was concerned that its organs were crushed by the fall, <b>deemed it an animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>],</b> which it is prohibited to consume.

### Part 18
Furthermore, <b>Rav Naḥman said: If the owner of this ox had taken a <i>kav</i> of flour</b> to bake into bread to eat instead of slaughtering his animal for its meat, <b>and gone and learned in the study hall</b> that although an ox that falls and hits the ground is considered <i>tereifa</i> if slaughtered immediately, <b>if</b> the animal <b>remained</b> alive <b>for twenty-four hours</b> and is then slaughtered, <b>it is fit to eat, he would not have lost</b> his <b>ox that was worth several <i>kav</i></b> of flour. The Gemara notes: <b>Apparently, Rav Naḥman maintains</b> that <b>there is an impact</b> caused even <b>by</b> a pit that is <b>less than ten</b> handbreadths, as Rav Naḥman was concerned in this case that its organs were crushed and it was fatally wounded.

### Part 19
<b>Rava raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Naḥman</b> from the mishna: If any of the types of excavations <b>were less than ten handbreadths</b> deep, <b>and an ox or a donkey fell into</b> one of <b>them and died,</b> he is <b>exempt. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Is it not because there is no</b> significant <b>impact</b> capable of causing death? If so, why is this animal deemed a <i>tereifa</i>?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC