
### Part 1
<b>a lost item</b> that he had found, which he had been obligated to safeguard until it could be returned to its owner, <b>he pays double payment, as it is stated: “For any manner of lost thing about which one shall say:</b> This is it…the one whom the judges convict shall pay double to his neighbor” (Exodus 22:8).

### Part 2
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (108b) about a case where an owner of an item said to the bailee: <b>Where is my deposit?</b> The bailee <b>said to him:</b> It <b>was lost.</b> The owner said: <b>I administer an oath to you</b> that it was actually lost, <b>and</b> the bailee <b>said: Amen,</b> thereby accepting the oath; <b>and</b> subsequently <b>the witnesses testify about</b> the bailee <b>that he</b> himself <b>consumed</b> the deposit. In this case, the bailee <b>pays the principal,</b> i.e., the value of the deposit, to the owner. If the bailee <b>admitted on his own</b> that he stole the deposit before any witnesses testified to this effect, <b>he pays the principal and</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> of the principal amount to the owner, <b>and</b> he brings <b>a guilt-offering</b> to atone for his sin (see Leviticus 5:20–26).

### Part 3
The mishna continues with another case: The owner said to the bailee: <b>Where is my deposit?</b> The bailee <b>said to him: It was stolen.</b> The owner said: <b>I administer an oath to you, and</b> the bailee <b>said: Amen; and the witnesses testify about</b> the bailee <b>that he stole</b> the deposit. In this case, the bailee <b>pays double payment.</b> If he <b>admitted</b> his theft <b>on his own, he pays the principal and</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> to the owner, <b>and</b> he brings <b>a guilt-offering</b> to atone for his sin.

### Part 4
The Gemara says: <b>In any event,</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that <b>in</b> the case of a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, <b>he pays double payment, but in</b> the case of a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>claims that</b> a deposit <b>was lost, he does not pay double payment. And</b> it also teaches that <b>even</b> with regard to <b>one who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, it is only <b>by</b> taking <b>an oath</b> to substantiate his claim <b>that he pays double payment, but</b> for simply lying <b>without</b> taking <b>an oath he does not pay double payment.</b>

### Part 5
<b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Torah states: “If a man gives his neighbor money or vessels to safeguard and it was stolen from the house of the man, <b>if the thief shall be found</b> he shall pay double” (Exodus 22:6). <b>The verse is speaking of</b> a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole.

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Do <b>you say</b> that the verse is speaking <b>about one who</b> falsely <b>claims that</b> a deposit <b>was stolen, or is it</b> speaking <b>only about the thief himself,</b> teaching that if the actual thief is caught he must pay double payment? <b>When</b> the Torah <b>says</b> in the following verse: <b>“If the thief shall not be found</b>…the one whom the judges convict shall pay double to his neighbor” (Exodus 22:7–8), <b>the verse is speaking of one who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, as it states that no other thief was found. Since the latter verse is speaking of one who falsely claims that a deposit was stolen, it stands to reason that the earlier verse is speaking of this case as well.

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: When the Torah states: <b>“If the thief shall be found</b> he shall pay double” (Exodus 22:6), <b>the verse is speaking of the thief himself.</b> Do <b>you say</b> that it is speaking <b>about the thief himself, or is it</b> speaking <b>only about one who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole? If so, then <b>when</b> the verse then <b>says: “If the thief shall not be found</b>…the one whom the judges convict shall pay double to his neighbor” (Exodus 22:7–8), the case of <b>one who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit <b>is</b> already <b>stated. How,</b> then, <b>do I realize</b> the first verse about paying double: <b>“If the thief shall be found,”</b> so that it not be superfluous? It must be that <b>the</b> first <b>verse is speaking of the thief himself.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: Although the two <i>baraitot</i> disagree about the meaning of the earlier verse, <b>in any event everyone</b> agrees that the latter verse, which states: <b>“If the thief be not found [<i>im lo yimmatze hagannav</i>]</b>…shall pay double to his neighbor,” is referring to a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit. <b>From where</b> is this interpretation <b>inferred</b> from the verse? <b>Rava said</b> that the verse should be understood as follows: <b>If it is not found [<i>im lo yimmatze</i>]</b> to be <b>as he said,</b> i.e., if his claim that the deposit was stolen is found to be untrue, <b>but he himself stole it, he shall pay double</b> to his neighbor.

### Part 9
The Gemara turns its attention to another facet of this <i>halakha</i>: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> this double payment of one who falsely claims that the deposit was stolen applies only <b>when</b> the bailee has taken <b>an oath</b> that it was stolen?

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: “If the thief shall not be found, <b>the homeowner shall approach the judges</b> to determine if he laid his hand [<i>shalaḥ yado</i>] on his neighbor’s goods” (Exodus 22:7). This means that he shall come to court <b>for</b> the purpose of taking <b>an oath.</b> Do <b>you say</b> he comes to court <b>for</b> the purpose of taking <b>an oath, or is it only for</b> the purpose of facing <b>judgment?</b> The meaning may be determined by means of a verbal analogy. <b>Laying</b> the <b>hand [<i>shliḥut yad</i>],</b> referring to misappropriation, <b>is stated later,</b> in the verse: “The oath of the Lord shall be between them both, to see whether he has not laid his hand [<i>shalaḥ yado</i>] on his neighbor’s goods” (Exodus 22:10), <b>and laying the hand is stated above,</b> i.e., Exodus 22:7. <b>Just as laying</b> the <b>hand later</b> is referring explicitly <b>to an oath, so too</b> laying the hand <b>here</b> is referring <b>to an oath.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara analyzes the two <i>baraitot</i> cited earlier: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> in the second <i>baraita</i> that <b>one</b> verse about double payment is speaking <b>about</b> the <b>thief and one</b> verse is speaking <b>about</b> a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, <b>this is</b> why <b>two verses are written,</b> as each verse teaches a different <i>halakha</i>. <b>But according to the one who says</b> in the first <i>baraita</i> that <b>both</b> of the verses <b>are</b> speaking <b>about</b> a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, <b>why do I</b> need <b>two verses?</b> One verse should be sufficient.

### Part 12
The Sages <b>say:</b> Both verses are necessary because <b>one</b> verse serves <b>to exclude</b> from double payment the case of one who falsely states <b>the claim</b> that the item has been <b>lost.</b> Double payment is paid only when the bailee falsely claims that the item under his care was stolen.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that <b>one</b> verse is speaking <b>about the thief and one</b> verse is speaking <b>about</b> a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, so that <b>there is no superfluous</b> verse, <b>from where does he</b> learn <b>to exclude</b> from double payment a bailee who falsely states <b>the claim</b> that the item has been <b>lost?</b> The Gemara answers: He derives it <b>from</b> the fact that the verse could have stated: If <b>a thief [<i>gannav</i>]</b> shall not be found, but it states instead: “If <b>the thief [<i>hagannav</i>]</b> shall not be found.”

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> since <b>according to the one who says</b> that <b>both</b> verses are speaking <b>about</b> a bailee who falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit one of the verses <b>excludes</b> the case of a bailee who falsely <b>claims that</b> the deposit <b>was lost, what does he derive</b> from the fact that the verse did not state: If <b>a thief</b> shall not be found, but it states instead: “If <b>the thief</b> shall not be found”?

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: <b>He</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that this terminology <b>is necessary to</b> teach <b>what Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says, <b>as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> One who falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the <b>deposit pays double payment,</b> and if the deposit was an ox or sheep and <b>he slaughtered or sold</b> it, <b>he pays</b> the <b>fourfold or fivefold payment.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara notes: <b>According to the one who says</b> that <b>one</b> verse is speaking <b>about a thief and one</b> verse is speaking <b>about</b> a bailee <b>who</b> falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, <b>who employed this</b> change in terminology, i.e., the fact that the verse could have stated: If <b>a thief</b> shall not be found, but states instead: “If <b>the thief</b> shall not be found,” <b>to exclude</b> the case of a bailee who falsely states the <b>claim that</b> the deposit was <b>lost,</b> there seems to be no source to teach the <i>halakha</i> stated by Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba. Accordingly, <b>from where does he</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> taught by <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba,</b> that if the bailee slaughtered or sold the animal he pays a fourfold or fivefold payment?

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: He could have <b>said to you: It is a juxtaposition,</b> as liability for double payment for a thief and for a bailee who falsely claims that the deposit was stolen are juxtaposed to each other. Therefore, just as a thief pays a fourfold or fivefold payment if he slaughtered or sold the animal, so must the bailee. <b>And</b> although these two cases are not entirely comparable, this derivation cannot be refuted on that basis, as there is a principle that <b>one cannot refute</b> a derivation based on <b>juxtaposition</b> by drawing distinctions between the two juxtaposed cases.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks further: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that <b>one</b> verse is speaking <b>about the thief and one</b> verse is speaking <b>about</b> a bailee who falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, it is <b>well. But according to the one who says that both</b> verses are speaking <b>about</b> a bailee who falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, <b>from where does he</b> derive that <b>a thief himself</b> must pay double payment for stealing?

### Part 19
<b>And if you would say: Let it be derived by an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the case of the bailee who falsely <b>states the claim</b> that <b>a thief</b> stole the deposit, because if one is obligated to pay double payment for falsely claiming that a deposit was stolen, which constitutes passive theft, all the more so must a thief himself pay double payment, this derivation is not possible. The reason is that <b>it is sufficient for the</b> conclusion that <b>emerges from</b> an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference to be like</b> its <b>source.</b> In other words, a <i>halakha</i> derived by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference cannot be more stringent than the <i>halakha</i> of the source from which it is derived. Consequently, on the basis of this <i>a fortiori</i> inference, it would have to be concluded that <b>just as there,</b> in the source case, the double payment is required only when the guilty party took <b>an oath, so too here,</b> when the thief himself pays double, it is only when he took <b>an oath</b> that he did not steal it.

### Part 20
The Gemara responds: <b>He derives</b> the obligation of a thief to pay double payment without having taken an oath from a third verse: “If the theft shall be found in his possession alive, whether it is an ox, or a donkey, or a sheep, he shall pay double” (Exodus 22:3). The double payment in this verse applies to all items, as is derived <b>from what the school of Ḥizkiyya taught. As the school of Ḥizkiyya taught: Let</b> the verse <b>state</b> only <b>“ox” and “theft,” and all</b> items <b>would be included.</b> Why was it necessary to also mention “donkey” and “sheep”?

### Part 21
<b>Had</b> the verse had been written <b>this</b> way <b>I would have said: Just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail</b> is clearly <b>defined as</b> an item that <b>is sacrificed on the altar, so too everything that is sacrificed on the altar</b> is subject to double payment, but other items are not. <b>What</b> else <b>is there for you to include</b> in this category? <b>Sheep,</b> which, like oxen, can be sacrificed on the altar.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC