
### Part 1
based <b>on the word of one</b> witness, which is insufficient evidence according to Jewish law. <b>And we said</b> that this is so <b>only</b> when <b>one</b> individual testifies alone against his fellow Jew, <b>but when two</b> witnesses testify against a Jew, we do <b>not</b> excommunicate them, as their testimony is sufficient evidence according to Jewish law as well, and they have not caused the defendant any unjustified financial loss even according to <i>halakha</i>. <b>And</b> in a case of <b>a single</b> witness <b>also, we said</b> that we excommunicate him <b>only</b> if he testified <b>in a court of villagers [<i>demagista</i>], but</b> if he testified in <b>the</b> official government <b>courthouse [<i>bei davar</i>],</b> he is not excommunicated. This is because <b>they also prescribe an oath to</b> the defendant based on the testimony of <b>a single</b> witness, but they do not expropriate money, in accordance with Jewish law.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Ashi said: When I was in the academy of Rav Huna,</b> the following <b>dilemma was raised before us:</b> What is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an <b>important person,</b> whose testimony <b>is relied upon</b> by the gentile courts <b>as</b> if it were the testimony of <b>two</b> witnesses? Since the gentile court will <b>expropriate money</b> based <b>on his word,</b> should the <i>halakha</i> be that <b>he should not testify? Or perhaps, since he is an important person, he cannot escape</b> the authorities who demand his testimony, <b>and he may</b> therefore <b>testify.</b> The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara cites another situation where a Jew is excommunicated for causing harm to another Jew. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> In the case of <b>a Jewish man who sells a gentile</b> a plot of <b>land</b> that is <b>on the border of</b> the property of <b>his fellow Jew, we excommunicate him. What is the reason? If we say</b> it is <b>because</b> he has ignored <b>the right of one</b> whose field <b>borders</b> the field of his neighbor to be the first one offered the purchase of the field, <b>but doesn’t the Master say:</b> With regard to <b>one who purchases</b> land <b>from a gentile, and one who sells</b> land <b>to a gentile, there is no right of one</b> whose field <b>borders</b> the field of his neighbor to be the first one offered the purchase of the field?

### Part 4
<b>Rather,</b> it is <b>because we say to him</b> on behalf of the owner of the adjacent field: <b>You have placed a lion,</b> i.e., a dangerous individual, <b>on my border,</b> as the gentile might now cause me harm. Consequently, <b>we excommunicate him until he accepts upon himself</b> responsibility for <b>all harm that comes</b> upon the neighbor <b>due to</b> the gentile’s activities.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>customs collectors took one’s donkey and gave him a different donkey</b> that was taken from another Jew in its stead, or if <b>bandits took his garment and gave him a different garment</b> that was taken from a Jew in its stead, <b>these</b> items <b>are</b> now <b>his because the owners despaired of</b> retrieving <b>them</b> when they were stolen, and they may therefore be acquired by another. In a case of <b>one who salvages</b> items <b>from a river, or from a troop [<i>hagayis</i>]</b> of soldiers, <b>or from bandits, if the owners</b> of the items <b>despaired</b> of retrieving them, <b>they are his,</b> i.e., they belong to the one who salvaged them. <b>And so too,</b> with regard to <b>a swarm of bees, if</b> the owners <b>despaired</b> of retrieving the bees, <b>they are his,</b> i.e., they belong to the one who found them.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka said: A woman or a minor,</b> whose testimony is not generally accepted by the court, <b>is deemed credible to say:</b> It was <b>from here that this swarm emerged,</b> and it therefore belongs to a certain individual. <b>And</b> one <b>may walk into another’s field</b> in order <b>to salvage his</b> own <b>swarm</b> of bees that has relocated there, <b>and if he damaged</b> some property in the process, <b>he must pay</b> for <b>what he has damaged. But</b> if the bees settled on a branch of a tree, <b>he may not cut</b> off the other’s <b>branch</b> in order to take the bees, even <b>on the condition</b> that he will later <b>give him the money</b> for it. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says: He may even cut</b> off the branch <b>and</b> later <b>give</b> him <b>the money</b> for it as compensation.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that one who is given an item by a customs collector or a bandit may keep the item. It was <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If he took</b> a donkey from the customs collector, <b>he</b> must <b>return</b> it <b>to the original owners.</b> The Gemara explains: The <i>tanna</i> of this <i>baraita</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>despair alone does not effect</b> legal <b>acquisition.</b> Consequently, the customs collector did not acquire the donkey, <b>and it initially came into the possession</b> of the individual to whom the customs collector gave it <b>illegally,</b> and he is therefore required to return it to the original owner.

### Part 8
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> means that <b>if he</b> wants to act beyond the letter of the law and <b>comes to return it</b> voluntarily, he should <b>return it to the original owners,</b> but he is not required to return it. <b>What is the reason</b> that he is not required to return it? It is because <b>despair alone effects</b> legal <b>acquisition</b> and the donkey was, therefore, acquired by the Jew when the customs collector gave it to him. <b>Nevertheless, if he said: I do not want</b> to accept <b>money that is not mine, he returns</b> it <b>to the original owners.</b>

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that if customs collectors or bandits replaced one’s item with one taken from another Jew, <b>these</b> items <b>are</b> now <b>his because the owners</b> despaired of retrieving them when they were stolen. In this regard, <b>Rav Ashi says: They taught</b> that the owners certainly despaired of recovering their property <b>only</b> when it was stolen by <b>a gentile bandit, but</b> if it was taken by <b>a Jewish bandit, no,</b> the owner did not necessarily despair of recovering it. This is because the victim of the theft might <b>reason: Tomorrow, I will take him to court</b> and force him to return what he stole.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef objects to this: On the contrary, the opposite is</b> more <b>reasonable:</b> When dealing with <b>gentiles, who judge</b> a case and impose their verdicts <b>with force, he does not despair</b> because he realizes that the gentile court will enforce the law. By contrast, when dealing with <b>a Jew, since</b> Jewish courts merely <b>pronounce a verbal</b> decision but do not have the authority to enforce it, the victim <b>despairs</b> of recovering his property.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, if</b> Rav Ashi’s distinction <b>was stated, it was stated with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which states: In the case of <b>one who salvages</b> an item <b>from gentiles or from bandits,</b> if the owners despaired of retrieving it, the one who finds it may keep it. The Gemara infers: <b>If</b> it is known that <b>the owners despaired</b> of retreating it, <b>yes,</b> the finder may keep the item; but in <b>an unspecified</b> situation, where it is not known whether the owners despaired, the finder may <b>not</b> keep the item.

### Part 12
Concerning this, Rav Ashi said: <b>They taught</b> this <b>only</b> when the item was stolen by <b>a gentile</b> bandit, <b>because</b> the gentile court <b>judges</b> a case and imposes its verdict <b>with force,</b> and therefore it cannot be assumed that the owners despair. <b>But</b> if the robbery was committed by <b>a Jewish bandit, since</b> Jewish courts merely <b>pronounce a verbal</b> decision but do not have the authority to enforce it, the victim <b>despairs</b> of recovering his property.

### Part 13
§ Apropos the discussion with regard to an owner’s despair of retrieving a lost or stolen item, the Gemara notes that <b>we learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Kelim</i> 26:8): With regard to <b>hides</b> that are tanned by the <b>owner</b> himself, <b>thought renders them susceptible to ritual impurity.</b> Hides and leather are susceptible to contracting impurity only if they are in a finished state. If a private individual uses a piece of hide or leather for a certain purpose, e.g., as a cot or a table top, and decides that this will be its fixed purpose, it is considered a finished product and is susceptible to contracting impurity.

### Part 14
<b>But</b> with regard to hides <b>belonging to a leatherworker, thought does not render them susceptible to ritual impurity.</b> Since this individual sells leather to others, when he uses a piece of leather for a household purpose and decides that this will be its fixed purpose, it is not considered a finished state, as he is likely to change his mind and sell the leather to one who will process it further and put it to a different use.

### Part 15
The mishna continues: If the hides are those <b>of a thief,</b> who has stolen them from another, the thief’s <b>thought renders them susceptible to ritual impurity.</b> If they are those <b>of a robber,</b> his <b>thought does not render them susceptible to ritual impurity,</b> because he is not considered the owner of the hide. The difference is that unlike the case of a thief, who steals items stealthily, the identity of a robber, who takes the item openly, is known to the owner, and he harbors hope of finding him and getting the item back. Consequently, he does not despair of recovering his property.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> that <b>the matters are reversed:</b> In the case <b>of a robber,</b> the robber’s <b>thought renders them susceptible to ritual impurity.</b> If the hides are those <b>of a thief, thought does not render them susceptible to ritual impurity, because the owners have not despaired</b> of recovering them and the thief has not acquired the hide. Rabbi Shimon’s reasoning is that a robber, who seizes items brazenly, is a more difficult criminal to apprehend and bring to justice than a thief.

### Part 17
The Gemara analyzes the scope of the dispute between Rabbi Shimon and the first <i>tanna</i>. <b>Ulla says: The dispute</b> is only with regard <b>to an unspecified</b> case, where it is unknown whether or not the owners despaired, <b>but where it is known</b> that the owners despaired, <b>all agree</b> that their <b>despair</b> effects legal <b>acquisition.</b> By contrast, <b>Rabba says:</b> Even in cases <b>where it is known</b> that the owners despaired, there is <b>also a dispute,</b> because although the owner may have expressed despair verbally, he may still hope to retrieve the item.

### Part 18
<b>Abaye said to Rabba: Do not disagree with Ulla, as</b> the formulation of the <i>halakha</i> that <b>we learned in the mishna</b> is <b>in accordance with his</b> opinion. The mishna states that according to Rabbi Shimon, thought does not render the hides of a thief susceptible to ritual impurity <b>because the owners did not despair</b> of retrieving them, and therefore the hides do not belong to the thief. This indicates that <b>the reason</b> the thought of the thief does not render the hides susceptible to ritual impurity <b>is that the owners did not despair</b> of retrieving them. <b>But</b> if <b>the owners</b> had <b>despaired</b> of retrieving them, then <b>these</b> items would be <b>his,</b> and his thoughts would render the hides susceptible to ritual impurity.

### Part 19
Rabba <b>said to him: We learned</b> the mishna as saying: A thief cannot render the hides susceptible to ritual impurity <b>because there is no</b> true <b>despair for owners</b> of stolen goods, even if they state they have despaired.

### Part 20
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna here that if <b>customs collectors took one’s donkey</b> and replaced it with a donkey taken from another Jew, or if bandits took his garment and replaced it with a garment taken from another Jew, he may keep these items because the owners despaired of retrieving them when they were stolen. The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in this mishna?

### Part 21
<b>If</b> it is in accordance with <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that the owner despairs only in the case of a thief who steals secretly, it <b>is difficult,</b> because the mishna indicates that the victim of <b>a robber</b> also despairs of retrieving his property, as in the case of a customs collector. And <b>if</b> it is in accordance with <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the owner despairs only in the case of a robber, it <b>is difficult,</b> because the mishna indicates that the victim of <b>a thief</b> also despairs of retrieving his property, as in the case of bandits.

### Part 22
<b>Granted, according to Ulla, who says</b> that all agree that if <b>it is known</b> that the owners despaired, the individual in possession of the items <b>acquires</b> them, <b>here too</b> it is possible to explain that the mishna is discussing a case <b>where it is known</b> that the owners despaired, <b>and all agree</b> that the recipient of the stolen property may keep it.

### Part 23
<b>But according to Rabba, who says</b> that even in cases <b>where it is known</b> that the owners despaired, there is <b>also a dispute,</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna written? <b>It is not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and it is not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> The Gemara answers that the mishna is discussing a case of <b>an armed bandit,</b> who is similar to a robber in that he steals using force and aggression. <b>And it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the victim of a robber despairs of recovering his property.

### Part 24
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, this is</b> identical to the case of <b>a robber,</b> i.e., the customs collector, and there is no reason for the mishna to teach the same <i>halakha</i> twice. The Gemara answers that the mishna in fact teaches the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>two</b> different <b>types</b> of <b>robbers,</b> the customs collector and the armed bandit.

### Part 25
The Gemara suggests another proof with regard to the dispute between Ulla and Rabba. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a thief, a robber, and one who forces</b> another to sell him some-thing, <b>their consecrated items are</b> considered <b>consecrated, and their <i>teruma</i>,</b> the portion of the produce designated for the priest, <b>is</b> considered <b><i>teruma</i>, and their tithes are</b> considered <b>tithes.</b>

### Part 26
The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in this <i>baraita</i>? <b>If</b> it is in accordance with <b>the Rabbis,</b> it <b>is difficult</b> because the <i>baraita</i> assumes that even the victim of <b>a robber</b> despairs of retrieving his property, as seen from the <i>halakha</i> that the robber’s act of consecration or separation of <i>teruma</i> or tithes is valid. This contradicts the opinion of the Rabbis, who hold that the thoughts of a robber do not render the hides susceptible to ritual impurity, because he is not considered the owner of the hides. Conversely, <b>if</b> it is in accordance with <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> it <b>is difficult</b> because the <i>baraita</i> assumes that the victim of <b>a thief</b> despairs of retrieving his property, as seen from the <i>halakha</i> that the thief's act of consecration or separation of <i>teruma</i> or tithes is valid. This contradicts the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, as he holds that the thoughts of a thief do not render the hides susceptible to ritual impurity, because he is not considered the owner of the hides.

### Part 27
<b>Granted, according to Ulla, who says</b> that <b>all agree</b> that if <b>it is known</b> that the owners despaired of recovering their property, the individual in possession of the items <b>acquires</b> them, <b>here too,</b> it is possible to explain that the mishna is discussing a case <b>where it is known</b> that the owners despaired. <b>But according to Rabba, who says</b> that even in cases <b>where it is known</b> that the owners despaired, there is <b>also a dispute,</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i> written? It is <b>not</b> written in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> it is <b>not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b>

### Part 28
The Gemara answers: <b>Here too,</b> when the <i>baraita</i> mentions a thief it is actually referring to <b>an armed bandit,</b> who is considered a robber because he steals using force and aggression. <b>And it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the victim of a robber despairs of recovering his property. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, this</b> case of a thief <b>is</b> identical to the case of <b>a robber,</b> and there is no reason for the <i>baraita</i> to teach the same <i>halakha</i> twice. The Gemara answers that the <i>baraita</i> wishes to teach the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>two</b> different <b>types</b> of <b>robbers.</b>

### Part 29
The Gemara offers an alternative explanation: <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>this <i>baraita</i></b> is referring to an actual thief, and <b>it is</b> written in accordance the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: A thief</b> is <b>like a robber.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC