
### Part 1
<b>why</b> would one speak the <b>Syriac [<i>Sursi</i>] language?</b> One should speak <b>either the sacred tongue,</b> Hebrew, <b>or the Greek language. And Rabbi Yosei said</b> similarly: In <b>Babylonia, why</b> would one speak the <b>Aramaic language?</b> One should speak <b>either the sacred tongue or the Persian language.</b> At any rate, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s statement indicates that there is nothing wrong with learning and speaking Greek. The Sages <b>say</b> in response: <b>The Greek language</b> is <b>discrete, and Greek wisdom</b> is <b>discrete.</b> In other words, these are two separate issues; only Greek wisdom is prohibited, not the Greek language.

### Part 2
The Gemara further pursues this line of inquiry: <b>And is Greek wisdom</b> itself actually <b>prohibited? But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say</b> that <b>Shmuel says in the name of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel:</b> It is written: <b>“My eye affected my soul, because of all the daughters of my city”</b> (Lamentations 3:51). Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel applied this verse to a personal tragedy: <b>There were a thousand children in the household of</b> my <b>father,</b> Rabban Gamliel; <b>five hundred of them studied</b> the <b>Torah, and five hundred of them studied Greek wisdom.</b> All of them were killed by the Romans; <b>and the only</b> ones that <b>remain of them</b> are <b>I,</b> who is <b>here, and the son of</b> my <b>father’s brother,</b> who is <b>in Asia Minor [Asya]</b>. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel’s statement indicates that it is permitted to study Greek wisdom.

### Part 3
The Sages <b>say</b> in response: <b>The household of Rabban Gamliel is different, as they</b> held <b>close</b> ties <b>with the government.</b> Since knowledge of Greek wisdom was crucial for the members of this family, the Sages exempted them from the general decree, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one</b> who <b>cuts his hair</b> in the fashion of <b><i>komi</i>,</b> a certain haircut favored by the Romans, <b>this is</b> considered one <b>of the ways of the Amorites,</b> i.e., a gentile practice prohibited by the Torah (Leviticus 18:3). Despite this, the Sages <b>permitted Avtolmos bar Reuven to cut his hair</b> in the fashion of <b><i>komi</i>, because he</b> had <b>close</b> ties <b>with the government.</b> Like-wise, <b>they permitted</b> the members <b>of the household of Rabban Gamliel to discuss</b> matters <b>of Greek wisdom, because they</b> had <b>close</b> ties <b>with the government.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A person may not raise a dog unless it is tied with chains. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not raise a dog unless it is tied with a chain. But he may raise</b> a dog <b>in a city that is close to the border</b> of the country, <b>and</b> in that case <b>he</b> should <b>tie it during the day but may release it at night.</b>

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer the Great says: One who raises dogs is like one who raises pigs.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>significance</b> of this statement? Since both are prohibited, what is the point of this comparison? The Gemara answers: The significance is with regard <b>to determining when one is liable</b> to be <b>cursed for it.</b> Rabbi Eliezer is saying that the same curse meted out to one who raises pigs also applies to one who raises dogs.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says: Babylonia is</b> considered <b>like a city close to the border,</b> and therefore it is permitted to raise dogs there. The Gemara qualifies this statement, and in this context, Babylonia is <b>interpreted</b> as referring only to <b>Neharde’a,</b> a city that was close to the border.

### Part 7
With regard to raising dogs, <b>Rabbi Dostai from Biri expounded:</b> It is written in connection to the Ark of the Covenant: <b>“And when it rested, he said: Return, O Lord, to the myriads of the thousands of Israel”</b> (Numbers 10:36). This verse serves <b>to teach you that the Divine Presence does not rest upon the Jewish people</b> if they number <b>fewer than two thousand and two myriads,</b> where one myriad is equal to ten thousand. The plural form of “myriads” and “thousands” indicates at least two of each. If they are <b>lacking one</b> individual from this total, <b>and there was a pregnant woman among them, who was fit to complete</b> the number by giving birth, <b>and a dog barked at her and she miscarried</b> as a result of the fright, <b>this</b> owner of the dog <b>is found</b> to have <b>caused the Divine Presence to depart from the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 8
There was <b>a certain woman who entered a certain building to bake. A dog barked at her. Its owner said to her: Do not be afraid of it; its canine teeth have been removed. She said to him:</b> It is too late for your reassurances. <b>Take your favors and throw them on the thorns!</b> I have felt that <b>the baby has already moved</b> from its place in the womb and will not be born alive.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>One may spread out traps for pigeons only</b> if this was performed at a distance of at least thirty <i>ris</i>, which is eight thousand cubits, from any settled area, to ensure that privately owned pigeons are not caught in the traps. The Gemara asks: <b>And do</b> pigeons really <b>travel that</b> far from their established places? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Batra</i> 23a): <b>One must distance a dovecote fifty cubits from the city,</b> so that the pigeons that settle in the cotes do not eat the crops that grow in the gardens of the city. This shows that the range of a pigeon is only fifty cubits, whereas four <i>mil</i> is eight thousand cubits. <b>Abaye said:</b> Pigeons <b>fly</b> much <b>more</b> than fifty cubits away from their cotes, but <b>their stomachs become full</b> from the food they find <b>within fifty cubits,</b> and therefore they do not eat any more beyond that range.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>flying,</b> is their range only <b>thirty <i>ris</i> and no more? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>In a settled area, one may not spread out</b> a trap for pigeons <b>even</b> at a distance of <b>one hundred <i>mil</i></b> from the settlement? This indicates that a privately owned pigeon might be trapped even one hundred <i>mil</i> away from a settled area. Why, then, does the mishna permit trapping beyond four <i>mil</i>? <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is not talking about an ordinary city but <b>about a settled area</b> where <b>vineyards</b> are grown. Since the pigeons rest in the vineyards as they travel, they are able to traverse great distances. <b>Rabba stated</b> a different answer: The <i>baraita</i> is dealing <b>with a settled area</b> where there are many <b>dovecotes</b> in which they can rest from their flight.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: If there are many dovecotes along the way, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>derive</b> the prohibition against setting pigeon traps <b>due to the dovecotes themselves.</b> Since the mishna teaches that it is prohibited to trap pigeons within four <i>mil</i> of privately owned dovecotes, it should be irrelevant that there is a city one hundred <i>mil</i> away. The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is dealing with dovecotes <b>that</b> belong <b>to a gentile,</b> and the prohibition against trapping pigeons from private dovecotes applies only to birds owned by Jews. <b>Or if you wish, say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is dealing <b>with</b> abandoned dovecotes <b>that</b> are <b>ownerless. Or if you wish, say</b> that it is referring to dovecotes <b>that are his,</b> i.e., they belong to the same individual who is setting the pigeon trap.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC