
### Part 1
The debtor <b>gives him a coin that is in circulation at that time</b> with which he repays the loan. <b>And Shmuel says</b> that the debtor <b>can say to</b> the creditor: I am giving you a coin like the one you gave me, although you cannot utilize it here. <b>Go spend it in Meishan,</b> i.e., a distant place where this coin is still in circulation. <b>Rav Naḥman said: Shmuel’s statement is reasonable when</b> the creditor <b>has a way to go to Meishan,</b> i.e., he intends to travel there, and therefore the debtor can tell him to spend the coin when he arrives at his destination. <b>But</b> if <b>he has no way</b> to go to Meishan, i.e., he does not intend to go there, the debtor may <b>not</b> give him these coins. Rather, he must give him coins that are in circulation in their current location.

### Part 2
<b>Rava raised an objection to Rav Naḥman</b> from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 1:6): <b>One cannot desacralize</b> second-tithe produce by transferring its sanctity <b>onto coins that are not in circulation. How so? If one had coins of bar Kokheva [<i>Kozeviyyot</i>],</b> coins <b>of Jerusalem, or</b> coins <b>of earlier kings,</b> all of which are no longer in use, one <b>cannot desacralize</b> second<b>-</b>tithe produce by transferring its sanctity onto them. Rava infers: <b>But</b> if one had coins <b>of later,</b> i.e., current, kings, that are <b>similar to</b> the coins of the <b>earlier</b> kings in that they have been invalidated in his location, since they are still valid elsewhere, one <b>can desacralize</b> the second-tithe produce by transferring its sanctity onto them. The <i>baraita</i> does not make a distinction as to whether the owner of the produce intends to travel to the location where those coins are in use or not.

### Part 3
Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: With what are we dealing here</b> in the <i>baraita</i>? We are dealing with a case <b>where</b> the <b>kingdoms are not particular with one another.</b> They allow a coin that has been invalidated in their province to be taken out of their borders and spent in a province where it is valid. Since these coins can be given to those planning to travel to the location where it is valid, it is considered to be a valid coin even in the location of the one desacralizing the second-tithe produce.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But,</b> according to this explanation, <b>when Shmuel said</b> that the debtor can repay his debt with invalidated coins only if the creditor intends to travel to a location where they are valid, he is speaking of a case <b>where</b> the <b>kingdoms are particular with each other.</b> If so, <b>how can he bring</b> these coins to Meishan without the authorities confiscating them? The Gemara responds: Shmuel is discussing a case <b>where</b> the creditor can <b>bring them with difficulty,</b> as in a case <b>where</b> the authorities <b>do not search, but if they find</b> any invalid coins <b>they are particular</b> to confiscate them. It is therefore possible to bring these coins into the other kingdom. Nevertheless, since the authorities are particular, one who does not plan to travel there will not be able to exchange these coins with anyone in his location.

### Part 5
The Gemara questions Shmuel’s opinion: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what was taught in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 1:6): <b>One cannot desacralize</b> second-tithe produce by transferring its sanctity <b>onto money of</b> Eretz Yisrael, i.e., <b>here,</b> when <b>they,</b> the coins and their owner, <b>are in Babylonia. And</b> one cannot do so onto money <b>of Babylonia when they,</b> the coins and their owner, <b>are here</b> in Eretz Yisrael. If one uses money <b>of Babylonia and they are in Babylonia,</b> one <b>can desacralize</b> the second-tithe produce. <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches:</b> One <b>cannot desacralize</b> second-tithe produce by transferring its sanctity <b>onto money of</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>here,</b> when <b>they are in Babylonia.</b> And this is stated <b>even though they will ultimately ascend to there,</b> Eretz Yisrael, as the very purpose of transferring the sanctity to the coins is to spend them in Jerusalem.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where</b> the <b>kingdoms are</b> especially <b>particular with one another,</b> and it is impossible to transport coins from one location to the other. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> if the kingdoms are especially particular with one another, then with regard to the case in the <i>baraita</i>, in which sanctity is transferred onto money <b>of Babylonia and they are in Babylonia, for what are these</b> coins <b>fit?</b> In any case they cannot be brought to Jerusalem. The Gemara responds: <b>They are fit for purchasing an animal with them</b> in Babylonia <b>that will be brought up to Jerusalem.</b>

### Part 7
With regard to the statement of the <i>baraita</i>, that one cannot desacralize second-tithe produce by transferring its sanctity onto Babylonian money when in Eretz Yisrael, the Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Sages <b>instituted that</b> all <b>money shall circulate in Jerusalem because of this reason,</b> i.e., so that Jews from all locations will be able to use their local currencies? <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that states that all money is valid in Jerusalem is referring to <b>a time when the authority of the Jewish people is dominant over the nations of the world</b> and could enforce the rabbinic enactments. <b>There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that states that sanctity may not be transferred onto Babylonian money when in Eretz Yisrael, is referring to <b>a time when the authority of the nations of the world is dominant over them,</b> i.e., the Jews, at which time foreign currency was not usable in Jerusalem.

### Part 8
Having mentioned the coins of Jerusalem, the Gemara notes: <b>The Sages taught: What is</b> the <b>coin of</b> ancient <b>Jerusalem?</b> The names <b>David and Solomon</b> were inscribed <b>on one side, and Jerusalem the Holy City</b> was <b>on</b> the <b>other side. And what is</b> the <b>coin of Abraham our forefather? An old man and an old woman,</b> representing Abraham and Sarah, were inscribed <b>on one side, and a young man and a young woman,</b> representing Isaac and Rebecca, were <b>on</b> the <b>other side.</b>

### Part 9
§ <b>Rava inquired of Rav Ḥisda: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the case of <b>one who lends</b> money to <b>another on</b> the condition that he repay the loan in <b>coin,</b> i.e., with the specific denomination of a currency, <b>and</b> the government <b>added to</b> the size of the coin, so that a coin of the same denomination now weighs more? Is the debtor obligated to return the newly adjusted coin, or can he repay the debt according to the prior weight of the coin that he borrowed? Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: He gives him</b> the <b>coin that is in circulation at the time</b> of the payment. Rava <b>said to him: And</b> is this the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if the new coin is as large <b>as a sieve?</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: Yes.</b> Rava <b>said to him:</b> And is this the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if it is as large <b>as a quarter-<i>kav</i> [<i>tartiya</i>]?</b> Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: Yes.</b>

### Part 10
Rava challenged: <b>But</b> by increasing the weight of this coin, the <b>produce has decreased in price,</b> and since more produce can be purchased with this coin, giving it to the creditor as repayment is a form of interest. <b>Rav Ashi said: We examine</b> the situation: <b>If</b> the produce <b>decreased in price due to</b> the change in the weight of <b>the coin,</b> the debt <b>is reduced for</b> the debtor and the creditor is repaid with coins that equal the prior value of the loan.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC