
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But with regard to sacrificial</b> animals <b>it is also stated</b> in the first part of the verse: <b>“A bull or a sheep”</b> (Leviticus 22:27), which are two animals <b>from which you cannot produce diverse kinds. And</b> accordingly, <b>let us include</b> an animal of diverse kinds as being fit for sacrifice on the altar on that account. The Gemara answers: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause</b> of the verse: “Or a goat,” serves <b>to exclude</b> a type of animal from being fit for sacrifice on the altar, it may be inferred that the <b>first clause:</b> “A bull or a sheep,” also serves <b>to exclude</b> a type of animal from being fit for sacrifice on the altar. The Gemara asks: <b>On the contrary,</b> one could equally argue that <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the first clause</b> of the verse serves <b>to include</b> a type of animal as being fit for sacrifice on the altar, the <b>latter clause also</b> serves <b>to include</b> a type of animal as being fit for sacrifice on the altar.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>What</b> is <b>this</b> comparison? <b>Granted, if you say</b> that both expressions serve <b>to exclude</b> types of animals from being fit for sacrifice on the altar, <b>this is</b> why <b>two exclusions were necessary:</b> One exclusion is referring to diverse kinds and the other is referring to an animal that resembles another species, <b>as even though</b> an animal of <b>diverse kinds is excluded, it was</b> still <b>necessary to exclude</b> an animal that <b>resembles</b> another. <b>But if you say</b> that both phrases serve <b>to include</b> types of animals as being fit for sacrifice on the altar, <b>why are two inclusions</b> required? <b>Now that</b> an animal of <b>diverse kinds has been included,</b> in the first inclusion, is it <b>necessary</b> to say that an animal that <b>resembles</b> another is also included? There is more justification for including an animal that resembles another, whose parentage is entirely of one species, than for including an animal of diverse kinds.

### Part 3
The Gemara has established that when the Torah uses the word <i>seh</i> (Exodus 21:37) in the context of theft it does not serve to exclude animals of diverse kinds. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> what is meant by <b>this</b> statement <b>that Rava says</b> with regard to the verse: “The ox, the <i>seh</i> of a sheep, and the <i>seh</i> of a goat” (Deuteronomy 14:4), that <b>this establishes a paradigm</b> for other cases, teaching that <b>wherever</b> the word <b><i>seh</i> is stated</b> in the Torah, <b>it</b> serves <b>to exclude only</b> an animal of <b>diverse kinds. With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> did Rava state this principle? <b>If</b> this principle is referring <b>to</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>sacrificial</b> animals, <b>it is written explicitly with regard to them: “A bull or a sheep”</b> (Leviticus 22:27), which, as taught in the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>, serves to <b>exclude diverse kinds.</b>

### Part 4
<b>If</b> this principle is referring <b>to</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>animal tithe,</b> concerning which it is written: “And all the tithe of the herd or the flock [<i>tzon</i>], any one that passes under the rod, the tenth shall be sacred unto the Lord” (Leviticus 27:32), this principle is not necessary either. The reason is that the exclusion of diverse kinds can be <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the term <b>“under”</b> in this verse, and the word <b>“under”</b> in a verse that deals with <b>sacrificial</b> animals: “When a bull, or a sheep, or a goat is born, it shall be seven days under its mother” (Leviticus 22:27). This verbal analogy, from which many <i>halakhot</i> of animal tithe are derived, indicates that diverse kinds are not subject to animal tithe, just as they cannot be used for an offering.

### Part 5
<b>If</b> this principle is referring <b>to firstborn</b> animals, concerning which it is written: “However, the firstborn among animals, which is born as a firstling to the Lord, no man shall sanctify it; whether it be ox or <i>seh</i>, it is the Lord’s” (Leviticus 27:26), it is not necessary in that context either. The reason is that this can be <b>derived</b> by a verbal analogy between the term <b>passing,</b> in the verse: “And you shall cause to pass to the Lord all that open the womb” (Exodus 13:12), and the same term <b>passing, from</b> a verse concerning <b>animal tithe:</b> “And all the tithe of the herd or the flock, any one that passes under the rod, the tenth shall be sacred unto the Lord” (Leviticus 27:32). This verbal analogy teaches that if the firstborn of a ewe or a she-goat is an animal of diverse kinds it is not considered a firstborn with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of firstborn animals, which means that Rava’s principle is not necessary here.

### Part 6
<b>Alternatively, you</b> must <b>say</b> that an animal that <b>resembles</b> another is <b>not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of a firstborn, <b>as it is written: “But the firstborn of a bull,</b> or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat, you shall not redeem; they are holy” (Numbers 18:17). This indicates that the <i>halakhot</i> of the firstborn are not applicable <b>unless</b> the fathering animal <b>is a bull</b> and <b>its firstborn is also a bull.</b> This excludes an animal that resembles another species, rather than its father. Once it is established that an animal that resembles another is not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of a firstborn, is it <b>necessary</b> for the Torah to state the same with regard to <b>diverse kinds?</b> Since it is evident that firstborn status does not apply to diverse kinds, Rava’s principle is not required here either.

### Part 7
<b>Rather, Rava’s</b> principle <b>was stated with regard to</b> the redemption of <b>a firstborn donkey,</b> concerning which it is written: “And every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a <i>seh</i>” (Exodus 13:13), <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 12a): <b>One may not redeem</b> a firstborn donkey <b>neither with a calf, nor with a non-domesticated animal, nor with a slaughtered</b> animal, <b>nor with a <i>tereifa</i></b> animal, <b>nor with diverse kinds,</b> i.e., a sheep-goat hybrid, <b>nor with a <i>koy</i>.</b> Rava’s principle is referring to the source for the prohibition against using an animal of diverse kinds for the redemption of a firstborn donkey.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> what about <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, who</b> disagrees with this ruling and <b>permits</b> the use <b>of</b> an animal of <b>diverse kinds</b> for the redemption of a firstborn donkey? <b>As we learned</b> in the same mishna: <b>Rabbi Elazar permits diverse kinds</b> for use in the redemption of a firstborn donkey <b>because it is</b> considered <b>a <i>seh</i>.</b> Accordingly, <b>with regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is Rava’s principle relevant?

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Elazar</b> could have <b>said to you: Rava’s</b> principle <b>was stated with regard to a non-kosher</b> animal <b>that was born from a kosher</b> mother, <b>whose impregnation was from a non-kosher</b> animal. Rava is saying that this animal is not kosher. <b>And</b> this is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua, as, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> although he would agree with this <i>halakha</i>, <b>he derives</b> this <i>halakha</i> (see <i>Bekhorot</i> 7a) <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“The <i>seh</i> of sheep [<i>kevasim</i>], and the <i>seh</i> of goats [<i>izzim</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:4). The plural forms “<i>kevasim</i>” and “<i>izzim</i>” indicate that a lamb is not kosher <b>unless</b> both <b>its father is a sheep and its mother is a ewe,</b> and the same <i>halakha</i> applies to a kid.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks with regard to the case under discussion: <b>But can a kosher</b> animal <b>become impregnated by a non-kosher</b> animal in the first place? Is it even possible for this to occur? Why did Rabbi Yehoshua and Rava have to find a biblical source to deem this offspring as non-kosher? The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> it is possible. <b>As we maintain</b> elsewhere (<i>Bekhorot</i> 7a)

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC