
### Part 1
<b>that it is satisfactory for her to</b> have <b>any</b> kind of marital arrangement, and even had she taken into consideration the possibility of entering a levirate bond with this <i>yavam</i> who is afflicted with boils she still would have accepted betrothal to her husband. This is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Reish Lakish, as Reish Lakish says</b> that women have a saying: <b>It is better to sit</b> as <b>two bodies [<i>tan du</i>],</b> i.e., to be married, <b>than to sit</b> lonely like <b>a widow.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: If the robber <b>gave the money to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib</b> and then gave the guilt-offering to the priestly watch of Jedaiah, the following priestly watch, to sacrifice on his behalf, he has fulfilled his obligation. By contrast, if he first gave the guilt-offering to the priestly watch of Joiarib and then gave the money to the priestly watch of Jedaiah, if the guilt-offering is extant, then members of the priestly watch of Jedaiah, who received the money, should sacrifice it. The Gemara quotes a <i>baraita</i> that records a dispute between <i>tanna’im</i> concerning this case. <b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:18): If the robber <b>gave the guilt-offering to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib and</b> then gave <b>the money to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Jedaiah,</b> they <b>should return the money</b> to be <b>with the guilt-offering,</b> i.e., with the priestly watch of Joiarib; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And the Rabbis say</b> the opposite: They <b>should return the guilt-offering</b> to be <b>with the money,</b> and the priestly watch of Jedaiah will sacrifice it.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this dispute? <b>If we say that he gave the guilt-offering to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib during the priestly watch of Joiarib and the money to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Jedaiah during the priestly watch of Jedaiah,</b> then <b>this</b> one <b>acquired that which belongs to it and that</b> one <b>acquired that which belongs to it.</b> Why would the court remove what was given lawfully to the priestly watch?

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: With what are we dealing here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where he gave the guilt-offering to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib during the priestly watch of Joiarib and the money to</b> the priestly watch of <b>Jedaiah</b> also <b>during the priestly watch of Joiarib,</b> and the dispute is as follows: <b>Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>since this is not the priestly watch of Jedaiah, we penalize Jedaiah; therefore,</b> the priestly watch of Jedaiah must <b>return the money</b> in their possession <b>to be with the guilt-offering</b> held by the Joiarib watch. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>the members of</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib acted unlawfully when they accepted the guilt-offering before</b> the robber paid <b>the money,</b> since payment for the robbery must be given before the guilt-offering can be offered. <b>Therefore, we penalize them, and the guilt-offering</b> in their possession <b>returns</b> to be <b>with the money</b> held by the Jedaiah watch.

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> on this topic (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:18): <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: According to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> that if during the Joiarib watch the robber gave the guilt-offering to the Joiarib watch and the money to the Jedaiah watch, the money should return to the priestly watch of Joiarib, <b>if the members of</b> the priestly watch of <b>Joiarib went first and sacrificed the guilt-offering</b> before receiving the money from the priestly watch of Jedaiah, then the robber <b>should go back and bring another guilt-offering, and the members of</b> the priestly watch of <b>Jedaiah,</b> who are already in possession of the money, <b>should offer it, and those</b> members of the priestly watch of Joiarib <b>acquired that</b> offering <b>that is in their possession.</b>

### Part 6
The Sages <b>say: For what</b> purpose is that offering <b>useful? It is a disqualified guilt-offering,</b> since it was sacrificed before the payment for the robbery was given, and had to be entirely burned on the altar. <b>Rava said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to</b> acquiring <b>its hide,</b> which the members of the priestly watch of Joiarib keep.

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: According to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, if the guilt-offering is</b> still <b>extant,</b> i.e., if the priestly watch of Joiarib did not already sacri-fice it, then the priestly watch of Joiarib <b>should return the guilt-offering</b> to be <b>with the money,</b> and the priestly watch of Jedaiah will sacrifice it.

### Part 8
The Gemara questions this: <b>But Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that they <b>should return</b> the <b>money</b> to be <b>with the guilt-offering.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where</b> it happened <b>that the priestly watch of Joiarib exited</b> at the close of their Temple service <b>and they did not demand</b> the money from the priestly watch of Jedaiah. <b>And this</b> statement of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>teaches us this: That</b> by doing so, the members of the priestly watch of Joiarib <b>waived</b> their rights to the money <b>in favor of</b> the priestly watch of Jedaiah. Consequently, they are required to give the guilt-offering to the priestly watch of Jedaiah to sacrifice.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: According to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, if the guilt-offering is</b> still <b>extant,</b> i.e., if the priestly watch of Joiarib did not already sacrifice it, <b>the money</b> must <b>return</b> to be <b>with the guilt-offering.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious? This is</b> what Rabbi Yehuda <b>holds</b> explicitly; what novelty did Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi teach?

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: <b>With what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where</b> it happened <b>that the priestly watch of these and of those,</b> i.e., both Joiarib and Jedaiah, <b>exited</b> at the end of their Temple service, <b>and they did not demand</b> of the other the item in possession of the other watch. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>they waived</b> their rights <b>in favor of each other,</b> so that the money stays in possession of the Jedaiah watch, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>teaches us that we say: Since</b> the Jedaiah watch <b>did not demand</b> the guilt-offering from the Joiarib watch after the latter exited, <b>let them go back to the first,</b> standard scenario, returning the money to Joiarib to be with the guilt-offering.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: <b>For one who brings his stolen item</b> to the priests <b>before he brings his guilt-offering</b> has fulfilled his obligation, but one who brings his guilt-offering before he brings his stolen item has not fulfilled his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rava said:</b> This is <b>as the verse states:</b> “But if the man has no kinsman to whom restitution may be made for the guilt, <b>the restitution for guilt that is made shall be the Lord’s, even the priest’s; besides the ram of the atonement, whereby atonement shall be made for him”</b> (Numbers 5:8). Learn <b>by inference that the money</b> must be returned <b>first,</b> before the guilt-offering is brought.

### Part 12
Having understood that the inference is that the wording “besides the ram of the atonement” indicates that the ram must be brought after the money is given, <b>one of the Sages said to Rava: If that is so,</b> then in a different verse, which states concerning the additional offerings sacrificed on the first day of Passover: “You shall offer these <b>besides the burnt-offering of the morning,</b> which is for a continual burnt-offering” (Numbers 28:23), <b>so too</b> should one learn <b>by inference that the additional offerings</b> are brought <b>first,</b> before the morning burnt-offering?

### Part 13
<b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that no</b> sacrifice <b>shall precede the daily morning offering? The verse states:</b> “And the fire on the altar shall be kept burning on it, it shall not be extinguished; and the priest shall kindle wood upon it every morning, and <b>he shall prepare the burnt-offering upon it</b> and shall cause the fats of the peace-offerings to go up in smoke upon it” (Leviticus 6:5). <b>And Rava says: “The burnt-offering,”</b> with the definite article, is referring to <b>the first burnt-offering,</b> i.e., the daily morning offering, which is first both chronologically and in terms of importance.

### Part 14
Rava <b>said to him:</b> I do not hold that the <i>tanna</i> derives this <i>halakha</i> from the wording of: “Besides the ram of the atonement,” but <b>I</b> hold that the <i>tanna</i> <b>derives it from</b> the phrase in the same verse: <b>“Whereby atonement shall be made for him”</b> (Numbers 5:8), which is written in the future tense, indicating that he will achieve atonement in the future by bringing the ram of atonement, <b>but</b> as of now, when he is giving payment for the robbery, the offering <b>did not yet atone</b> for his sin.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>he gave the principal to him</b> but did not yet give the additional one-fifth payment, his not giving it does not preclude sacrificing the offering. The Gemara now clarifies the source of this <i>halakha</i>. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> on the topic of the guilt-offering brought by one who misuses consecrated property, which is accompanied by repayment of the value of the item and an additional fifth of its value: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that if he brought his</b> payment for his benefit from <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>but did not bring his guilt-offering,</b> or if he brought <b>his guilt-offering but did not bring his</b> payment for his benefit from <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, <b>that he did not fulfill</b> his obligation?

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>The verse states: “With the ram of the guilt-offering [<i>ha’asham</i>], and he shall be forgiven”</b> (Leviticus 5:16). The <i>baraita</i> interprets the phrase: “The ram of the guilt-offering,” to be referring to two entities: The ram, i.e., the offering, and the payment, represented by the words “the guilt-offering”; this teaches that forgiveness and atonement are achieved only after both the ram of the guilt-offering is sacrificed and the restitution of the monetary payment is given.

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that if he brought his guilt-offering before bringing his</b> payment for his benefit from <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property <b>that he did not fulfill</b> his obligation? <b>The verse states: “With the ram of the guilt-offering,”</b> indicating that <b>the guilt-offering was already</b> brought.

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>just as the ram and guilt-offering,</b> i.e., payment, <b>preclude</b> his achieving atonement, <b>so too,</b> payment of the additional <b>one-fifth</b> of the value <b>precludes</b> his achieving it. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “With the ram of the guilt-offering, and he shall be forgiven,”</b> which teaches that <b>the ram and guilt-offering,</b> i.e., payment, <b>preclude</b> his achieving atonement <b>with regard to consecrated</b> property, <b>but</b> the payment of the additional <b>one-fifth does not preclude</b> his achieving it.

### Part 19
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And let</b> the <i>halakha</i> of misuse of <b>consecrated</b> property <b>be learned from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>common</b> money, i.e., payment for robbery of a convert who died without heirs, <b>and</b> let the <i>halakha</i> of <b>common</b> money be learned <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of misuse of <b>consecrated</b> property.

### Part 20
In what manner? The <i>halakha</i> of misuse of <b>consecrated</b> property can be learned <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>common</b> money as follows: <b>Just as</b> the word <b>“guilt” that is</b> written <b>there,</b> in the context of robbery of a convert, is referring to the <b>principal,</b> i.e., the payment itself, <b>so too,</b> the word <b>“guilt” that is</b> written <b>here,</b> in the context of misuse of consecrated property, is referring to the <b>principal. And</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>common</b> money can be learned <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of misuse of <b>consecrated</b> property as follows: <b>Just as</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of misuse of <b>consecrated</b> property the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>does not preclude</b> his achieving atonement, <b>so too,</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of <b>common</b> money <b>as well,</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>does not preclude</b> his achieving atonement.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC