
### Part 1
<b>When</b> the verse <b>states “sheep,” a sheep is thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the detail of “ox” cannot be written to include specifically items that can be sacrificed on the altar, e.g., a sheep. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of the word <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues to analyze the verse: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>state</b> only <b>“ox,” “sheep,” and “theft,” and</b> in that manner <b>everything</b> would be <b>included.</b> Why is it necessary to write “donkey”? <b>Had</b> the verse been written in <b>this</b> manner, without “donkey,” <b>I would have said: Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox” and “sheep,” are clearly <b>defined as items that are</b> subject to being <b>sacred with</b> the sanctity of the <b>firstborn, so too any item that is</b> subject to being <b>sacred with</b> the sanctity of the <b>firstborn</b> is subject to double payment, but not other items.

### Part 3
<b>What is there for you to include</b> in this category? <b>A donkey. When</b> the verse <b>says “donkey,” a donkey is thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the details of “ox” and “sheep” cannot be written to include specifically items that are subject to being sacred with the sanctity of the firstborn, e.g., a donkey. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of the word <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues to analyze the verse: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>state</b> only <b>“ox,” and “donkey,”</b> and <b>“sheep,” and “theft,” and</b> in that manner <b>all</b> items <b>would be included.</b> Why is it necessary to write the word “alive”? <b>Had</b> the verse been written in <b>this</b> manner, <b>I would say: Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox,” “sheep,” and “donkey,” are clearly <b>defined as</b> items that are <b>animals, so too all animals</b> are subject to double payment, but not inanimate objects.

### Part 5
<b>What is there for you to include</b> in this category that is not already listed? <b>Animals other</b> than oxen, sheep, and donkeys. <b>When</b> the verse <b>states</b> the term <b>“alive,” animals are thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the details of “ox,” “sheep,” and “donkey” cannot be written to include animals. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment. This is the end of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 6
There are several puzzling elements of the halakhic exposition of the verse in this <i>baraita</i>. The Gemara now seeks to explain it in detail. <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i> above: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>state</b> only <b>“ox” and “theft.”</b> The Gemara objects: <b>Are “ox” and “theft” written</b> in the verse in this order, as a generalization and a detail? No, <b>it is “theft” and</b> then <b>“ox” that is written.</b> Consequently, the verse contains a generalization and a detail, in which case the generalization is understood to refer only to that which is specified in the detail.

### Part 7
<b>And if you would say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying</b> that this would be the case <b>had</b> the verse <b>stated</b> the words in this manner, i.e.: <b>Had</b> the verse <b>stated “ox” and</b> then <b>“theft,”</b> all items would have been included; <b>how can you</b> then proceed to <b>say: Just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox,” is clearly <b>defined as</b> an item that can be sacrificed on the altar, so too everything that can be sacrificed on the altar is subject to double payment? <b>“Ox” is a detail and “theft” is a generalization,</b> and according to the rules of hermeneutics, in such a case <b>the generalization adds to the detail, and all items are included,</b> not just items that resemble the detailed item.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> must be <b>saying</b> that the verse should be analyzed <b>as it is</b> actually <b>written:</b> First <b>“theft” and</b> then <b>“ox.”</b> Accordingly, <b>how can you</b> then proceed to <b>say</b> that <b>all</b> items <b>would be included, or: Just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail</b> is clearly <b>defined as</b> an item that can be sacrificed on the altar, as the <i>baraita</i> states? This analysis is applicable only when there is a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization. In this verse <b>“theft” is a generalization and “ox”</b> is <b>a detail.</b> The rules of hermeneutics state that when there is only <b>a generalization and a detail, there is nothing</b> included <b>in the generalization other than what is</b> listed <b>in the detail.</b> In this case, one would necessarily conclude that if one steals <b>an ox, yes,</b> he is liable to pay the double payment for stealing it, but if one steals <b>anything else, no,</b> there is no double payment.

### Part 9
<b>Rava stated</b> an explanation of the <i>baraita</i>: When <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> suggested: Let the verse say “ox” and “theft,” and similar suggestions, <b>he was relying on</b> the word <b>“alive”</b> at the end of the phrase. He considered this word an additional generalization after the detailed items, and therefore <b>he was saying</b> that the phrase is to be treated as <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization.</b> Consequently, it should have been sufficient for the verse to state merely “theft,” followed by “ox,” followed by “alive.” Why does the Torah specify further items?

### Part 10
The Gemara questions this explanation: <b>But the latter generalization is not similar to the first generalization.</b> The first generalization, “theft,” is so general that it includes all items, whereas the latter generalization, “alive,” includes only animals. Consequently, the rule of a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization should not apply. The Gemara responds: <b>This <i>tanna</i>,</b> the author of this <i>baraita</i>, <b>is of the school of Rabbi Yishmael, who expounds generalizations and details in a case like this.</b> Even if the first generalization and the latter generalization are dissimilar, he interprets the verse as a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization.

### Part 11
Rava continues his explanation of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And this is what</b> the <i>tanna</i> found <b>difficult</b> at the end of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why do I</b> need the beginning of the verse to state: <b>“If</b> the theft <b>shall be found [<i>himmatze timmatze</i>],”</b> with the verb repeated? Rava now explains the entire <i>baraita</i>, from the beginning: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>say “ox” and “theft” and “alive,” and all</b> items would be <b>included,</b> in accordance with the rules of a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization. Why did the verse include other details?

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> answers this by saying: <b>Had</b> the verse been written in <b>this</b> manner, <b>I would have said: Just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox,” is clearly <b>defined as an item that is sacrificed on the altar, so too everything that is sacrificed on the altar</b> is subject to double payment, but not other items. <b>What</b> else <b>is there</b> for you <b>to include</b> in this category? <b>A sheep. When</b> the verse <b>states “sheep,” a sheep is thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the detail of “ox” cannot be written to include specifically items that can be sacrificed on the altar, e.g., a sheep. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of the word <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>say</b> only <b>“theft,” and “ox” and “sheep” and “alive,” and all</b> items <b>would be included.</b> Why is it necessary to write “donkey”? The <i>baraita</i> answers: <b>Had</b> the verse been written in <b>this</b> manner, without “donkey,” <b>I would have said: Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox” and “sheep,” are clearly <b>defined as items that are</b> subject to being <b>sacred with</b> the sanctity of the <b>firstborn, so too any item that is</b> subject to being <b>sacred with</b> the sanctity of the <b>firstborn</b> is subject to double payment, but not other items.

### Part 14
<b>What is there for you to include</b> in this category? <b>A donkey. When</b> the verse <b>says “donkey,” a donkey is thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the details of “ox” and “sheep” cannot be written to include specifically items that are subject to being sacred with the sanctity of the firstborn, e.g., a donkey. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of the word <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> then asks: <b>Let</b> the verse <b>say</b> only <b>“theft,” and “ox,” and “sheep,” and “donkey” and “alive,” and</b> in that manner <b>all</b> items would be <b>included.</b> The <i>baraita</i> answers: <b>Had</b> the verse been written in <b>this</b> manner, <b>I would say: Just as</b> the items mentioned in <b>the detail,</b> “ox,” “sheep,” and “donkey,” are clearly <b>defined as</b> items that are <b>animals, so too all animals</b> are subject to double payment, but not inanimate objects.

### Part 16
<b>What is there for you to include</b> in this category that is not already listed? <b>Animals other</b> than oxen, sheep, and donkeys. <b>When</b> the verse <b>states “alive,” animals are thereby stated</b> explicitly. Therefore, the details of “ox,” “sheep,” and “donkey” cannot be written to include animals. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of <b>“theft,”</b> i.e., what is the category of items derived from the detail and generalization? It must be that it serves <b>to include all</b> types of <b>items</b> in the requirement of double payment. If so, <b>why do I</b> need the phrase <b>“if</b> the theft <b>shall be found [<i>himmatze timmatze</i>]”?</b> This is the conclusion of the <i>baraita</i> as explained by Rava.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC