
### Part 1
then the additional one-fifth is considered a new principal obligation. The robber <b>pays</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>apart from</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment about which he had taken a false oath. If he then takes a false oath concerning the second one-fifth payment, he is assessed an additional one-fifth payment for that oath, <b>until the principal,</b> i.e., the additional one-fifth payment about which he has most recently taken the false oath, <b>is reduced to less than the value of one <i>peruta</i>.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And such</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a deposit, as it is stated:</b> “If anyone sins, and commits a trespass against the Lord, and he defrauds his counterpart <b>with regard to a deposit, or with regard to a pledge, or with regard to a robbery, or if he exploited his counterpart; or he has found that which was lost, and deals falsely with it, and swears to a lie</b>…he shall restore it in full, and shall add the fifth part more to it” (Leviticus 5:21–24). <b>This</b> one must <b>pay</b> the <b>principal and</b> an additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, <b>and</b> bring <b>a guilt-offering.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that if a robber took a false oath that he did not rob, he must travel even as far as Medea in order to repay the robbery victim. This indicates that if <b>he takes an oath to</b> the robbery victim, <b>yes,</b> he is required to go to any length to repay his obligation, but if he <b>did not take an oath to him, no,</b> he does not have to do so. <b>Whose</b> opinion is this? It is <b>not</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon and not</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 118b): If one <b>robbed one of five</b> people <b>and he does not know which of them</b> he robbed, <b>and each one</b> of the five <b>says: He robbed me,</b> the robber <b>places</b> the <b>stolen item between them and withdraws</b> from them; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Tarfon. Rabbi Akiva says: This is not</b> the <b>way to spare him from transgression.</b> He is not considered to have returned the stolen item <b>until he pays</b> the value of the <b>stolen item to each and every one</b> of the five.

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is the mishna written? <b>If</b> one suggests that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon,</b> it is not so, because <b>even though</b> the robber <b>took</b> a false <b>oath</b> that he did not rob, Rabbi Tarfon <b>says: He places</b> the <b>stolen item between them and withdraws;</b> it is not his responsibility to ensure that it reaches the robbery victim. <b>If</b> one suggests that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> it is also not so, because <b>even though</b> the robber <b>did not</b> necessarily <b>take</b> a false <b>oath,</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>says:</b> He is not considered to have returned the stolen item <b>until he pays</b> the value of the <b>stolen item to each and every one</b> of the five, while the mishna rules that his obligation is contingent upon his having taken the false oath.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually, it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, and when Rabbi Akiva says</b> that the robber is not considered to have returned the stolen item <b>until he pays</b> the value of the <b>stolen item to each and every one</b> of the five, it is only in a case <b>where</b> the robber <b>took</b> a false <b>oath that</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>says</b> this. <b>What is the reason? As the verse states</b> with regard to one who takes a false oath concerning a financial obligation: <b>“Unto him to whom it appertains shall he give it, on the day of his being guilty”</b> (Leviticus 5:24). The <i>halakha</i> that the guilty party must make a rigorous effort to return what he owes is stated in the case of one who took a false oath, and Rabbi Akiva would state his ruling only in that case.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Tarfon</b> rule that a robber who took a false oath is not required to pay all claimants, being that the verse indicates otherwise? The Gemara answers: <b>Even though he took</b> a false <b>oath</b> and by Torah law is obligated to return the stolen item to the robbery victim, <b>the Sages instituted an ordinance</b> allowing him to place it between the five possible victims, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, says:</b> The Sages <b>instituted a great ordinance</b> stating <b>that if the expense</b> required to return a stolen item to the victim <b>is greater than the principal,</b> the robber may <b>pay the principal and</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>to the court, and</b> he then <b>brings his guilt-offering and achieves atonement for himself.</b> This ordinance would apply here as well, as the expense required to pay all five claimants is greater than the principal.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> doesn’t <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> agree that the Sages instituted this ordinance? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Akiva holds that <b>when the Sages instituted the ordinance,</b> they did so only for cases <b>where</b> the robber <b>knows whom he robbed, as</b> in such cases <b>he is</b> definitely <b>returning the money to its owner</b> by depositing it with the court, who will convey it to the robbery victim. But in the case of one who <b>robbed one of five</b> people, <b>where he does not know whom he robbed,</b> and <b>where,</b> by merely placing the stolen item between the five of them <b>the money is not returned to its owner, the Sages did not institute an ordinance.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda raises an objection</b> to the explanation that Rabbi Akiva stated his opinion specifically in a case where the robber took an oath. The <i>baraita</i> in the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Yevamot</i> 14:2) states that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva did not disagree with regard to one who purchased</b> an item <b>from</b> one of <b>five</b> people <b>and does not know from which of them he purchased</b> it, as both agree <b>that</b> in this case <b>he places the money of the purchase between them and withdraws.</b> Since the purchaser has not transgressed, he is not penalized by being required to suffer the loss of paying each of them. <b>With regard to what did they disagree?</b> They disagree with regard to one <b>who robbed one of five people, and he does not know from which of them he robbed</b> the item, <b>as Rabbi Tarfon says: He places the stolen item between them and withdraws, and Rabbi Akiva says: He has no remedy,</b> i.e., he has not fulfilled his obligation to return the stolen item, <b>until he pays</b> the value of <b>the stolen item to each and every one</b> of them.

### Part 9
Rav Huna bar Yehuda states his objection: <b>And if it enters your mind that</b> Rabbi Akiva stated his ruling specifically <b>with regard to</b> one who <b>took</b> a false <b>oath, what</b> is the difference <b>to me</b> if he <b>purchased</b> an item from another, and <b>what</b> is the difference <b>to me</b> if he <b>robbed</b> him? In either case he has transgressed the prohibition against taking a false oath denying his obligation, and he should be penalized by being required to ensure that the one to whom he owes the money receives it.

### Part 10
<b>And Rava raises another objection</b> to the explanation that Rabbi Akiva stated his opinion specifically in a case where the robber took an oath. There was <b>an incident involving a certain pious</b> man <b>who purchased</b> an item <b>from</b> one of <b>two people, and he did not know from which of them he purchased</b> the item, <b>and he came before Rabbi Tarfon</b> for a ruling. Rabbi Tarfon <b>said to him: Place the money of your purchase between them and withdraw. He</b> then <b>came before Rabbi Akiva,</b> who <b>said to him: You have no remedy until you pay each and every one,</b> i.e., both of them. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that Rabbi Akiva stated his ruling specifically <b>where</b> the purchaser <b>took</b> a false <b>oath, does a pious</b> man <b>take a false oath?</b> It seems from this incident that Rabbi Akiva rules he must pay all potential owners regardless of whether or not he took a false oath.

### Part 11
<b>And if you would say that</b> perhaps <b>he took</b> a false <b>oath and later became a pious</b> man, <b>but</b> isn’t there a tradition that <b>anywhere that we say:</b> There was <b>an incident involving a certain pious</b> man, the pious man is <b>either Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava or Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Elai, and Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava and Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Elai, were</b> both <b>pious</b> men <b>from the beginning.</b>

### Part 12
Due to these objections, the Gemara offers an alternative explanation. <b>Rather,</b> the mishna here <b>is actually</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon, and Rabbi Tarfon concedes</b> that a robber must pay every potential owner in a case <b>where he took</b> a false <b>oath,</b> as is the case in the mishna here. <b>What is the reason? As the verse states: “Unto him to whom it appertains shall he give it, in the day of his being guilty”</b> (Leviticus 5:24). This verse, which requires one to go to any length to return money owed, is referring specifically to one who takes a false oath concerning his financial obligation. <b>And Rabbi Akiva, who said</b> in the mishna in tractate <i>Yevamot</i> that a robber must pay all potential owners <b>even though he did not take</b> a false <b>oath,</b> agrees that the verse is referring specifically to one who takes a false oath, but holds that the Sages <b>penalize</b> the robber by obligating him to pay them all in any event.

### Part 13
The Gemara questions this explanation of the mishna: <b>But</b> if the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon, after all,</b> the mere fact that it is a case <b>where he took</b> a false <b>oath is not sufficient</b> to obligate him to pay the additional one-fifth and to bring a guilt-offering if it is a case <b>where he did not</b> also <b>admit</b> that he took a false oath and owes the money. Therefore, <b>why</b> would the mishna here <b>specifically</b> state: <b>And he took</b> a false <b>oath? Even without</b> taking the false <b>oath,</b> the robber should <b>also</b> be obligated to pursue the owner as a result of his having admitted his obligation. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Tarfon concedes</b> that <b>in</b> a case where a robber <b>says to two</b> people: <b>I robbed one of you</b> of <b>one hundred dinars and I do not know which of you</b> it was, <b>he gives one hundred dinars to this</b> person <b>and one hundred dinars to that</b> person,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC