
### Part 1
The conditions are <b>that</b> people <b>shall</b> have the right to <b>graze</b> their animals <b>in forests,</b> even on private property; <b>and</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>gather wood from</b> each other’s <b>fields,</b> to be used as animal fodder; <b>and</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>gather</b> wild <b>vegetation</b> for animal fodder in any place <b>except for</b> a field of <b>fenugreek; and</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>pluck off a shoot anywhere</b> for propagation and planting, <b>except for olive shoots; and</b> that <b>the people of the city</b> shall have the right to <b>take supplies</b> of water from a spring on private property, even <b>from a spring that emerges for the first time; and</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>fish in the Sea of Tiberias,</b> i.e., the Sea of Galilee, <b>provided that</b> the fisherman <b>does not build an</b> underwater <b>fence</b> to catch fish, thereby <b>causing an impediment to boats.</b>

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues the list of Joshua’s ten conditions: <b>And</b> people shall have the right to <b>relieve themselves</b> outdoors <b>behind a fence, even in a field</b> that is <b>full of saffron [<i>karkom</i>]; and they</b> shall have the right to <b>walk in permitted paths,</b> i.e., those paths that cut through a private field, throughout the summer <b>until the second rainfall,</b> when crops begin to sprout; <b>and they</b> shall have the right to <b>veer off to the sides of the roads</b> onto private property <b>because of hard protrusions [<i>yeteidot</i>] of the road; and one who becomes lost among the vineyards</b> shall have the right to <b>cut down branches and enter</b> an area of the vineyard, or <b>cut down branches and exit</b> an area of the vineyard, until he finds his way back to the road; <b>and</b> that <b>a corpse with no one to bury it [<i>met mitzva</i>] acquires its place</b> and is buried where it was found.

### Part 3
The first condition mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> is <b>that</b> people shall have the right to <b>graze</b> their animals <b>in forests. Rav Pappa said: We said</b> this <b>only</b> with regard to <b>small</b> domesticated animals, i.e., sheep or goats, that graze <b>in</b> a forest of <b>large</b> trees. Small animals grazing in a forest of this kind would not destroy it. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>small</b> animals grazing <b>in</b> a forest with <b>small</b> growth, or <b>large</b> animals, e.g., oxen, grazing <b>in</b> a forest of <b>large</b> trees, these practices are <b>not</b> permitted, as in either of these scenarios the practice would destroy the forest. <b>And, all the more so,</b> it is understood <b>that large</b> animals grazing <b>in</b> a forest with <b>small</b> growth is <b>not</b> permitted.

### Part 4
The Gemara discusses the next condition mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>gather wood from</b> each other’s <b>fields,</b> to be used as animal fodder. The Gemara comments: <b>We said</b> this <b>only with regard to</b> twigs of <b>thorns and shrubs,</b> as the field’s owner does not care about these. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>other</b> types of <b>wood,</b> it is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>And even with regard to</b> twigs of <b>thorns and shrubs, we said</b> this <b>only when</b> they are <b>attached</b> to the ground. <b>But when</b> they have been <b>detached</b> by the owner it is <b>not</b> permitted, as he has already claimed them for himself.

### Part 5
<b>And even when</b> they are <b>attached we said</b> this <b>only when</b> the twigs are still <b>moist, but when</b> they are completely <b>dry</b> it is <b>not</b> permitted, as the owner requires these for firewood. Moreover, it is permitted only <b>provided that one does not uproot</b> the thorn bush or shrub from the ground, but it is prohibited to pull them out with their roots.

### Part 6
The Gemara further discusses Joshua’s conditions: <b>And</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>gather</b> wild <b>vegetation</b> for animal fodder in any place <b>except for</b> a field of <b>fenugreek.</b> The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that</b> wild <b>vegetation is good for fenugreek,</b> and therefore the owner wants it to be left in his field? The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna that deals with diverse kinds (<i>Kilayim</i> 2:5): With regard to <b>fenugreek that sprouted alongside</b> various <b>types of</b> wild <b>vegetation, one is not required to uproot</b> the vegetation. Although it is generally prohibited to grow different species of vegetables together in one patch, if the species have a negative impact on each other’s growth, it is not prohibited. In this case the wild vegetation may be left alongside the fenugreek because it is harmful to it, and the <i>halakhot</i> of diverse kinds do not apply in a case of this kind.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yirmeya said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the mishna is referring to a case where the fenugreek was planted <b>for</b> its <b>seeds; there,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that lists Joshua’s conditions is referring to fenugreek planted <b>for</b> its <b>stalks.</b> When it is planted <b>for</b> its <b>seeds,</b> wild <b>vegetation is bad for it, as it weakens</b> the fenugreek and lowers its yield. But when it is planted <b>for</b> its <b>stalks,</b> wild vegetation is <b>good for it, as when it is situated among vegetation it climbs on it</b> and thereby grows to a larger size.

### Part 8
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead another answer: <b>Here,</b> the mishna is referring to a case where the fenugreek was planted <b>for human</b> consumption; and <b>there,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to fenugreek planted <b>for animal</b> consumption. <b>Since</b> the owner <b>sowed</b> the fenugreek <b>for animal</b> consumption, the wild <b>vegetation is also required by him,</b> as this too can be used for animal fodder. <b>And how can we know</b> if a particular fenugreek field was planted for human or animal consumption, and thereby know whether the vegetation may be picked and taken? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> If he planted it <b>in rows [<i>mesharei</i>],</b> it is <b>for human</b> consumption; if he did <b>not</b> plant <b>in rows</b> but planted haphazardly, it is <b>for animal</b> consumption.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>And</b> that <b>they</b> shall have the right to <b>pluck off a shoot anywhere</b> for propagation and planting, <b>except for olive shoots,</b> as this would cause damage to the olive tree. <b>Rabbi Tanḥum and Rabbi Berayes explained</b> this <b>in the name of a certain elder: With regard to olive</b> trees, one must distance himself by <b>the size of an egg</b> from the trunk before detaching a shoot; in the case <b>of reeds and grape vines,</b> he may take shoots only <b>from the</b> place of the first <b>knot and above. And</b> with regard to <b>all other trees,</b> shoots may be taken only <b>from the thick</b> part <b>of</b> the <b>tree,</b> where there are many branches growing, <b>but not from the thin</b> part <b>of</b> the <b>tree.</b>

### Part 10
Furthermore, one may take <b>from a new</b> branch, <b>which does not</b> yet <b>produce fruit, but not from old</b> branches, <b>which do produce fruit;</b> and one may take <b>from a place that does not face the sun,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC