
### Part 1
<b>And if</b> it is a case <b>where one did not declare them ownerless, there is still a difficulty. If</b> Rav Pappa’s statement is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, who says: We learned</b> that one is liable for damage caused by <b>all</b> obstacles that he places in a public domain, whether or not he declares them ownerless, <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> with regard to <b>one’s pit, these</b> cases <b>are</b> a subcategory of <b>Pit. And if</b> Rav Pappa’s statement is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav, who says: We learned</b> that one is liable for damage caused by <b>all</b> obstacles that he places in a public domain that he did not declare ownerless, <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> with regard to <b>one’s ox</b> that gored another animal, <b>these</b> cases <b>are</b> a subcategory of <b>Ox.</b> With regard to the subcategories of Ox, the Gemara already established that their legal status is like that of the primary category of Ox.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks concerning an obstacle that is a subcategory of Pit: <b>What is different</b> about <b>Pit</b> that it is defined it as a unique category? It is <b>that its initial formation,</b> i.e., the digging of the pit, <b>is</b> done in a manner that can <b>result in damage, and</b> it is <b>your property, and</b> responsibility for <b>its safeguarding,</b> to prevent it from causing damage to others, is incumbent <b>upon you.</b> In <b>these</b> subcategories of Pit, <b>too, their initial formation,</b> i.e., the placement of the obstacle in the public domain, <b>is</b> done in a manner that can <b>result in damage, and</b> they are <b>your property, and</b> responsibility for <b>their safeguarding,</b> to prevent them from causing damage, is incumbent <b>upon you. Rather,</b> it is apparent that the status of <b>a subcategory of Pit is like</b> that of the primary category of <b>Pit, and when Rav Pappa says:</b> There are among them some whose subcategories are dissimilar to them, he is referring <b>to a subcategory of <i>Maveh</i>.</b>

### Part 3
The meaning of the term <i>Maveh</i> is not clear; therefore, the Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the primary category of <i>Maveh</i> to whose subcategories the Gemara referred? <b>If</b> one suggests that Rav Pappa said his statement <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, who says: <i>Maveh</i>, this</b> is the category of <b>Eating,</b> this cannot be Rav Pappa’s intent. <b>But didn’t we</b> already <b>establish</b> that the legal status of <b>a subcategory of Eating is like</b> that of the primary category of <b>Eating?</b> Clearly, Rav Pappa was not referring to subcategories of <i>Maveh</i>. And <b>if</b> one suggests that Rav Pappa said his statement <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav, who says: <i>Maveh</i>, this</b> is the primary category of <b>Man,</b> which includes damage caused by a person, not by his property or animals, <b>what primary categories and what subcategories are there in</b> that category? The <i>halakha</i> is the same with regard to all damage that a person causes.

### Part 4
<b>And if you would say</b> that there is a distinction: The <b>primary category</b> is a case where one causes damage while <b>awake,</b> and <b>a subcategory</b> is a case where one causes damage while <b>asleep; but didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (26a): The legal status of <b>a person</b> is <b>always</b> that of one <b>forewarned,</b> and he is liable for any damage that he causes, <b>both</b> when <b>he is awake and</b> when <b>he is asleep?</b> Accordingly, that is not the distinction between a primary category and a subcategory.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps Rav Pappa was referring <b>to</b> cases where one causes damage with <b>his phlegm or his spittle.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> where one would be liable for damage in that case? <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where</b> his phlegm and spittle <b>cause damage as they were moving</b> through the air after the person expectorated, that <b>is</b> damage caused by <b>his</b> direct <b>action</b> and there is no room to distinguish between the damage that it caused and any other damage caused by one’s direct action. <b>If</b> it is a case where his phlegm or spittle causes damage <b>after it comes to rest</b> on the ground, e.g., if one slipped in the spittle, fell, and was injured, <b>both according to Rav and according to Shmuel this is</b> a subcategory of <b>Pit,</b> as the spittle is an ownerless obstacle in the public domain. <b>Rather,</b> it is apparent that the status of <b>a subcategory of <i>Maveh</i> is like</b> that of the primary category of <b><i>Maveh</i>, and when Rav Pappa says:</b> There are among them some whose subcategories are dissimilar to them; he was referring <b>to a subcategory of Fire.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is a subcategory of Fire? If we say</b> that it is a case of <b>his stone, his knife, or his load, where he placed them on top of his roof, and they fell</b> off the roof <b>by means of a common wind, and they caused damage, what are the circumstances</b> in which one would be liable for the damage that was caused? <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where</b> those items <b>caused damage as they were moving</b> through the air propelled by the wind, <b>that is</b> a case of <b>Fire.</b>

### Part 7
If so, <b>what is different</b> about <b>Fire</b> that defines it as a unique category? What is different is <b>that another force,</b> the wind, <b>is involved with</b> the fire in causing damage, as the wind causes the fire to spread, <b>and</b> the fire is <b>your property, and</b> responsibility for <b>its safeguarding,</b> to prevent it from causing damage, is incumbent <b>upon you.</b> In <b>these</b> subcategories of Fire <b>too, another force is involved with</b> the items placed on the roof and causes damage, as the wind causes them to fall, <b>and</b> they are <b>your property, and</b> responsibility for <b>their safeguarding,</b> to prevent them from causing damage, is incumbent <b>upon you. Rather,</b> it is apparent that the status of <b>a subcategory of Fire is like</b> that of the primary category of <b>Fire, and when Rav Pappa says:</b> There are among them some whose subcategories are dissimilar to them, he was referring <b>to a subcategory of Trampling.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara questions this explanation: A subcategory of <b>Trampling? But didn’t we</b> already <b>establish that</b> the status of <b>a subcategory of Trampling is similar to</b> that of the primary category of <b>Trampling?</b> The Gemara explains: Rav Pappa was referring <b>to</b> one’s liability to pay <b>half the</b> cost of the <b>damage</b> caused by <b>pebbles</b> in a case where they were inadvertently propelled by the foot of a walking animal, <b>which is a <i>halakha</i> learned through tradition</b> and not explicitly written in the Torah.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if it is a unique halakhic category and the payment is different, <b>why is it characterized</b> as <b>a subcategory of Trampling?</b> The Gemara explains: It is due to the fact that it shares a common aspect with Trampling. One whose animal propels pebbles while it walks and thereby causes damage is liable <b>to pay</b> half of the damages <b>from</b> his <b>superior-quality</b> property, and he does not pay only from the body of his animal, as is the <i>halakha</i> concerning half the cost of the damage paid by the owner of an innocuous ox that gored a person or an animal.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rava raise a dilemma</b> with regard to that matter? <b>As Rava raised a dilemma:</b> With regard to one’s liability to pay <b>half</b> the cost of <b>the damage</b> caused by <b>pebbles</b> propelled by the foot of his animal, does <b>one pay</b> damages exclusively <b>from</b> the <b>body</b> of his ox that caused the damage, <b>or</b> does <b>one pay</b> damages <b>from</b> his <b>superior-quality</b> property?

### Part 11
The Gemara explains: Although <b>it is a dilemma for Rava, it is obvious to Rav Pappa</b> that one pays from his superior-quality property, and in that sense, he classified the pebbles that cause damage as a subcategory of Trampling.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>According to Rava, who raises it as a dilemma, why is it characterized</b> as <b>a subcategory of Trampling</b> when its legal status is different both in terms of the extent of one’s liability and in terms of the manner of payment? The Gemara explains: It is classified as a subcategory of Trampling in order <b>to exempt</b> from liability pebbles that cause damage <b>in the public domain,</b> just as damage in the category of Trampling is exempt in the public domain.

### Part 13
§ One of the primary categories of damage enumerated in the mishna is <b>the</b> category of <b><i>Maveh</i> and</b> another is <b>the</b> category of <b>Fire.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>Maveh</i>? Rav says: <i>Maveh</i>, that</b> is the category of <b>Man,</b> which includes a person who causes damage, but not the property or animal of a person that causes damage. <b>And Shmuel says: <i>Maveh</i>, this</b> is <b>the</b> category of <b>Eating.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Rav says: <i>Maveh</i>, this</b> is the category of <b>Man, as it is written: “The watchman said: Morning has come, and also night; if you will inquire [<i>tivayun</i>], inquire [<i>be’ayu</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 21:12). The terms “<i>tivayun</i>” and “<i>be’ayu</i>,” meaning inquire, refer to a person, who is able to inquire. Accordingly, <i>Maveh</i> relates to an action performed by a person.

### Part 15
<b>And Shmuel says: <i>Maveh</i>, this is the</b> category of <b>Eating, as it is written: “How is Esau searched out [<i>neḥpesu</i>]; how are his hidden places revealed [<i>nivu</i>]”</b> (Obadiah 1:6)? The terms <i>nivu</i> and <i>maveh</i> share a common root. The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred</b> that <i>nivu</i> connotes Eating? The Gemara explains that it is <b>as Rav Yosef translates</b> the verse into Aramaic: <b>How is Esau searched out [<i>itbelish</i>]; how are his hidden places revealed [<i>itgaleyan</i>]?</b> The meaning of the Aramaic term <i>itgaleyan</i> means revealed, and that is the meaning of the Hebrew term “<i>nivu</i>.” <i>Maveh</i> references the animal’s teeth, which are covered when its mouth is closed and revealed when it eats.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rav, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> that <i>Maveh</i> refers to Eating, <b>as</b> does <b>Shmuel?</b> The Gemara explains that Rav could have <b>said to you: Is it taught</b> in the mishna: <b><i>Niveh</i>?</b> <i>Niveh</i> is the passive form of the word <i>maveh</i>, which would be the appropriate form if the reference was to teeth that are revealed. The term in the mishna is <i>maveh</i>, an active form of the verb.

### Part 17
<b>And</b> as for <b>Shmuel, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> that <i>Maveh</i> refers to the category of Man, <b>as</b> does <b>Rav?</b> The Gemara explains that Shmuel could have <b>said to you: Is it taught</b> in the mishna: <b><i>Bo’eh</i>?</b> <i>Bo’eh</i> is a form of the word <i>maveh</i> connoting an action taken directly, which would be appropriate were the reference to one’s actions that cause damage. The term in the mishna is <i>maveh</i>, which connotes an action that one causes another to take.

### Part 18
The Gemara notes: <b>After all, the</b> meaning of the term in the <b>verses is not precise according to</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rav, <b>and</b> it <b>is not precise according to</b> the other <b>Sage,</b> Shmuel. It is apparent that their dispute is not based upon their interpretation of the verses; it must be based on another issue. The Gemara asks again: As for <b>Rav, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> that <i>Maveh</i> refers to Eating, <b>as</b> does <b>Shmuel?</b> The Gemara explains: Rav holds that the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the primary category of <b>Ox</b> in the mishna. This includes damage caused by an ox <b>and all matters</b> involving damaging actions <b>that</b> are completed by <b>an ox,</b> i.e., the actions included in the categories of Goring, Eating, and Trampling. Perforce, <i>Maveh</i> refers to a different category of damage, i.e., Man.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Shmuel too,</b> who interpreted <i>Maveh</i> as Eating, <b>doesn’t</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> the category of <b>Ox,</b> which should include all matters involving damaging actions that are completed by an ox? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that according to Shmuel, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches Ox</b> specifically with regard <b>to</b> damage caused with <b>its horn, and</b> it teaches <b><i>Maveh</i></b> with regard <b>to</b> damage caused with <b>its tooth. And</b> when the mishna contrasts Ox with <i>Maveh</i>, <b>this is</b> what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying:</b> The defining <b>characteristic</b> of <b>the</b> primary category of <b>Goring, where there is no</b> inherent <b>pleasure</b> for the animal <b>in</b> the course of <b>its</b> causing <b>damage, is not similar to</b> the defining <b>characteristic</b> of <b>the</b> category of <b>Eating, where there is pleasure</b> for the animal <b>in</b> the course of <b>its</b> causing <b>damage.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC