
### Part 1
<b>the seller is not compelled to sell</b> the field <b>another time,</b> i.e., to provide the purchaser with a document denoting him as the owner of the field. <b>But if he said to him:</b> I will purchase the field <b>on the condition</b> that you will provide a deed in my name, <b>the seller is compelled to sell</b> the field again, i.e., to provide the purchaser with a document denoting him as the owner.

### Part 2
The Gemara clarifies the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Master said:</b> In the case of <b>one who purchases a field in the name of another, the seller is not compelled to sell</b> the field <b>another time.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> this <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that the purchaser <b>can say to</b> the seller: <b>You knew that I took,</b> i.e., purchased, the field <b>for myself, and it was merely</b> for <b>protection [<i>ufanaḥya</i>] that I desired</b> to obtain ownership by claiming to purchase it in the name of the other person, <b>and I do not throw</b> out <b>money for naught. Rather,</b> it was <b>with the intention that you will write another document for him,</b> i.e., the seller, stating that I purchased the field. The <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us that</b> the seller can <b>say to him: I have performed a matter for you together with the one in whose name you purchased</b> the field, <b>and let him write you another document.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara discusses Abaye’s interpretation of the latter clause of the <i>baraita</i>, which states: <b>But if he said to him:</b> I will purchase the field <b>on the condition</b> that you will provide a deed in my name, <b>the seller is compelled to sell</b> the field again. Isn’t that <b>obvious? No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> in a case <b>where</b> the purchaser <b>said to the witnesses in front of</b> the seller: You can <b>see that I require another document. Lest you say</b> that the seller <b>can say to him: I thought</b> that it was <b>a document from the one in whose name you purchased</b> the field that <b>you were saying</b> you required, and not from me. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us that</b> the purchaser can <b>say to him:</b> It was <b>for this</b> that <b>I took the trouble and said to the witnesses, in front of you,</b> that I require another document, <b>as it is from you that I require</b> the document.

### Part 4
§ The Gemara mentions a related incident: <b>Rav Kahana gave money</b> to a salesman in exchange <b>for flax,</b> and temporarily left the flax in the possession of the seller. <b>Ultimately,</b> the <b>flax appreciated</b> in value and the <b>owner of the flax sold it</b> for a greater profit on behalf of Rav Kahana, intending to give him all of the money. Rav Kahana then <b>came before Rav,</b> and <b>said to him: What should I do? Should I go and take my money,</b> or would doing so have the appearance of collecting interest for a loan? Rav <b>said to</b> Rav Kahana: <b>If, when they sold</b> the flax, <b>they said: This flax is Kahana’s, go take</b> the money, as in such a case it is as though the flax was purchased directly from you. <b>But if</b> they did <b>not</b> say this, <b>do not take</b> the money, since you would be receiving a greater sum of money than you provided, and this would appear to be a loan repaid with interest.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion was Rav’s ruling? Was it only <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the people of the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>who say: Who informed the owner of the wheat that he should transfer the wheat to the owner of the money?</b> As the Gemara taught earlier, the Sages of Eretz Yisrael hold that the sale can be performed on another’s behalf only if such an arrangement is explicitly stated at the time of the transaction. In this case as well, if the seller did not explicitly state that the money would belong to Rav Kahana, all the money from the sale would be acquired by the seller, who would then be prohibited to give it to Rav Kahana due to the appearance of paying interest.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Is that to say that Rav Kahana gave four</b> dinars <b>and took eight</b> in return? He did not lend money to the seller. Rather, <b>the flax appreciated</b> in value <b>by itself,</b> and when the seller sold it <b>he robbed</b> Rav Kahana of his flax, <b>and we learned</b> in a mishna (93b) that <b>all robbers pay</b> compensation <b>according to</b> the value of the stolen item at <b>the time of the robbery.</b> Therefore, according to all opinions the seller owes Rav Kahana the value of the flax at the time the seller sold it for its appreciated value, and Rav Kahana’s accepting the money would not constitute collecting interest for a loan.

### Part 7
Having rejected the previous explanation of Rav’s ruling, the Gemara presents an alternative understanding of the case. The Sages <b>say: There, it was</b> a matter of <b>trust,</b> as the seller was paid in advance <b>and Rav Kahana did not pull the flax</b> as an act of acquisition, or perform any other formal act of acquisition. Consequently, at the time of the second sale the flax belonged to the seller. <b>And Rav</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as Rav says: One may make</b> an arrangement of <b>trust with regard to</b> the delivery of items such as <b>produce,</b> i.e., one may pay the money in advance with the agreement that he will receive the produce at a later date, <b>but one may not make</b> an arrangement of <b>trust with regard to money,</b> i.e., one may not pay the money in advance with the agreement that he will receive the value of the produce at a later date, as this has the appearance of collecting interest.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who robs another</b> of an item having <b>the value of</b> at least <b>one <i>peruta</i> and takes</b> a false <b>oath to</b> the robbery victim claiming his innocence, and then later wishes to repent, must <b>bring</b> the money, which includes the principal together with an additional one-fifth payment, to the robbery victim, even if this necessitates following <b>after him to</b> a distant place like <b>Medea.</b> The robber <b>may not give</b> the payment <b>to</b> the robbery victim’s <b>son</b> to return it to the robbery victim, <b>and neither</b> may he give it <b>to his agent, but he may give</b> the payment <b>to an agent of the court. And if</b> the robbery victim <b>dies, he returns it to his heirs.</b>

### Part 9
If <b>he gave</b> the robbery victim <b>the principal</b> value of the stolen item <b>but did not give him</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, or if the owner <b>forgave him concerning the principal but did not forgive him concerning</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, or if <b>he forgave him concerning this and concerning that, with the exception of the value of less than one <i>peruta</i> of the principal, he need not pursue him</b> to repay the remaining debt. By contrast, if <b>he gave</b> the robbery victim the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>but did not give him the principal,</b> or if the robbery victim <b>forgave him concerning</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment <b>but did not forgive him concerning the principal,</b> or if <b>he forgave him concerning this and concerning that, with the exception of the value of one <i>peruta</i> of the principal, he must pursue him</b> to repay the remaining debt.

### Part 10
If the robber <b>gave</b> the robbery victim <b>the principal and took</b> a false <b>oath to him concerning</b> the additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, asserting that he had already paid it,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC