
### Part 1
<b>will not derive an inference</b> with regard to <b>Goring from</b> a different case of <b>Goring. I will</b> instead <b>derive an inference</b> with regard to <b>Goring from Trampling: And if in a place where</b> the Torah <b>was lenient with regard to</b> damage classified as <b>Eating and Trampling,</b> specifically <b>in the public domain,</b> as the owner is exempt from liability, nevertheless the Torah was <b>strict with regard to</b> damage classified as <b>Goring,</b> requiring him to pay half the cost of the damage, then in <b>a place where</b> the Torah <b>was strict with regard to</b> damage classified as <b>Eating and Trampling,</b> specifically <b>on the property of the injured</b> party as the animal’s owner is obligated to pay the full cost of the damage, <b>is it not right that we</b> should <b>be</b> equally <b>strict with regard to</b> damage classified as <b>Goring</b> and require payment of the full cost of the damage in this case as well?

### Part 2
The Rabbis <b>said to him:</b> Here as well, <b>it is sufficient for the</b> conclusion that <b>emerges from</b> an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference to be like</b> its <b>source,</b> and therefore, <b>just as</b> one is liable to pay <b>half</b> the cost of <b>the damage</b> classified as Goring <b>in the public domain, so too,</b> for damage classified as Goring <b>on the property of the injured</b> party he will be liable to pay only <b>half</b> the cost of <b>the damage,</b> as ultimately your inference still depends on the fact that for Goring in the public domain one pays half the cost of the damage.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>And</b> is it true that <b>Rabbi Tarfon does not accept</b> the principle of: <b>It is sufficient</b> for the conclusion that emerges from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference to be like its source? <b>But</b> that cannot be, as the principle that begins with: <b>It is sufficient, is</b> an aspect <b>of Torah law, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Sages said that one of the ways in which the Torah may be interpreted is <b>by an <i>a fortiori</i> inference. How</b> is this <b>so?</b> It is written (Numbers 12:14): <b>“And the Lord said to Moses: If her father had but spit in her face, should she not hide in shame seven days?</b> Let her be shut up seven days outside the camp, and after that she shall be brought in again,” and therefore, using <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference it can be derived <b>that</b> if <b>the Divine Presence</b> reprimanded her, she should hide in shame for <b>fourteen days.</b> Why was Miriam banished for only seven days? <b>Rather,</b> it is because <b>it is sufficient</b> for the conclusion <b>that emerged from the</b> <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference to be like the source</b> of the inference. Consequently, this principle is mandated by the Torah itself.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>When</b> Rabbi Tarfon <b>does not accept</b> the principle: <b>It is sufficient,</b> it is <b>where</b> this principle completely <b>refutes</b> the <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, leaving no <i>halakha</i> derived from it. But <b>where it does not</b> completely <b>refute</b> the <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, Rabbi Tarfon <b>accepts</b> the principle: <b>It is sufficient.</b> Consequently, <b>there,</b> with regard to Miriam, the <b>seven</b> days during which she deserved to be banished from the camp due to the rebuke <b>of the Divine Presence were not written,</b> so <b>the <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>came</b> and <b>brought</b> those days plus additional days, adding up to a total of <b>fourteen,</b> and then the principle: <b>It is sufficient, came</b> and <b>removed seven</b> days <b>and left seven</b> days intact. Consequently, the <i>a fortiori</i> inference was effective with regard to the seven days during which she was banished from the camp.

### Part 5
<b>But here,</b> payment for <b>half</b> the cost of <b>the damage is written</b> explicitly in the Torah with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of Goring in the public domain, <b>and the <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>comes and brings an additional</b> payment for <b>half</b> the cost of <b>the damage, forming</b> a payment of <b>the full</b> cost of the <b>damage. If you interpret</b> the <i>halakha</i> employing the principle: <b>It is sufficient,</b> to reduce the payment to half the cost of the damage, this completely <b>refutes</b> the <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, as no <i>halakha</i> would be derived from the inference; the initial payment for half the cost of the damage was written explicitly in the Torah. Consequently, in this case, Rabbi Tarfon does not employ the principle: It is sufficient.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis</b> understand this matter? How do they respond to Rabbi Tarfon’s reasoning? The Gemara answers: In their opinion, the <b>seven</b> days during which Miriam had to be banished due to the reprimand she received <b>from the Divine Presence</b> are in fact <b>written</b> in the Torah: <b>“Let her be shut up seven days.”</b> This indicates that the <i>a fortiori</i> inference is not required to teach the <i>halakha</i> of the seven days she was banished, as it would have added only the extra seven days. This means that according to the Rabbis, there is a source in the Torah that the principle: It is sufficient, is employed even when it refutes the <i>a fortiori</i> inference completely.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what would <b>Rabbi Tarfon</b> say about that reasoning? The Gemara answers: He would say that <b>this</b> verse: <b>“Let her be shut up</b> seven days,” is necessary to teach us the basic fact <b>that we interpret</b> the <i>halakha</i> according to the principle: <b>It is sufficient</b> for the conclusion that emerges from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference to be like its source.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what would <b>the Rabbis</b> say in response? The Gemara answers: They would point out that <b>a different verse is written</b> about Miriam: <b>“And Miriam was shut up</b> outside the camp seven days” (Numbers 12:15). The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how would <b>Rabbi Tarfon</b> respond to that? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse teaches <b>that we interpret</b> the <i>halakha</i> according to the principle: <b>It is sufficient, even generally,</b> and not only in this specific case. <b>And</b> this point is necessary so that <b>you do not say: Here</b> the principle: It is sufficient, is employed <b>due to respect for Moses, but generally</b> that is <b>not</b> done. This verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye:</b> Is the fundamental principle: It is sufficient for the conclusion that emerges from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference to be like its source, actually accepted by all authorities? <b>But</b> there is <b>this <i>tanna</i>, who does not interpret</b> the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with the principle: <b>It is sufficient, even though</b> it is a case where the principle <b>does not refute</b> the <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference completely. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <b>semen of a man who experiences a gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>zav</i>]</b> imparts ritual impurity by someone carrying it as well as by coming into contact with it, just as the actual gonorrhea-like discharge does? <b>It is a logical derivation</b> from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>Just as</b> spittle, which is <b>ritually pure</b> when coming <b>from</b> a person who is <b>ritually pure,</b> is <b>impure</b> when coming <b>from</b> someone like a <i>zav</i> who is <b>impure, is it not logical that</b> semen, which is <b>impure</b> when coming <b>from</b> someone who is <b>pure, should be impure</b> when coming <b>from</b> someone who is <b>impure?</b>

### Part 10
<b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>brings</b> this derivation and applies it <b>whether</b> discussing ritual impurity imparted <b>by contact</b> or <b>whether</b> discussing impurity imparted <b>by carrying. And why</b> is this the case? <b>Let us say: The <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>is effective in</b> teaching that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity <b>by contact</b> alone, as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the semen of a pure man, and the principle: <b>It is sufficient, is effective</b> by limiting the scope of the <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>to exclude</b> the semen of a <i>zav</i> from imparting ritual impurity <b>by carrying.</b> Since the <i>tanna</i> does not formulate his derivation in this manner, it appears that he rejects the principle: It is sufficient, in all situations.

### Part 11
<b>And if you would say</b> that the <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>was not necessary</b> to teach that the seminal emission of the <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity <b>by contact, as it is</b> certainly <b>no less</b> impure <b>than</b> if it had come from <b>a man</b> who was <b>pure,</b> so the inference was necessary only to teach that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts impurity by carrying, this is not correct. In fact, it <b>was necessary</b> to teach this point, as it may <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>it is written</b> in the verse: “If there be among you any man that is not clean because of something that <b>happens to him by night”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:11), this means that a seminal emission is ritually impure if it came from <b>someone who</b> had something <b>happen to him,</b> and this <b>causes him</b> to experience the emission, but the verse is <b>excluding this</b> <i>zav</i>, who did <b>not</b> have something <b>happen to him</b> to <b>cause him</b> to experience the emission, but <b>rather another matter,</b> i.e., his gonorrhea-like condition, <b>caused him</b> to experience the emission. Consequently, it <b>teaches us</b> that this is incorrect.

### Part 12
Abaye responded: In the verse “something that happens to him by night,” <b>is it</b> also <b>written: But not another matter?</b> This limiting clause is not written in the verse, and therefore the <i>halakha</i> that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity by contact can be understood from the explicit verse in the Torah, and there is no need to derive it from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference. Therefore, the only function of the <i>a fortiori</i> inference is to teach the halakha that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts impurity by carrying. Applying the principle: It is sufficient, would refute the <i>a fortiori</i> inference completely, so there is no proof that the <i>tanna</i> would apply the principle in all circumstances.

### Part 13
Once the Gemara raised the issue, it clarifies: <b>And who is the <i>tanna</i></b> about whom <b>you heard that he said: Semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity by carrying?</b> It was <b>not Rabbi Eliezer and not Rabbi Yehoshua. As we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity by contact but</b> it <b>does not impart ritual impurity by carrying;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. And Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> It <b>also imparts ritual impurity by carrying, as it is impossible</b> for semen to emerge <b>without small drops of gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>ziva</i>]</b> accompanying it.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says there</b> that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity by carrying <b>only because it is impossible</b> for semen to emerge <b>without small drops of <i>ziva</i></b> accompanying it. This indicates that <b>if not for this</b> reason, the semen would <b>not</b> impart ritual impurity by carrying, according to the opinions of both Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Eliezer. The Gemara explains: <b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>this <i>tanna</i> is</b> the one who holds the opinion that the semen of a <i>zav</i> imparts ritual impurity by carrying, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna listing the sources of ritual impurity (<i>Kelim</i> 1:3): <b>Of a greater degree than</b> the ritual impurities listed previously in the mishna, i.e., the impurity of a creeping animal, semen, and one who contracted ritual impurity from a corpse,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC