
### Part 1
The mishna continues: If the father stated in his vow that his son may not derive benefit from his property <b>in his life and in his death,</b> then even <b>if</b> the father then <b>dies</b> the son <b>does not inherit</b> from <b>him,</b> as the prohibition is still in effect. <b>And</b> instead of taking his inheritance, <b>he returns</b> his portion in the estate <b>to his sons or to his brothers. And if he does not have</b> sufficient funds to subsist without his inheritance, he <b>borrows</b> money in the amount of the value of his share in the inheritance <b>and</b> the <b>creditors come and are repaid</b> from his share.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the <i>halakha</i> written in the mishna that one who robs his father pays the principal and the additional one-fifth payment to the father’s heirs, <b>Rav Yosef says:</b> One may <b>even</b> put this money <b>in a charity purse</b> if he so chooses. <b>Rav Pappa says: And</b> when giving the money <b>he must say: This</b> is what was <b>robbed</b> from <b>my father.</b>

### Part 3
§ The Gemara questions the mishna’s ruling that one who robs his father must return the stolen item to others even if he is the sole heir. <b>Why</b> must he do this? <b>Let him forgive</b> the debt <b>to himself;</b> as the heir, to whom payment is due, he should be able to forgive it. <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (103a) that in the case of a robber who took a false oath claiming to be innocent and later admitted his liability: If the owner <b>forgave him concerning the principal, but did not forgive him concerning the</b> additional <b>one-fifth</b> payment, he need not pursue him to repay the remaining debt. <b>Apparently,</b> even the principal <b>is subject to forgiveness,</b> so why doesn’t he forgive the obligation to himself?

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. That</b> mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> who says that this obligation can be forgiven, while <b>this</b> mishna, ruling that a son who robbed his father and is his sole heir cannot forgive the obligation to himself, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> who holds that this obligation cannot be forgiven.

### Part 5
Rabbi Yoḥanan explains: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 10:16) that the verse states with regard to one who steals from one who then died: <b>“But if the man has no kinsman</b> to whom <b>restitution may be made for the guilt,</b> the restitution for guilt that is made shall be the Lord’s, even the priest’s” (Numbers 5:8). The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>But is there</b> any <b>Jewish person who has no kinsmen?</b> Since every Jew descends from Jacob our forefather, all Jews have relatives to inherit from them. <b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>the verse is speaking of robbery of a convert</b> who never married or had children as a Jew, and in any case is no longer legally related to his gentile family; he has no heirs. In this situation the Torah instructs one who robbed from a now-deceased convert to return the stolen item to a priest.

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: In the case of one <b>who robbed a convert and took</b> a false <b>oath to him</b> saying that he did not rob him, <b>and</b> then <b>heard that the convert died; and he was bringing his money,</b> for the principal and the additional one-fifth payment, <b>and his guilt-offering up to Jerusalem</b> to pay his debt to the priests and sacrifice his offering, <b>and he encountered that same convert,</b> who in fact had not died; <b>and,</b> instead of having the robber pay the money right away the convert <b>established it as a loan for</b> the robber, <b>and</b> then the convert <b>died,</b> leaving his property ownerless, as he had no heirs; <b>this</b> robber <b>acquires</b> all <b>that</b> is <b>in his possession,</b> as it is now a loan, not money to pay back the theft; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The robber <b>has no remedy until he will remove his stolen item from his possession.</b>

### Part 7
Rabbi Yoḥanan explains their respective opinions. <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> there <b>is no difference</b> if the one to whom payment is due forgives the return of a stolen item <b>to himself,</b> such as in this case of a convert who died or in the case of the mishna where a son robbed his father who then died, and there <b>is no difference</b> if he forgives the return of a stolen item <b>to others.</b> In either case, he <b>can forgive</b> payment. <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> there <b>is no difference</b> if the one to whom payment is due forgives the return of a stolen item <b>to others</b> and there <b>is no difference</b> if he forgives the return of a stolen item <b>to himself.</b> In either case, he <b>cannot forgive</b> payment.

### Part 8
Rabbi Yoḥanan continues his analysis: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> HaGelili, <b>the same is true,</b> i.e., the <i>halakha</i> would also be, <b>that</b> no liability would remain in the case of the convert <b>even had he not established</b> the robbery debt <b>as a loan,</b> as the robber could forgive the obligation to himself once the convert died. <b>And</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> its <i>halakha</i> in a case where he <b>established it as a loan for</b> the robber <b>is to convey to you the far-reaching nature of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva: That even</b> if he <b>established it as a loan for him,</b> in which case it could be considered as though the robber had returned the stolen item and now has a standard loan debt, nevertheless, the robber <b>has no remedy until he will remove his stolen item from his possession,</b> so as to not benefit from his act of robbery.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Sheshet objects to this</b> interpretation of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>If so,</b> then <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, let</b> the mishna on 103a, which indicates that one can forgive the principal payment of a robbery, <b>teach us</b> instead that the robbery victim can forgive the obligation <b>to himself, and</b> it would be understood that <b>all the more so</b> one can forgive the obligation <b>to others.</b> And <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> which Rabbi Yoḥanan explains to be the opinion stated in the mishna here, <b>let it teach us that one cannot forgive</b> the obligation <b>to others, and</b> it would be understood <b>all the more so</b> with regard to the robber, <b>that</b> he <b>cannot forgive</b> the obligation <b>to himself.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rav Sheshet said: That</b> mishna <b>and this</b> mishna are both in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili. When Rabbi Yosei HaGelili is saying that one can forgive</b> the return of a stolen item, he meant specifically forgiving the obligation <b>to others, but</b> he <b>cannot forgive</b> the obligation <b>to himself.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if that is the <i>halakha</i>, <b>why did this</b> one who robbed a convert who subsequently died <b>acquire</b> all <b>that</b> is <b>in his possession? Because</b> the convert <b>established it as a loan for him,</b> and henceforth it is no longer considered stolen property, but a standard loan debt.

### Part 11
The Gemara offers a different explanation. <b>Rava said: That</b> mishna <b>and this</b> mishna are both in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. When Rabbi Akiva says that</b> he <b>cannot forgive</b> the return of a stolen item he meant specifically forgiving the obligation <b>to himself,</b> as in the case of the convert, <b>but</b> he <b>can forgive</b> the obligation <b>to others.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC