
### Part 1
<b>even</b> if it is <b>in the womb of a gentile woman.</b> If she discharges this semen, it imparts ritual impurity. <b>And</b> by contrast, the semen <b>of a gentile is ritually pure wherever</b> it is found, <b>even</b> if it is <b>in the womb of a Jewish woman, except for</b> any <b>urine that</b> intermingled <b>with it.</b> In other words, if the semen of a gentile intermingled with his urine, the mixture is impure due to the urine it contains, as the Sages decreed that a gentile is considered like a <i>zav</i> in all matters. Consequently, his urine imparts impurity.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues: <b>And if you would say</b> in rejection of this proof: Here <b>as well,</b> the <i>baraita</i> means that the semen of a gentile is <b>ritually pure by Torah law but impure by rabbinic</b> law, one may respond: Since the <i>baraita</i> states that the urine of a gentile is impure, <b>is that to say</b> that <b>her urine,</b> i.e., the urine of the gentile that intermingled with his semen and is now inside the womb of the Jewish woman, is <b>ritually impure by Torah law?</b> Isn’t it impure only by rabbinic law? <b>Rather, conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that the semen of a gentile is <b>pure even by rabbinic law.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 3
<b>The Master said</b> above in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The semen of a Jew is impure wherever</b> it is found, <b>even</b> if it is <b>in the womb of a gentile woman.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let one resolve</b> from this <i>baraita</i> a dilemma <b>that Rav Pappa raises. As Rav Pappa raises a dilemma: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>semen of a Jew in the womb of a gentile woman?</b> Let one conclude from the <i>baraita</i> that the semen is impure.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: Rav Pappa <b>does not raise his dilemma</b> with regard to the semen of a Jew that is in the womb of a gentile woman <b>within three</b> days of their intercourse, as such semen is impure. Rather, <b>when</b> Rav Pappa <b>raises his dilemma</b> it is with regard to semen in the womb of the gentile more than <b>three</b> days <b>after</b> their intercourse. <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> in such a case?

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the sides of the dilemma: Do we say that as <b>Jewish</b> women <b>are concerned about</b> the proper fulfillment of <b>mitzvot, their bodies are hot and</b> semen in their wombs <b>becomes foul</b> within three days, whereas <b>gentile</b> women <b>are not concerned about</b> the proper fulfillment of <b>mitzvot</b> and therefore <b>their bodies are not hot and</b> semen in their wombs <b>does not become foul</b> within three days? <b>Or perhaps, since</b> gentiles <b>eat repugnant creatures and creeping animals, their bodies are</b> also <b>hot and</b> semen in their wombs <b>becomes foul</b> within three days? Since no resolution is found, the Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>blood</b> discharged <b>by</b> a female Jewish <b>leper</b> during the days <b>of purity</b> of a woman who gives birth, <b>Beit Shammai</b> deem it ritually pure and Beit Hillel say it imparts impurity only while moist. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of Beit Hillel,</b> i.e., from where is their opinion derived? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> The verse states at the conclusion of the passage discussing impure individuals: “Whether it be a male or a female” (Leviticus 15:33). <b>“Whether it be a male”</b> serves <b>to include the sources</b> of bodily emissions <b>of a male leper,</b> teaching that they also impart impurity. Likewise, the phrase <b>“or a female”</b> serves <b>to include the sources</b> of bodily emissions <b>of a female leper,</b> teaching that they too impart impurity.

### Part 7
<b>What</b> is meant by the <b>sources</b> of bodily emissions of a female leper? <b>If we say</b> that this is referring to <b>the rest of her sources,</b> e.g., her saliva and urine, this can be <b>derived from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a male</b> leper. <b>Rather,</b> it is referring <b>to her blood,</b> and the verse serves <b>to render impure</b> the <b>blood</b> of a leper discharged during the days of <b>her purity.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>Beit Shammai,</b> who maintain the blood is ritually pure, interpret the verse? They contend that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the emissions of <b>a female</b> leper <b>cannot be derived from</b> that of <b>a male</b> leper, <b>as</b> such a comparison <b>can be refuted</b> as follows: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a male</b> leper? He is unique <b>in that he is required to let his hair grow and rend his garments, and he is prohibited to</b> engage in <b>sexual intercourse.</b> Can <b>you say,</b> then, that the same <i>halakhot</i> should apply to the emissions <b>of a female</b> leper, <b>to</b> whom all the aforementioned requirements do <b>not</b> apply? Consequently, the verse is necessary to teach that the saliva and urine of a female leper are impure.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>Beit Hillel</b> respond? They respond as follows: If the verse serves to include only the saliva and urine of a female leper, then <b>let the Merciful One write</b> this <i>halakha</i> only <b>with regard to a female</b> leper. <b>And</b> there will be <b>no need</b> to write it with regard to <b>a male</b> leper, as <b>I will say</b> that the saliva and urine of a male leper are impure by an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>And what,</b> if with regard to <b>a female</b> leper, <b>who is not required to let her hair grow and rend her garments, and</b> it <b>is not prohibited</b> for her <b>to</b> engage in <b>sexual intercourse, the Merciful One</b> nevertheless <b>includes her sources</b> of bodily emissions as impure, then in the case of <b>a male</b> leper, to whom all the aforementioned requirements apply, is it <b>not all the more so</b> that his emissions are impure?

### Part 10
Therefore, <b>if</b> the phrase “whether it be a male” <b>is not</b> needed for the <b>matter of a male</b> leper, as this <i>halakha</i> may be derived by an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of a female</b> leper. <b>And if it is not</b> needed for the <b>matter of her</b> other <b>sources</b> of bodily emissions, as they are derived from the phrase “or a female,” <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of her blood,</b> i.e., <b>to render impure</b> the <b>blood of her</b> days of <b>purity.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>Beit Shammai</b> respond? They would answer that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the emissions of <b>a male</b> leper <b>cannot be derived</b> by an <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a female</b> leper, <b>as</b> it <b>can be refuted</b> as follows: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a female?</b> She is unique <b>in that she is rendered impure</b> as a <i>zava</i> even by sightings that occur <b>due to circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control.</b> Can <b>you say</b> that the same <i>halakhot</i> should apply to the emissions <b>of a male,</b> for <b>whom</b> this is <b>not</b> the case?

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>Beit Hillel</b> respond? They respond as follows: Can it be that we are <b>standing</b> and dealing <b>with</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>a leper, and</b> Beit Shammai are attempting to <b>refute</b> the <i>a fortiori</i> inference by citing <b>matters</b> pertaining <b>to a <i>zav</i>?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Beit Shammai?</b> According to Beit Shammai, this is a legitimate refutation of the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, as <b>they refute</b> it through the common <b>name of impurity</b> that applies to both a leper and a <i>zav</i>.

### Part 13
<b>And if you wish, say</b> that <b>Beit Shammai</b> could <b>say to you: That</b> phrase <b>“whether it be a male” is necessary to</b> teach another <i>halakha</i>, that the phrase <b>“whether it be a male”</b> serves to include <b>anyone who is a male, whether an adult or a minor,</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>zav</i>. <b>And</b> how do <b>Beit Hillel</b> respond? <b>They derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the following verse: <b>“This is the law of the <i>zav</i>,</b> and of him from whom the flow of seed goes out, so that he is unclean through it” (Leviticus 15:32). The verse indicates that the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>zav</i> apply to any male, <b>whether</b> he is <b>an adult or whether</b> he is <b>a minor.</b>

### Part 14
§ The Gemara mentioned earlier that a minor is included in the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>zav</i>. In this regard <b>Rav Yosef says: When Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish taught</b> the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of a <i>zav</i>, he raised this dilemma:</b> With regard to the <b>first sighting</b> of <i>ziva</i> <b>of a <i>zav</i></b> who is a <b>minor, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>as to</b> whether <b>it imparts impurity through contact?</b> Does one say that as <b>the Merciful One states: “This is the law of the <i>zav</i>, and of him from whom the flow of seed goes out”</b> (Leviticus 15:32), one’s <i>ziva</i> is thereby compared to his semen?

### Part 15
Accordingly, with regard to <b>any</b> male <b>whose semen imparts impurity, his first sighting</b> of <i>ziva</i> <b>imparts impurity. And</b> with regard to <b>this</b> minor, <b>since his semen does not impart impurity, his first sighting does not impart impurity either. Or perhaps, since if</b> this minor <b>sees two</b> emissions of <i>ziva</i> the first sighting <b>combines</b> with the second sighting to render him impure as a <i>zav</i> for seven days, this indicates that the first sighting of a minor is significant, and consequently it should <b>render him impure</b> until the evening, just like an adult male.

### Part 16
<b>Rava says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“This is the law of the <i>zav</i>,” whether</b> he is <b>an adult</b> or <b>whether</b> he is <b>a minor.</b> Since the verse equates an adult and a minor, <b>just as</b> with regard to <b>an adult his first sighting imparts impurity, so too,</b> with regard to <b>a minor,</b> his <b>first sighting imparts impurity as well.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara earlier stated that the phrase “whether it be a male” serves to include the sources of bodily emissions of a male leper, teaching that they impart impurity. In this regard <b>Rav Yosef raises a dilemma:</b> Granted, the first sighting of <i>ziva</i> of an otherwise ritually pure individual imparts impurity only through contact, as stated above, and only the second sighting imparts impurity through carrying. But with regard to the <b>first sighting</b> of <i>ziva</i> <b>of a leper, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>as to</b> whether <b>it imparts impurity</b> even <b>through carrying?</b> Does one say that the <b>place of <i>ziva</i></b> in one’s body <b>is</b> considered <b>a source, and</b> therefore his <i>ziva</i> <b>imparts impurity</b> through carrying, like all the sources of bodily emissions of a leper? <b>Or perhaps</b> the place of <i>ziva</i> <b>is not</b> considered <b>a source,</b> in which case the first sighting of <i>ziva</i> does not impart impurity through carrying.

### Part 18
<b>Rava says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “When any man has an issue out of his flesh, <b>his issue [<i>zovo</i>] is unclean”</b> (Leviticus 15:2). The verse <b>teaches with regard to the <i>zov</i> that it is impure,</b> and that it imparts impurity through carrying. <b>To what</b> case is the verse referring? <b>If we say</b> it is referring <b>to</b> one who is <b>just a <i>zav</i></b> and not a leper as well, and the verse is teaching that any drop of <i>ziva</i> emitted by him imparts impurity through carrying,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC