
### Part 1
<b>in exigent circumstances [<i>bishe’at hadeḥak</i>]. And we discussed it</b> and asked: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>After he remembered? If we say</b> that this means <b>after he remembered that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer but in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> if so, <b>how could</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>act in accordance with</b> Rabbi Eliezer even <b>in exigent circumstances,</b> since the <i>halakha</i> has been decided against him?

### Part 2
<b>Rather, is it not</b> correct that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> had <b>not been stated</b> on this matter, <b>neither in accordance with</b> the opinion of this <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>nor in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis. <b>And once</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>remembered that it was not a single</b> authority who <b>disagrees with</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>but</b> it was several Sages who <b>disagreed with him,</b> and there is a principle that the <i>halakha</i> follows the opinion of the many over that of an individual, <b>he</b> nevertheless <b>said: Rabbi Eliezer is worthy to rely upon in exigent circumstances.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains the proof from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that it was a case <b>of</b> a menstruating woman who had touched <b><i>teruma</i></b> during the previous twenty-four hours, <b>this is</b> fine, <b>as <i>teruma</i></b> still <b>existed in the days of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>But</b> if you say that it was a case <b>of</b> a woman who touched <b>sacrificial</b> food, <b>was there</b> still <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>in days of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, after the destruction of the Temple? Clearly, the case involved <i>teruma</i>, and according to the Rabbis, whose opinion is accepted as <i>halakha</i>, this woman who had skipped three menstrual cycles nevertheless renders <i>teruma</i> impure retroactively. This ruling apparently contradicts the opinion of Rav Huna.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: This can be answered <b>in accordance with</b> the testimony <b>of Ulla, as Ulla said: <i>Ḥaverim</i> purify</b> their wine and oil <b>in the Galilee,</b> i.e., they produce their wine and oil by the standards of purity used for sacrificial food, in the hope that the Temple will be rebuilt in their lifetime. <b>Here, too, in the days of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi there were those who kept the standards of purity observed for sacrificial food.

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>an incident involving the maidservant of Rabban Gamliel, who was baking loaves of <i>teruma</i></b> bread. <b>And in between each and every one she</b> would <b>wash her hand in water and examine</b> herself. <b>After</b> the <b>last</b> one she <b>examined</b> herself <b>and found</b> that she was <b>impure</b> due to menstrual blood, <b>and she came and asked Rabban Gamliel</b> about the status of the loaves. <b>And he said to her: They are all impure,</b> due to her retroactive impurity for the previous twenty-four hours. <b>She said to him: My teacher, didn’t I perform an examination in between each and every one?</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>said to her: If so,</b> then <b>this</b> last one is <b>impure and</b> the rest are <b>all pure,</b> as your retroactive impurity is reduced until the time of the most recent examination.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that the case involved <b>loaves of <i>teruma</i></b> bread. This apparently contradicts the opinion of Rav Huna, as Rabban Gamliel applied retroactive impurity in a case of <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: What is meant by: <i>Teruma</i>? It means <b><i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering,</b> i.e., the four loaves of the thanks offering that were separated from the total of forty and eaten by the priests. These are sacrificial foods, not <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to this interpretation: <b>What</b> was she <b>doing baking the <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering</b> alone? All forty loaves of the thanks offering are baked together, and only afterward are four set aside as <i>teruma</i> to be eaten by priests.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where</b> dough for the <i>teruma</i> loaves <b>was separated</b> and designated for the priests <b>during its kneading. And</b> this <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with that which Rav Tovi bar Rav Ketina said:</b> If <b>one baked the loaves of the thanks offering as four loaves,</b> rather than the requisite forty loaves, <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation. <b>And we discussed it</b> and asked: <b>Isn’t one required</b> to bring <b>forty</b> loaves with the thanks offering, ten loaves of each of the four different types? The Gemara answers: One must bake forty loaves in order <b>to</b> fulfill the <b>mitzva</b> in the optimal fashion, but he has nevertheless fulfilled his obligation with four loaves, one of each type.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues its answer by further elucidating the statement of Rav Tovi bar Rav Ketina. And we asked with regard to this opinion: <b>But he is required to separate <i>teruma</i> from it,</b> i.e., to designate one loaf from each type that is given to the priests. <b>And if you would say that he separates a slice from each one</b> of the four loaves and gives them to the priest, this cannot be the case, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: “And of it he shall present <b>one</b> out of each offering for a gift to the Lord; it shall be the priest’s” (Leviticus 7:14). The word “one” indicates <b>that he may not take a slice,</b> but rather he takes a complete loaf. The Gemara answers: Rather, <b>we</b> must <b>say</b> that he <b>separated</b> dough for the <i>teruma</i> loaves <b>during its kneading. Here too, in</b> the incident involving Rabban Gamliel’s maidservant, she <b>separated</b> the dough <b>during its kneading.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>another incident involving the maidservant of Rabban Gamliel who was sealing barrels of wine. And in between each and every one she</b> would <b>wash her hands in water and examine</b> herself. <b>And after the last</b> one <b>she examined</b> herself <b>and found</b> that she was ritually <b>impure, and she came and asked Rabban Gamliel</b> about the wine. <b>And he said to her: They are all impure. She said to him:</b> My teacher, <b>didn’t I perform an examination in between each and every one?</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>said to her: If so, this</b> last one is <b>impure and</b> the rest are <b>all pure.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies the difficulty with regard to Rav Huna’s opinion: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that <b>one</b> incident involved a case <b>of sacrificial</b> food <b>and one</b> incident involved a case <b>of <i>teruma</i>, this is</b> the reason <b>that she returned and</b> again <b>asked</b> Rabban Gamliel what to do. <b>But if you say</b> that both <b>this</b> incident <b>and that</b> incident <b>involved sacrificial</b> food, <b>why</b> did <b>she</b> need <b>to return and ask him</b> the same question a second time? The Gemara answers: Each <b>incident that occurred was</b> with sacrificial food and they happened <b>with two</b> different <b>maidservants.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Some say another version</b> of Rav Huna’s statement. <b>Rav Huna says:</b> During the twenty-four-hour <b>period of</b> retroactive impurity of <b>a menstruating woman,</b> she <b>renders impure</b> both <b>sacrificial</b> food and <b><i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is this derived? The Gemara answers: It can be inferred <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the mishna in <i>Ḥagiga</i> (20b) <b>does not teach</b> this matter <b>among</b> the other matters where higher <b>levels</b> of purity are required only for sacrificial foods but not for <i>teruma</i>. <b>Rav Naḥman said to</b> Rav Huna: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> explicitly <b>teach</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The retroactive impurity of a menstruating woman applies only <b>with regard to sacrificial</b> food but <b>not with regard to <i>teruma</i>?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak received</b> the following explanation <b>from</b> Rav Naḥman: The <i>baraita</i> means that this retroactive impurity applies <b>to non-sacred</b> food <b>that was prepared according to</b> the standards of <b>purity of sacrificial</b> food, <b>but not to non-sacred</b> food <b>that was prepared</b> according to the standards of <b>purity of <i>teruma</i>.</b> It does apply to <i>teruma</i> itself.

### Part 13
§ With regard to a non-sacred food prepared according to the standards of purity of <i>teruma</i>, <b>we learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Ḥalla</i> 3:2): In a case of dough where <b>uncertainty developed</b> as to whether it was <b>ritually impure,</b> if the uncertainty developed <b>before it was kneaded, it may be prepared</b> even <b>in</b> definite <b>impurity,</b> i.e., with impure vessels. If it developed <b>after it was kneaded, it</b> must <b>be prepared in purity.</b>

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> elaborates: <b>Before it was kneaded it may be prepared</b> even <b>in</b> definite <b>impurity</b> because <b>it is non-sacred</b> food, <b>and</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that it is <b>permitted to cause impurity to non-sacred food in Eretz Yisrael. After it was kneaded it</b> must <b>be prepared in purity,</b> since <b>non-sacred</b> food <b>that is untithed with regard to</b> the obligation to separate <b><i>ḥalla</i>,</b> i.e., its <i>ḥalla</i> has not yet been separated, <b>is considered like <i>ḥalla</i>, and</b> it is <b>prohibited to cause impurity to <i>ḥalla</i>.</b>

### Part 15
It is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC