
### Part 1
<b>you shall send out,</b> out of the camp you shall send them, so that they not impurify their camp, in the midst of which I dwell” (Numbers 5:3). It is derived from the verse that only <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female</b> is liable for entering the Temple in a state of impurity, <b>but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the following <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> the opinion of Rav: In the case of <b>a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite who saw white</b> <i>ziva</i> <b>or red</b> blood, <b>they are not liable for entering the Temple</b> in a state of impurity, <b>and</b> if they touch <i>teruma</i>, <b>one does not burn the <i>teruma</i> due to their</b> contact. If they <b>saw white</b> <i>ziva</i> <b>and red</b> blood <b>as one,</b> i.e., they emitted both <i>ziva</i> and blood, <b>they are</b> still <b>not liable for entering the Temple, but one burns <i>teruma</i> due to their</b> contact.

### Part 3
The Gemara reasons: <b>What is the reason</b> that they are not liable for entering the Temple despite the fact that they are definitely impure? Is it <b>not because it is stated</b> in the verse: <b>“Both male and female you shall send out,”</b> from which it is derived that only <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female</b> could be liable for entering the Temple in a state of impurity, <b>but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite? Ulla says: No,</b> Rav’s opinion cannot be proved from this <i>baraita</i>, as in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 4
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shevuot</i> 14b) that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> With regard to the sliding-scale offering the verse states: “Or if a person touches any impure thing…or the carcass of a non-kosher <b>creeping animal, and it is hidden from him”</b> (Leviticus 5:2). A precise reading of this verse indicates that <b>if</b> one has <b>a lapse of awareness</b> that he contracted ritual impurity by touching a carcass of <b>a creeping animal,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sliding-scale offering for defiling the Temple or the sacrificial food, <b>but he is not liable</b> to bring such an offering <b>for a lapse of awareness</b> that he is entering the <b>Temple</b> or partaking of sacrificial food.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Akiva says</b> that it is derived from the phrase: <b>“And it is hidden from him, so that he is impure”</b> (Leviticus 5:2), that <b>for a lapse of awareness</b> that one had contracted <b>ritual impurity,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sliding-scale offering, <b>but</b> he <b>is not liable</b> to bring an offering <b>for a lapse of awareness</b> that he is entering the <b>Temple</b> or partaking of sacrificial food.

### Part 6
<b>And we say</b> with regard to this mishna: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Akiva? They are apparently stating the same <i>halakha</i>. <b>And Ḥizkiyya says: There is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> in a case where one initially knew that he had contracted ritual impurity, but he did not know whether the impurity was contracted from a carcass of <b>a creeping animal or</b> from <b>the carcass of an unslaughtered animal. As Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that for one to be liable to bring an offering, <b>we require that he</b> initially <b>know whether he contracted impurity from</b> a carcass of <b>a creeping animal</b> or <b>whether he contracted impurity from an unslaughtered animal carcass,</b> and if he never knew this, he does not bring an offering. <b>And Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that for him to be liable to bring an offering, <b>we do not require</b> that he know this detail, since he knows in general terms that he contracted impurity.

### Part 7
The Gemara infers: <b>Doesn’t Rabbi Eliezer say there,</b> in that mishna, that <b>we require</b> one to bring an offering for entering the Temple in a state of impurity only <b>if he knew</b> initially <b>whether he contracted impurity from</b> a carcass of <b>a creeping animal</b> or <b>whether he contracted impurity from an unslaughtered animal carcass? Here, too,</b> with regard to a hermaphrodite or a <i>tumtum</i> who emitted both <i>ziva</i> and blood, they are not obligated to bring an offering according to Rabbi Eliezer, as <b>we require</b> one to bring an offering only <b>if he knew whether he became impure due to</b> the <b>white</b> <i>ziva</i> he emitted or <b>whether he became impure due to</b> the <b>red</b> blood he emitted.

### Part 8
<b>But according to Rabbi Akiva, who said</b> that one <b>is obligated</b> to bring an offering <b>due to</b> his initial knowledge of his <b>impurity</b> even if he did not know the exact cause of his impurity, <b>here too,</b> in the case of a hermaphrodite or a <i>tumtum</i> who emitted both <i>ziva</i> and blood, <b>he is obligated</b> to bring an offering <b>due to</b> his initial knowledge of his <b>impurity,</b> despite the fact that he does not know whether he is impure due to the blood or the <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rav,</b> who holds that an impure <i>tumtum</i> or hermaphrodite is not liable for entering the Temple but that any <i>teruma</i> that he touches is burned, <b>what is different</b> with regard to <b>entering the Temple,</b> for <b>which</b> he is <b>not</b> liable? The reason it is different is <b>that it is written: “Both male and female you shall send out,”</b> from which it is derived that <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female</b> is liable for entering the Temple in a state of impurity, <b>but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b>

### Part 10
<b>If so, we should not burn <i>teruma</i></b> that he touches either, <b>as it is written</b> in a verse dealing with these types of impurity: “This is the law of the <i>zav</i>, and of one from whom the flow of semen emerges, so that he is thereby impure; and of her that is sick with her menstrual status, <b>and they who have an issue, whether a male or a female”</b> (Leviticus 15:32–33). It can similarly be derived from this verse that these types of impurity apply only to <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female, but not</b> to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse <b>is necessary for</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rabbi Yitzḥak, as Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> The term <b>“whether a male”</b> serves <b>to include a male leper</b> as a primary source of impurity <b>with regard to the sources of his</b> bodily emissions. In other words, the various emissions of a leper, e.g., his saliva and urine, have the status of a primary source of impurity, and therefore they transmit impurity to a person or utensil that touches them. And the term <b>“or a female”</b> serves <b>to include a female</b> as a primary source of impurity <b>with regard to the sources of her</b> bodily emissions.

### Part 12
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>This</b> verse: “Both male and female you shall send out” (Numbers 5:3), from which Rav derives that the prohibition against an impure person entering the Temple does not apply to one whose sex is uncertain, <b>is also necessary</b> for another <i>halakha</i>. That <i>halakha</i> is that the obligation to remove from the Temple any impure person or item applies only <b>to one that has</b> the option of attaining ritual <b>purity</b> by immersing <b>in a ritual bath; this excludes</b> an impure <b>earthenware vessel,</b> which cannot be purified by immersing it in a ritual bath. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei.</b> Consequently, Rav’s <i>halakha</i> cannot be derived from that verse.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> that the verse serves to teach Rabbi Yosei’s <i>halakha</i> alone, <b>let the Merciful One write:</b> Any <b>person</b> you shall send out, as this would also exclude earthenware vessels. Rav’s <i>halakha</i> is derived from the fact that the wording of the verse is: “Both male and female.”

### Part 14
<b>And if you would say</b> in response that <b>if the Merciful One had written:</b> Any <b>person</b> you shall send out, <b>I would say</b> that impure <b>metal vessels</b> need <b>not</b> be removed from the Temple either, as they are not included in the term: Any person, this is not correct. The Gemara elaborates: The <i>halakha</i> that impure metal vessels must be removed from the Temple <b>is derived from</b> the previous verse: “That they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that has an issue, and <b>whatever is impure by the dead”</b> (Numbers 5:2). Therefore, <b>why do I</b> need the verse to write: <b>“Both male and female</b> you shall send out,” instead of simply stating: Any person you shall send out? Clearly, the phrase: “Both male and female,” is necessary <b>for</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rav.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, one can <b>say</b> that <b>the entire</b> phrase <b>comes for Rav’s</b> <i>halakha</i>, and not the <i>halakha</i> of Rabbi Yosei. The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let</b> the verse <b>write: Male and female. What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>“Both male and female”?</b> The verse is referring <b>to any</b> ritually impure <b>item that has</b> the same <i>halakha</i> that applies to both males and females, i.e., it can attain <b>purity by</b> being immersed in <b>a ritual bath;</b> this excludes earthenware vessels.

### Part 16
With regard to Rav’s <i>halakha</i> that the prohibition of entering the Temple in a state of ritual impurity does not apply to one who is a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite, the Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then even <b>when they become impure with other types of impurity,</b> in addition to the impurity of a <i>zav</i> or a menstruating woman, a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite <b>should</b> likewise <b>not be sent out</b> of the Temple, as the passage from which a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite are excluded is also referring to other types of impurity: “That they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that has an issue, and whatever is impure by the dead” (Numbers 5:2). The Gemara answers: <b>The</b> next <b>verse states: “Both male,”</b> which is referring <b>to impurity</b> caused by a substance <b>that is emitted from the male</b> organ, i.e., <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 17
The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to Rav’s derivation: <b>And</b> is it correct that <b>anywhere that</b> the phrase <b>“both male and female” is written</b> in the Torah, this <b>comes to exclude a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite? But isn’t</b> a similar expression stated <b>with regard to valuations, as it is written:</b> “For <b>the male…</b>fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the Sanctuary. And if she is a female, then your valuation shall be thirty shekels” (Leviticus 27:3–4).

### Part 18
<b>And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is derived from the term <b>“the male”: But not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite <b>shall not be</b> valuated <b>according to the valuation of a man,</b> which is fifty shekels, <b>but shall be</b> valuated <b>according to the valuation of a woman,</b> which is thirty shekels. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “The male,”</b> and the following verse states: <b>“And if she is a female,”</b> indicating that these <i>halakhot</i> apply only to <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female, but not</b> to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>The reason</b> a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite are excluded is <b>that it is written: “The male…and if she is a female,”</b> which indicates <b>that</b> if the verse had written: <b>Male and female,</b> without the superfluous words “the” and “if,” it would <b>not</b> have been derived that the verse <b>excludes</b> a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite. This apparently contradicts the opinion of Rav, who excludes a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite from the prohibition of entering the Temple in a state of impurity merely due to the phrase: “Male and female” (Numbers 5:3). The Gemara answers: In <b>that</b> verse with regard to valuations, the words “male” and “female” are themselves <b>necessary</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC