
### Part 1
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is a difference between these explanations in a case <b>where</b> the creeping animal <b>was found in a hole</b> in the ground. <b>If you say the presumptive status of</b> a swept alleyway is that it has been <b>examined,</b> it is clear that <b>one who examines</b> the alleyway <b>also examines</b> any <b>holes,</b> and any items that were in the alleyway beforehand should remain pure. By contrast, <b>if you say its presumptive status</b> is that it has been completely <b>swept,</b> this applies only to items that are on the ground, whereas <b>a hole is not</b> considered to have been <b>swept.</b> Consequently, even items that passed through the alleyway before it was swept should be deemed impure.

### Part 2
The mishna teaches: <b>And likewise,</b> a blood <b>stain</b> that was discovered on the robe of a woman renders her impure retroactively. With regard to this <i>halakha</i> as well <b>a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: The mishna states that any pure items the woman handled <b>from</b> the <b>time of laundering</b> are impure. Does this mean that once the robe has been laundered <b>its presumptive status</b> is that it has been <b>examined,</b> as when it is laundered it is examined thoroughly, and any blood stain would have been discovered? <b>Or perhaps</b> the mishna means that <b>its presumptive status</b> is that <b>it is</b> thoroughly <b>laundered,</b> and any blood stain would have been removed by the laundering.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference</b> that arises from this dilemma? The Gemara replies: There is a difference in a case <b>where</b> the person who laundered the robe <b>said he laundered</b> it <b>but did not examine</b> it. <b>If you say its presumptive status</b> is that it has been <b>examined,</b> in <b>this</b> case the man explicitly said that <b>he did not examine</b> the robe, so it does not have this presumptive status. By contrast, <b>if you say its presumptive status</b> is that <b>it is</b> thoroughly <b>laundered,</b> in <b>this</b> case too it has been <b>laundered.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is a difference between these explanations in a case <b>where</b> the blood stain <b>was found on the side</b> of the robe, in an area where there are folds and stitches. <b>If you say its presumptive status</b> is that it has been <b>examined,</b> it is clear that <b>one who examines</b> the robe <b>also examines the side</b> of the robe, and therefore any items that the woman handled before the robe was laundered should remain pure. By contrast, <b>if you say its presumptive status</b> is that <b>it is</b> thoroughly <b>laundered,</b> this applies only to the main part of the robe, but <b>on</b> its <b>side</b> it <b>is not laundered</b> thoroughly enough to remove a blood stain.

### Part 5
<b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to these two dilemmas? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir says: For what</b> reason <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that the carcass of <b>a creeping animal that was found in an alleyway renders</b> pure items <b>impure retroactively from</b> the time about which <b>one may state: I examined this alleyway and there was no creeping animal in it, or from</b> the <b>time of</b> the <b>sweeping</b> of the alleyway? It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> there is <b>a presumption with regard to Jewish people</b> that <b>they examine their alleyways at the time of their sweeping. And</b> therefore, <b>if they did not examine</b> the alleyway <b>they retroactively lose</b> the purity of any items that were there from the last time it was examined.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> similarly, <b>for what</b> reason <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that a blood <b>stain that was found on</b> the <b>robe</b> of a woman <b>renders</b> her <b>impure retroactively from</b> the time about which <b>one may state: I examined the robe and there was no</b> blood <b>stain on it, or from the time of the laundering</b> of the robe? It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> there is <b>a presumption with regard to the Jewish women</b> that <b>they examine their robes at the time of their laundering. And</b> therefore, <b>if they did not examine</b> the robe <b>they retroactively lose</b> the purity of any items they handled since it was last examined.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Aḥa says:</b> Even in a case where the robe was not examined when it was laundered and a blood stain was subsequently found on it, and it is unknown whether the stain was present before the laundering, there is a remedy to the dilemma: <b>Let her launder it again. If the appearance of</b> the blood stain <b>changes</b> as a result of this laundering <b>it is known that</b> the robe became stained <b>after</b> the previous <b>laundering,</b> which is why the present laundering affected its appearance. Consequently, those pure items that the woman handled before the earlier laundering remain pure. <b>And if</b> the blood stain’s appearance does <b>not</b> change due to the second laundering <b>it is known that</b> the robe became stained <b>before the</b> previous <b>laundering,</b> and therefore the items that she handled before the laundering are impure.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> One can differentiate between a blood stain that was on the robe before it was laundered and one that stained the robe afterward by inspecting the stain itself. This is because the appearance of a blood <b>stain after the laundering is not similar to</b> the appearance of a blood <b>stain before the laundering, as this</b> stain, from after the laundering, <b>penetrates [<i>makdir</i>]</b> the garment, <b>and that</b> stain, from before the laundering, <b>forms a crust [<i>maglid</i>]</b> that can be scraped off the robe. With regard to the Gemara’s dilemma, one may <b>conclude from</b> Rabbi Meir’s statement that <b>the presumptive status of</b> a swept alleyway or a laundered robe is that it has been <b>examined.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> the carcass of a creeping animal or a blood stain <b>renders</b> items <b>impure</b> retroactively <b>whether</b> they are still <b>moist</b> or are already dried out. Rabbi Shimon says: The dry one renders items impure retroactively, whereas the moist one does not render items impure since the aforementioned times, but only from such a time that it could still be moist from then up to the moment it was discovered. With regard to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The mishna <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard to the carcass of <b>a creeping animal, but</b> Rabbi Shimon concedes that <b>a moist</b> blood <b>stain also renders</b> the woman <b>impure retroactively</b> from the time that the robe was examined. This is because one can <b>say</b> the blood stain <b>was dry</b> beforehand <b>and water fell upon it,</b> causing it to become moist.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: With regard to the moist carcass of <b>a creeping animal as well,</b> one can <b>say it was dried out</b> beforehand <b>and water fell on it.</b> It should therefore render items impure retroactively from the time that the alleyway was swept. The Gemara answers: <b>If it is so, that this is</b> what occurred, the dead creeping animal <b>would be sundered apart</b> and would not have its current appearance.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Any</b> blood <b>stains</b> on garments <b>that come from</b> the town of <b>Rekem are ritually pure,</b> as most of the residents there are gentiles, and the blood stains of gentile women are not ritually impure. <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> those stains <b>impure because</b> in his opinion the residents of Rekem are not gentiles; rather, <b>they are converts</b> whose halakhic status is that of Jews, <b>but they are misguided</b> and do not put away their bloodstained garments. The blood stains on garments <b>that come from among the gentiles are ritually pure.</b> With regard to blood stains on garments that come <b>from among the Jews and from among the Samaritans, Rabbi Meir deems</b> them <b>impure,</b> as they may have come from the Jews. <b>And the Rabbis deem</b> them <b>ritually pure due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> Jews <b>are not suspected of</b> failing to put away <b>their</b> garments on which there are blood <b>stains.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna <b>categorically teaches</b> that any blood stains on garments that come from among the gentiles are ritually pure, thereby indicating that this applies <b>even</b> to garments that come <b>from</b> among the gentile population of <b>Tarmod. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: That is to say, one may accept converts from Tarmod,</b> i.e., there is no concern with regard to whether they are actually Jews of flawed lineage, who may not marry Jews of fit lineage.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But</b> aren’t there <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and the Elders who both say</b> that <b>one may not accept converts from Tarmod?</b> This is due to a concern that the daughters of the ten tribes exiled during the First Temple period might have intermingled with them, and according to Rabbi Yoḥanan the offspring of a Jewish woman and a gentile is a <i>mamzer</i>, who may not marry a Jew of fit lineage.

### Part 14
<b>And if you would say</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan merely infers that this is the opinion of the mishna, as indicated by the term: <b>That</b> is to say, <b>but he</b> himself <b>does not hold accordingly,</b> that is not so. <b>Didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say</b> a principle that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>an unattributed mishna,</b> as is the case here?

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: <b>They are <i>amora’im</i>, and</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> According to one <i>amora</i>, Rabbi Yoḥanan maintains that converts from Tarmod are not accepted, and he did not state that it is a principle that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the ruling of an unattributed mishna. According to another <i>amora</i>, Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the unattributed mishna, and therefore one may accept converts from Tarmod.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches with regard to blood stains on garments that come <b>from among the Jews</b> and from among the Samaritans that Rabbi Meir deems them impure, and the Rabbis deem them ritually pure. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> with regard to the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, if they deem</b> stains that come <b>from a Jewish</b> woman <b>pure, whose</b> stains <b>do they deem impure?</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> Everyone agrees that blood stains on garments that come <b>from among the Jews are impure.</b> With regard to blood stains that come <b>from among the Samaritans, Rabbi Meir deems</b> them <b>impure, as</b> he maintains the <b>Samaritans are true converts</b> and have the halakhic status of Jews, whose blood stains are impure. <b>And the Rabbis deem</b> them <b>ritually pure, as</b> they maintain the <b>Samaritans are converts</b> who converted under duress <b>due to</b> the threat posed by <b>lions,</b> and therefore their conversion is void, and their halakhic status is that of gentiles.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> why does the mishna state that according to the Rabbis the blood stains of the Samaritans are ritually pure due to the fact <b>that they are not suspected of</b> failing to put away <b>their</b> garments on which there are blood <b>stains?</b> The mishna <b>should</b> state that their blood stains are pure, as they are <b>converts</b> who converted <b>due to</b> the threat of <b>lions.</b>

### Part 19
<b>Rather, this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> Blood stains on garments that come <b>from among the Jews and from among the Samaritans are ritually impure, as</b> everyone agrees the <b>Samaritans are true converts.</b> With regard to blood stains <b>that are found in</b> the <b>towns of Jews, they are pure, as they are not suspected of</b> failing to put away <b>their</b> garments on which there are blood <b>stains, and they</b> certainly <b>put them away.</b> Therefore, the stains necessarily come from gentiles.

### Part 20
The Gemara continues paraphrasing the mishna: With regard to blood stains <b>that are found in</b> the <b>towns of Samaritans, Rabbi Meir deems</b> them <b>impure, as</b> the inhabitants <b>are suspected of</b> failing to put away <b>their</b> garments on which there are blood <b>stains. And the Rabbis deem</b> them <b>pure, as</b> they maintain that even Samaritans <b>are not suspected of</b> failing to put away <b>their</b> garments on which there are blood <b>stains,</b> and the stains are necessarily from gentiles.

### Part 21
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>All</b> blood <b>stains</b> on garments <b>that are found anywhere</b> where Jews and gentiles reside <b>are ritually pure,</b> since they must not belong to Jews, who put away their stained garments. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>except for</b> the stained garments <b>that are found in the</b> inner <b>rooms</b> of the house, as these might be garments that the Jews put away there; <b>and</b> except for the stained garments found <b>in proximity to the house of impurity,</b> i.e., the room that women used when they were impure due to menstruation.

### Part 22
<b>The house of impurity of Samaritans imparts</b> the <b>impurity</b> that is imparted by a corpse <b>by means of a tent, due to</b> the fact <b>that they bury the stillborn</b> children <b>there. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The house of impurity of Samaritans does not impart that impurity, as <b>they would not bury</b> a stillborn child there. <b>Rather, they would cast</b> it outside <b>and an animal would drag it</b> away.

### Part 23
Samaritans <b>are deemed credible to state: We buried the stillborn</b> children <b>there,</b> in a certain place, and it transmits ritual impurity; <b>or</b> to state: <b>We did not bury</b> the stillborn children there, and it does not transmit ritual impurity. <b>They are</b> likewise <b>deemed credible to state about an animal whether it</b> previously <b>gave birth</b> or <b>whether it did not</b> previously <b>give birth;</b> and their testimony is accepted with regard to determining whether the animal’s offspring has the status of a firstborn animal, which is sacred. They <b>are</b> also <b>deemed credible</b> to testify <b>about the marking of graves,</b> i.e., that where they marked is deemed a grave and where they did not mark is deemed a place where there is no grave.

### Part 24
<b>But</b> with regard to the following cases, in which the exact location of a grave is unknown, the Samaritans <b>are not deemed credible</b> to testify: They are <b>not</b> deemed credible to testify <b>about the overhanging boughs, nor about the protrusions</b> that jut out of stone fences and cover the ground. If it is unknown which bough or protrusion hangs over a grave, forming a tent that transmits the impurity of a corpse, and if a Samaritan testifies that the grave is not beneath a particular bough or protrusion his testimony is not accepted. <b>And</b> likewise they are <b>not</b> deemed credible to testify <b>about a <i>beit haperas</i>.</b> The Sages issued a decree that in such a case, the area that was plowed is impure as far as one hundred cubits from the original grave, due to the concern that the bones were dispersed by the plow.

### Part 25
<b>This is the principle</b> governing the credibility of Samaritans: In the case of any <b>matter</b> of <i>halakha</i> <b>that they are suspected</b> of not fulfilling, <b>they are not deemed credible</b> to testify <b>about it.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC