
### Part 1
If a woman <b>sat and did not examine</b> herself every morning and evening to determine whether she emitted blood and is impure, it makes no difference whether she failed to examine herself <b>unwittingly</b> or due to <b>circumstances beyond her control,</b> or even if she acted <b>intentionally and did not examine</b> herself; she remains <b>ritually pure.</b> She is rendered impure only if she examined herself and was found to have emitted blood.

### Part 2
By contrast, if <b>the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived,</b> when she is required to examine herself, <b>and she did not examine</b> herself, <b>that</b> woman <b>is ritually impure,</b> as it is typical for a woman to discharge blood at that time. <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> If a woman <b>was in hiding</b> from danger, <b>and the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself on that day, <b>that</b> woman <b>is pure, because fear drives away blood.</b> There is therefore no concern that she might have emitted blood.

### Part 3
<b>But</b> with regard to the seven clean <b>days of the <i>zav</i> and the <i>zava</i>, and</b> with regard to a woman who <b>observes</b> a clean <b>day for a day</b> she experiences a discharge during her days of <i>ziva</i>, if she fails to examine herself on those days, <b>these</b> women <b>have a presumptive status of ritual impurity,</b> as they already experienced a discharge.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that throughout the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> that follow the seven days of menstruation, a woman has the presumptive status of ritual purity. The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what <i>halakha</i></b> is this stated? <b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> This serves <b>to say that she does not require an examination</b> during these days. The Gemara objects: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches:</b> If <b>she sat and did not examine</b> herself she remains ritually pure, <b>it can be inferred that she requires examination <i>ab initio</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: In <b>the latter clause we arrive at</b> the case of a woman who is in the <b>days of menstruation,</b> not in the days of <i>ziva</i>. <b>And this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> For <b>all</b> the <b>eleven days</b> of <i>ziva</i> that follow the days of menstruation, a woman <b>has the presumptive status of ritual purity and she does not require examination. But during the days of her menstruation she requires examination.</b> Nevertheless, if <b>she sat and did not examine</b> herself, whether <b>unwittingly</b> or due to <b>circumstances beyond her control,</b> or even if she acted <b>intentionally and did not examine</b> herself, she remains <b>ritually pure.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ḥisda said</b> a different answer: The first clause of the mishna <b>is necessary only for</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who said:</b> With regard to <b>a woman who does not have</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle,</b> she is <b>forbidden to engage in intercourse,</b> lest she emit blood during intercourse. The mishna is teaching that <b>this statement</b> applies only <b>during the days of her menstruation, but during the days of her <i>ziva</i></b> even Rabbi Meir concedes that she <b>stands in</b> her <b>presumptive status of purity</b> and may engage in intercourse with her husband.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that even according to Rabbi Meir there are days in which a woman who does not have a fixed menstrual cycle is permitted to engage in sexual intercourse with her husband, <b>why did Rabbi Meir say</b> that her husband <b>must divorce</b> her <b>and he may never take</b> her <b>back,</b> even if she eventually develops a fixed menstrual cycle? Let them engage in intercourse during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>. The Gemara answers: He must divorce her <b>lest</b> the matter <b>lead to failure during the days of menstruation,</b> i.e., in case they come to engage in intercourse during the days of menstruation, when she might experience regular menstrual bleeding.

### Part 8
The Gemara objects: But <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches:</b> If <b>the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself, that woman is ritually impure, <b>it can be inferred that we are dealing with a woman who has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle.</b> The Gemara explains: The mishna <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> For <b>all</b> the <b>eleven</b> days of <i>ziva</i> that follow the days of menstruation, a woman <b>has the presumptive status of ritual purity and she is permitted to her husband, but during the days of menstruation she is prohibited</b> to her husband.

### Part 9
<b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? In</b> the case of <b>a woman who does not have</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle,</b> where there is a concern she might experience bleeding during any of the days of menstruation. <b>But</b> in the case of a woman who <b>has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle, she is permitted</b> to engage in sexual intercourse with her husband, <b>and she requires examination.</b> Nevertheless, if <b>she sat and did not examine</b> herself, whether <b>unwittingly</b> or due to <b>circumstances beyond her control,</b> or even if she acted <b>intentionally and did not examine</b> herself, she remains <b>ritually pure.</b> If <b>the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself, she is <b>impure.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: But <b>from</b> the fact that <b>the last clause</b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> it can be inferred that <b>the first clause</b> is <b>not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> The Gemara explains that <b>the entire</b> mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, and this</b> is what it <b>is saying: If she was not in hiding and the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself, she is <b>impure, as Rabbi Meir says:</b> If a woman <b>was in hiding and the time of her</b> menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself, she is <b>pure, as fear drives away blood.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rava says</b> a different explanation of the first clause of the mishna: The mishna is coming <b>to say that</b> if a woman experiences bleeding during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, as she previously had the presumptive status of purity <b>she does not impart impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period</b> to any ritually pure items she touched. It is assumed that she did not emit any blood before this emission.

### Part 12
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a menstruating woman, and a <i>zava</i>, and a woman who observes a day for a day, and a woman who gave birth, they all impart impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period.</b> A woman who observes a day for a day is one who experiences bleeding for one or two days during her days of <i>ziva</i>, and the <i>baraita</i> teaches that even such a woman imparts impurity retroactively for a twenty-four-hour period. If so, this is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Rava’s explanation.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya says</b> another explanation of the first clause of the mishna in the name of <b>Shmuel:</b> The mishna is coming <b>to say that</b> a woman <b>does not fix</b> a menstrual <b>cycle for herself during the days of her <i>ziva</i>.</b> In other words, a sighting during these days does not combine with sightings during the previous two periods of <i>ziva</i> to establish a fixed menstrual cycle. The Gemara relates that this statement was recited before <b>Rav Yosef,</b> who <b>said: I did not hear this <i>halakha</i></b> from Shmuel.

### Part 14
<b>Abaye said to him:</b> But <b>you</b> yourself <b>told us</b> this <i>halakha</i>, <b>and</b> it was <b>with regard to that</b> mishna <b>you told</b> it to <b>us,</b> as we learned in a mishna (63b): If the woman <b>was accustomed to see</b> an emission of blood on the <b>fifteenth day,</b> so that this was her fixed menstrual cycle, <b>and she deviated</b> from her cycle <b>to</b> see an emission on the <b>twentieth day,</b> then on both <b>this</b> day, the fifteenth, <b>and that</b> day, the twentieth, it is <b>prohibited</b> for her to engage in sexual intercourse due to the concern that she might have an emission on either day. If <b>she deviated</b> from her cycle <b>twice, to</b> see an emission on the <b>twentieth day,</b> then on both <b>this</b> day <b>and that</b> day it is <b>prohibited</b> for her to engage in intercourse. If she deviates a third time to see on the twentieth she has established for herself a new fixed menstrual cycle.

### Part 15
Abaye continues: <b>And you said to us with regard to this</b> mishna that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard to a woman who normally experiences bleeding <b>fifteen</b> days <b>from her immersion, which are twenty-two</b> days <b>from her sighting</b> of menstrual blood. This means <b>that there, she stands in her days of menstruation. But</b> if she normally experiences bleeding <b>fifteen</b> days <b>from her sighting</b> of menstrual blood, so <b>that she stands in her days of <i>ziva</i>,</b> she <b>has not fixed</b> a menstrual cycle, and the previous cycle is uprooted even if she deviates from it only once.

### Part 16
§ With regard to the ruling that a woman’s menstrual cycle cannot be fixed during her days of <i>ziva</i>, <b>Rav Pappa said: I said</b> this <b><i>halakha</i> before Rav Yehuda of Diskarta,</b> and I asked him for a clarification of the following matter: Granted, <b>she does not fix</b> a menstrual cycle during the days of <i>ziva</i>, and there is no need for three deviations to uproot her cycle; rather, it is uprooted by even one deviation. But <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether <b>we should be concerned</b> that <b>she</b> might experience bleeding? In other words, if she normally experiences bleeding on a particular day during her days of <i>ziva</i>, must she avoid engaging in sexual intercourse with her husband on that day out of concern that she might emit blood?

### Part 17
Rav Yehuda of Diskarta <b>was silent and did not say anything to</b> Rav Pappa. Therefore, <b>Rav Pappa said: Let us see</b> and try to resolve this <b>ourselves.</b> The mishna cited above states: If the woman <b>was accustomed to see</b> an emission of blood <b>on the fifteenth day, and she deviated</b> from her cycle <b>to</b> see an emission on the <b>twentieth day,</b> then on both <b>this</b> day <b>and that</b> day it is <b>prohibited</b> for her to engage in sexual intercourse.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC