
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> After the birth of an offspring by <b>caesarean section,</b> the mother <b>does not observe</b> seven or fourteen <b>days of impurity and</b> thirty-three or sixty-six <b>days of purity for</b> male and female offspring, respectively, <b>and she is not obligated to</b> bring <b>for it</b> the <b>offering</b> brought by a woman after childbirth. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The halakhic status of <b>that</b> offspring is <b>like</b> that of an offspring <b>born</b> in a standard birth.

### Part 2
<b>All women become ritually impure</b> with the flow of blood from the uterus <b>into the outer chamber,</b> i.e., the vagina, although it did not leave the woman’s body, <b>as it is stated: “And her issue in her flesh shall be blood,</b> she shall be in her menstruation seven days” (Leviticus 15:19), indicating that even if her menstrual blood remains in her flesh, she becomes impure. <b>But one who experiences a gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>zav</i>] and one who experiences a seminal emission do not become ritually impure until their</b> emission of <b>impurity emerges outside</b> the body.

### Part 3
If a priest <b>was partaking of <i>teruma</i>,</b> the portion of the produce designated for the priest, <b>and sensed a quaking of his limbs</b> indicating that a seminal emission was imminent, he should firmly <b>hold</b> his <b>penis</b> to prevent the emission from leaving his body, <b>and swallow the <i>teruma</i></b> while ritually pure. <b>And</b> the emission of a <i>zav</i> and a seminal emission <b>impart impurity in any amount, even like</b> the size of <b>a mustard seed or</b> even <b>smaller than that.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna cites a dispute as to whether or not a birth by caesarean section is considered a birth with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to childbirth. <b>Rabbi Mani bar Patish said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the Rabbis,</b> who say that it is not considered a birth? It is because <b>the verse states: “If a woman emitted seed and gave birth to a male,</b> then she shall be impure seven days…And when the days of her purification are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt offering, and a pigeon or a dove for a sin offering” (Leviticus 12:2–6). It is derived from here that the <i>halakhot</i> mentioned in that passage do not apply <b>unless she gives birth through the place where she emits seed.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> interpret the term “emitted seed”? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> word serves to teach <b>that even</b> if <b>she gave birth only</b> to a fluid that <b>resembles the seed that she emitted,</b> i.e., the fetus died and entirely decomposed and dissolved before emerging, <b>its mother is ritually impure</b> due to <b>childbirth.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara further asks: <b>And Rabbi Shimon, what is</b> the <b>reason</b> for <b>his</b> opinion that the <i>halakhot</i> of childbirth apply in the case of a caesarean section? <b>Reish Lakish said</b> that it is because the <b>verse states:</b> “But if <b>she gives birth</b> to a female” (Leviticus 12:5). The term “she gives birth” is superfluous in the context of the passage, as it was mentioned previously, and it therefore serves <b>to include</b> the birth of an offspring by <b>caesarean section.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what do <b>the Rabbis</b> derive from this superfluous expression? The Gemara answers: In their opinion, <b>that</b> expression <b>is necessary to include</b> the birth of a child <b>whose sexual organs are indeterminate [<i>tumtum</i>] or a hermaphrodite. As</b> it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that as the words <b>“male”</b> (Leviticus 12:2) <b>and “female”</b> (Leviticus 12:5) are <b>written</b> in the passage, these <i>halakhot</i> apply only to <b>a definite male</b> and <b>a definite female, but not</b> to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b> Therefore, the term “she gives birth” <b>teaches us</b> that it is the birth itself, not the sex of the offspring, that matters.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> from where does <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> derive that these <i>halakhot</i> apply to a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> that <b>which bar Livai teaches, as bar Livai teaches</b> a <i>baraita</i> that discusses the verse: “And when the days of her purity are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter” (Leviticus 12:6). Since the verse uses the terms “son” and “daughter,” rather than male and female, it is derived from the term <b>“for a son”</b> that these <i>halakhot</i> apply <b>to a son in any case,</b> even if his masculinity is not definite. Similarly, the term <b>“for a daughter”</b> teaches that these <i>halakhot</i> apply <b>to a daughter in any case,</b> even if her femininity is not definite.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what do <b>the Rabbis</b> derive from the terms “for a son” and “for a daughter”? The Gemara answers: In their opinion, <b>that</b> term <b>is necessary to obligate</b> the mother to bring an offering <b>for each and every son</b> to whom she gives birth, rather than one offering after having given birth to several sons; <b>and likewise to obligate</b> her to bring an offering <b>for each and every daughter</b> to whom she gives birth.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> from where does <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that <b>he derives it from</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>that a <i>tanna</i> taught before Rav Sheshet:</b> The verse states: <b>“This is the law for one who gives birth,</b> whether to a male or a female” (Leviticus 12:7). This <b>teaches that</b> a woman <b>brings a single offering for many offspring</b> born within a short time, e.g., after a multiple birth. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>she may bring</b> an offering <b>for</b> her <b>childbirth and</b> an offering <b>for</b> an irregular <b>discharge</b> of blood from the uterus [<i>ziva</i>], in a case where she is required to bring one, <b>as one,</b> i.e., that she may fulfill her two obligations with a single offering.

### Part 11
The Gemara interrupts the <i>baraita</i> to raise a difficulty: <b>But</b> how could it possibly enter your mind that a woman may bring one offering for two obligations? In the case of <b>a woman after childbirth who consumed blood, or a woman after childbirth who ate</b> forbidden <b>fat,</b> is <b>one offering sufficient for her?</b> One who eats blood or forbidden fat is obligated to bring a sin offering for atonement (see Leviticus 7:25–27). There is no reason to think that a woman after childbirth, who is required to bring a sin offering for a reason other than her childbirth, may bring one offering for both obligations. Similarly, there are no grounds for suggesting that a single offering might suffice for both childbirth and <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 12
<b>Rather,</b> the statement of the <i>baraita</i> should be revised, as follows: One <b>might</b> have thought that a woman <b>may bring</b> an offering <b>for a childbirth that</b> occurred <b>before the completion</b> of her term of postpartum purity, <b>and for</b> a second <b>childbirth that</b> happened <b>after the completion</b> of that period, <b>as one,</b> i.e., she may fulfill her two obligations with a single offering. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “This</b> is the law for one who gives birth” (Leviticus 12:7), indicating that each birth, unless it occurred within the period of purity following another birth, requires its own offering. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis</b> respond to this derivation? The Gemara answers that in their opinion, <b>even though it is written: “This</b> is the law,” <b>it was</b> still <b>necessary</b> for the verse to state: <b>“For a son, or for a daughter.”</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara explains: Had the Torah stated only the verse: “This is the law,” it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that one offering does not suffice for two births that occurred as a result <b>of two pregnancies,</b> as the second one was a miscarriage whose conception occurred during the woman’s period of purity following the first birth. <b>But</b> if both births occurred as a result <b>of one pregnancy, such as</b> in the case of <b>Yehuda and Ḥizkiyya,</b> the twin <b>sons of Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> who were born three months apart (see 27a), <b>I would say that one offering</b> for both births is <b>sufficient for her.</b> Therefore, the verse “for a son, or for a daughter” <b>teaches us</b> otherwise.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that childbirth by caesarean section has the halakhic status of regular childbirth, <b>concedes in</b> the case of <b>consecrated</b> animals <b>that</b> if one attempts to consecrate an animal born by caesarean section, it <b>is not consecrated. What is the reason</b> for this opinion? <b>He derives</b> it by means of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the word <b>birth</b> that is written with regard to consecrated animals (see Leviticus 22:27), and the word <b>birth</b> that is written in connection with a <b>firstborn</b> animal (see Deuteronomy 15:19). <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of the firstborn, the <i>halakhot</i> apply specifically to one who <b>“opens the womb”</b> (Exodus 13:15), <b>so too here,</b> in the case of consecrated animals, the <i>halakhot</i> apply only to one who <b>opens the womb.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara objects: <b>And let</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>derive</b> a different conclusion by a similar verbal analogy, as the word <b>birth</b> is written with regard to consecrated animals, and the word <b>birth</b> is also written <b>with regard to a person,</b> i.e., a woman who gives birth (see Leviticus 12:2): <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of humans, childbirth by <b>caesarean section</b> has the status of childbirth according to Rabbi Shimon, <b>so too here,</b> in the case of consecrated animals, an animal born by <b>caesarean section</b> is considered the same as an animal born via a natural birth.

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: It <b>is</b> more <b>reasonable for</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>to derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of a consecrated animal <b>from a firstborn</b> animal, rather than from the <i>halakha</i> of childbirth, <b>as</b> it is written with regard to a consecrated animal: <b>“Its mother”</b> (Leviticus 22:27), and it is likewise written <b>with regard to</b> a firstborn animal: <b>“Its mother”</b> (Exodus 22:29). The Gemara objects: <b>On the contrary, he should derive</b> it <b>from human</b> births, <b>as</b> that would be a derivation of the <i>halakha</i> concerning consecrated animals that are <b>ordinary,</b> i.e., not firstborns, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning human births of children that are <b>ordinary,</b> and not firstborns.

### Part 17
The Gemara adopts a different line of reasoning: <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>should derive</b> it <b>from a firstborn</b> animal, <b>as</b> they both share the following five characteristics: In both cases it is written: “its <b>mother”;</b> both are cases of <b>a sacrificial animal;</b> both are subject to <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> the disqualification of an offering through improper intent during its sacrificial rites; both are subject to <b><i>notar</i>,</b> the disqualification of sacrificial meat after a prescribed time; <b>and</b> finally, both are subject to disqualification by becoming <b>ritually impure.</b> By contrast, humans do not share any of these characteristics.

### Part 18
The Gemara objects: <b>On the contrary, he should derive</b> it <b>from human</b> births, <b>as</b> both cases share the following four characteristics: They are both instances of <b>ordinary,</b> non-firstborn offspring; they both apply to the offspring of either sex, and are not exclusively <b>males;</b> they are both dealing with offspring that are not automatically <b>sacred</b> at birth; and they both apply <b>to</b> offspring that are not <b>a gift</b> to a priest, but belong to an individual non-priest. By contrast, firstborn animals do not share any of these characteristics. The Gemara answers that the comparison to firstborn animals is preferable to the comparison to human childbirth because <b>these</b> shared characteristics <b>are more</b> numerous. The comparison to consecrated animals includes five shared characteristics, whereas the comparison to human births involves only four.

### Part 19
<b>Rav Ḥiyya, son of Rav Huna, said in the name of Rava:</b> A <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught which supports</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan: Rabbi Yehuda says: “This is the law of the burnt offering; that is the burnt offering</b> that goes up on the pyre upon the altar” (Leviticus 6:2). It is derived from this verse that the <i>halakha</i> is that if a part of a disqualified offering is taken up to the altar it should be burned there, rather than taken down, despite its unfit status. <b>There are three</b> expressions which indicate <b>exclusion</b> in this verse: The term “this is,” which indicates this one and not another one; the term “that is,” indicating that one and not another one; and the term “the burnt offering” instead of “a burnt offering.”

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC