
### Part 1
<b>And Shmuel explains</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning,</b> in the following manner: If an animal fetus is <b>born</b> in the <b>fourth</b> month of pregnancy in the case <b>of small</b> domesticated animals, or it is <b>born</b> in the <b>eighth</b> month of pregnancy in the case <b>of large</b> livestock, or if it was born <b>from this</b> stage of the pregnancy <b>and earlier,</b> the animal is <b>forbidden. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case <b>when</b> the fetus’s <b>months</b> of gestation <b>were not completed; but</b> in a case when <b>its months</b> of gestation <b>were completed, it is permitted</b> for consumption even outside the womb. This <b>excludes</b> a fetus <b>that has two backs and two spines, as even in</b> a case where <b>its months</b> of gestation <b>were completed, if it emerged into the airspace of the world, it is forbidden,</b> whereas if it is found <b>in the womb of its mother, it is permitted.</b>

### Part 2
<b>A <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav:</b> In the case of a woman <b>who discharges an entity</b> that has <b>a shapeless body,</b> i.e., it does not have the outline of limbs, <b>or an entity</b> that has <b>a shapeless head,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>its mother should be impure</b> with the impurity of a woman after <b>childbirth.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “If a woman bears seed and gives birth to a male,</b> she shall be impure seven days; as in the days of the menstruation of her sickness she shall be impure. <b>And on the eighth day</b> the flesh of his foreskin <b>shall be circumcised”</b> (Leviticus 12:2–3).

### Part 3
Those verses teach that the impurity of a woman after childbirth applies only to one who gave birth to a child <b>that is fit for circumcision</b> on the <b>eighth</b> day, <b>excluding these</b> cases, <b>where</b> the child <b>is not fit for circumcision</b> on the <b>eighth</b> day, as it cannot survive that long. Consequently, this woman does not have the impurity of a woman after childbirth. <b>Rav said to</b> the <i>tanna</i>: <b>And conclude</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>like this:</b> Excluding these cases, where the child is not fit for circumcision on the eighth day, <b>and</b> excluding the case of a woman who discharges a child <b>that has two backs and two spines.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba thought to perform an action,</b> i.e., to issue a ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> that a woman who gives birth to a child with two backs and two spines is impure. <b>Rav Huna said to him: What is your thinking?</b> That as this matter is subject to a dispute, one should rule <b>stringently?</b> Your ruling <b>is a stringency that leads to a leniency, as you have given</b> the woman a period of thirty-three days following her period of impurity when any blood that emerges is <b>blood of purity. In any event,</b> you should <b>perform,</b> i.e., issue your ruling, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav, as we maintain</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav with regard to ritual matters, whether</b> his opinion leads <b>to a leniency or to a stringency.</b>

### Part 5
§ <b>Rava says:</b> The Sages <b>said</b> that <b>a woman can give birth</b> to a viable offspring <b>after nine</b> months of pregnancy <b>or after seven</b> months of pregnancy; but if a woman gives birth after eight months of pregnancy, the child cannot survive and is stillborn. Similarly, <b>a large domesticated animal gives birth</b> to a viable offspring <b>after nine</b> months of pregnancy, and if it discharges a fetus after only eight months, the newborn animal cannot survive. With this in mind, Rava asked: Can a large domesticated animal <b>give birth</b> to a viable offspring <b>after seven</b> months of pregnancy, like a human, <b>or</b> can such an animal <b>not give birth</b> to a viable offspring after only seven months?

### Part 6
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma from the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: If an animal discharges <b>from this</b> stage of the pregnancy <b>and earlier,</b> the fetus is <b>forbidden</b> in consumption as an unslaughtered animal carcass. <b>What, is it not</b> referring <b>to large</b> livestock, which indicates that large livestock do not give birth to a viable offspring after only seven months of pregnancy? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the reference is specifically <b>to small</b> domesticated animals, which do not give birth to a viable offspring until after five months of pregnancy.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to this answer: <b>What is this? Granted, if you say</b> that the reference is <b>to large</b> livestock, it is <b>necessary</b> for the <i>baraita</i> to state that an animal does not give birth to a viable offspring after less than a complete period of pregnancy, as otherwise it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since in</b> the case of <b>a woman</b> who gives birth after seven months the baby <b>survives,</b> it is logical that <b>in</b> the case of a large domesticated <b>animal</b> that gives birth after seven months the newborn <b>also survives,</b> and it is therefore permitted for consumption. Consequently, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us that</b> such an animal <b>does not survive.</b>

### Part 8
<b>But if you say</b> that the ruling in the <i>baraita</i>, that if an animal discharged a fetus before the period of gestation was completed then the fetus is prohibited, <b>was stated with regard to small</b> domesticated animals, isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that if a sheep or goat fetus was discharged at this stage it cannot survive? <b>Can it survive after</b> only <b>three months</b> of gestation?

### Part 9
The Gemara answers that in fact <b>it is necessary</b> for the <i>baraita</i> to state this <i>halakha</i> with regard to small domesticated animals, as otherwise it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>any</b> mammal that is born <b>two months less</b> than its complete gestation <b>survives,</b> just as a human born at seven months of gestation survives. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that a sheep or goat that is born at three months of gestation cannot survive and is forbidden for consumption.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> In the case of a woman <b>who discharges</b> a fetus that has <b>the form of a lilith,</b> a female demon with wings and a human face, <b>its mother is impure</b> with the impurity of a woman after <b>childbirth,</b> as <b>it is</b> a viable <b>offspring, only it has wings. This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei said: An incident</b> occurred <b>in Simoni involving a certain</b> woman <b>who discharged</b> a fetus that had <b>the form of a lilith, and</b> the <b>incident was brought before the Sages; and they said</b> that <b>it is</b> a viable <b>offspring, only it has wings.</b>

### Part 11
There was a case of a woman <b>who discharged</b> an item that had <b>the form of a snake. Ḥanina,</b> the <b>son of Rabbi Yehoshua’s brother, ruled</b> that <b>its mother is impure</b> with the impurity of a woman after <b>childbirth. Rabbi Yosef went and told</b> this <b>matter to Rabban Gamliel.</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>sent to Rabbi Yehoshua: Take</b> hold of <b>your nephew and come</b> to me, so that I may admonish him for his ruling.

### Part 12
<b>While they were going</b> to Rabban Gamliel, <b>Ḥanina’s daughter-in-law went out to greet</b> Rabbi Yehoshua, and <b>said to him: My teacher, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a woman <b>who discharges</b> an item that looks <b>like a snake?</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to her: Its mother is pure. She said to him: But my mother-in-law said to me in your name</b> that <b>its mother is impure</b> in such a case, <b>and</b> that you <b>said to her: For what reason</b> is she impure? It is <b>because the pupil of</b> a snake <b>is round like that of a human. Due to her statement, Rabbi Yehoshua remembered</b> that he had issued such a ruling. He subsequently <b>sent</b> a message <b>to Rabban Gamliel: Ḥanina issued the ruling based on my</b> own statement.

### Part 13
<b>Abaye said: Conclude from</b> this incident that <b>a Torah scholar [<i>tzurva merabbanan</i>] who says</b> a halakhic <b>matter should say the reason</b> for his statement, <b>so that when</b> his colleagues <b>remind him</b> of his reasoning, <b>he will remember</b> that ruling, as happened to Rabbi Yehoshua.

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> A woman <b>who discharges a gestational sac full of fluid, full of blood,</b> or <b>full of</b> different <b>colors</b> need <b>not be concerned that</b> it was <b>an offspring. But if</b> the sac <b>was</b> one in which <b>tissue developed,</b> her halakhic status is that of a woman after childbirth. Since the sex of the embryo is unknown, the woman <b>observes</b> the strictures of a woman who gave birth both <b>to a male and to a female;</b> she is impure for fourteen days like a woman who gave birth to a female, but blood that she sees thereafter is pure only until forty days after birth, like a woman who gave birth to a male. A woman <b>who discharges a sandal</b> fetus, i.e., one that has the form of a sandal fish, <b>and</b> one who discharges <b>an afterbirth observes</b> the strictures of a woman who gave birth both <b>to a male and to a female.</b>

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Granted,</b> one can understand why a woman who discharges a gestational sac full of <b>blood or water</b> is pure, as such an item <b>is nothing,</b> i.e., it is not an offspring. <b>But</b> if the gestational sac was full of different <b>colors, let us be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps it was an offspring and</b> it <b>liquefied. Abaye says</b> in response: <b>How much undiluted wine,</b> which can be harmful to an embryo, <b>did the mother of this</b> purported embryo <b>drink, that her embryo was liquefied in her womb?</b> In other words, there is no such concern.

### Part 16
<b>Rava says</b> that there is a different explanation: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna that the gestational sac was <b>full</b> of different colors, <b>and if it is so,</b> that there was an embryo in the sac <b>that liquefied,</b> the sac would have been <b>lacking</b> some of the mass of the liquified portion. <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava says</b> that there is yet another explanation: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna that the gestational sac is full of different <b>colors, and if it is so,</b> that there was an embryo there <b>that liquefied, it would all be of one color.</b>

### Part 17
With regard to the effect of drinking wine on a person’s body, <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Abba Shaul says: I used to be a gravedigger, and I would observe the bones of corpses.</b> I discovered that <b>the bones of one who drinks</b> too much <b>undiluted wine</b> during his lifetime look <b>burnt, the bones of</b> one who drinks too much <b>diluted</b> wine <b>are black,</b> and <b>the bones of</b> one who drinks the <b>appropriate</b> amount of wine <b>are fat,</b> i.e., full of marrow. <b>And</b> furthermore, I discovered that <b>the bones of anyone who drinks</b> much <b>more than he eats</b> look <b>burnt, the bones of</b> one who <b>eats</b> much <b>more than he drinks are black,</b> and <b>the bones of one who</b> eats and drinks <b>appropriate</b> amounts <b>are fat.</b>

### Part 18
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Abba Shaul says</b> the following, <b>and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> said it: <b>I used to be a gravedigger. Once I ran after a deer, and I entered the thighbone of a corpse; and</b> it was so large that <b>I ran after</b> the deer for <b>three parasangs</b> inside the thighbone, <b>and</b> although <b>I did not reach</b> the <b>deer,</b> the <b>thighbone did not end. When I came back</b> and related this to the Sages, <b>they said to me: It was</b> evidently the thighbone <b>of Og, king of Bashan,</b> a known giant.

### Part 19
<b>It is</b> likewise <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Abba Shaul says: I used to be a gravedigger. Once</b> a burial <b>cave opened up underneath</b> where I was standing, <b>and I</b> found myself <b>standing in the eye socket of a corpse until my nose. When I came back</b> and told this to the Sages, <b>they said to me: It was</b> evidently <b>the eye of Absalom.</b>

### Part 20
<b>And lest you say</b> that <b>Abba Shaul was a midget,</b> and therefore he was capable of standing in an eye socket until his nose, <b>Abba Shaul was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Rabbi Tarfon reached</b> only <b>his shoulder, and Rabbi Tarfon was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Rabbi Meir reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rabbi Tarfon, and <b>Rabbi Meir was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rabbi Meir, and <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara continues: <b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and Rabbi Ḥiyya was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Rav reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya, and <b>Rav was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Rav Yehuda reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rav, <b>and Rav Yehuda was the tallest</b> person <b>in his generation. And Adda the attendant [<i>dayyala</i>] reached</b> only <b>the shoulder of</b> Rav Yehuda,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC