
### Part 1
<b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, who say</b> that there <b>is</b> only <b>one source</b> for the two types of blood (see 35b). The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> can it be that <b>the <i>tanna</i> taught us an unattributed</b> mishna, which is generally accepted as the <i>halakha</i>, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> whose opinion is usually not accepted as <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> a case where the mishna first records <b>an unattributed opinion and afterward</b> it records <b>a dispute</b> with regard to the same matter. <b>And</b> there is a principle that <b>any</b> time the mishna first records <b>an unattributed opinion and afterward</b> it records that the ruling is subject to <b>a dispute,</b> then the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not</b> necessarily <b>in accordance with the unattributed opinion.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Does</b> the mishna <b>teach:</b> A woman is <b>anticipating observing</b> the period <b>of</b> the blood of purity? Rather, it teaches: <b>Who is observing</b> the period of the blood of purity. The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the mishna is referring to a woman <b>who is</b> already <b>observing</b> the period of the blood of purity, <b>what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> that she is exempt from performing examinations? Isn’t this obvious? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>she should examine</b> herself, <b>as perhaps</b> she will find that <b>she established a fixed</b> menstrual <b>cycle</b> through blood found on her examination cloths, the mishna <b>teaches us that</b> a woman <b>does not establish</b> a cycle from sightings of blood that came from <b>a pure source</b> that transfers <b>to</b> the period when she sees blood from <b>an impure source.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to this answer: <b>This</b> answer <b>works out well according to Levi, who said</b> that <b>there are two</b> distinct <b>sources,</b> one for blood after birth and one for blood of purity; one can understand that she does not establish a cycle with regard to blood from one source, from a sighting of blood from a different source. <b>But according to Rav, who said</b> that blood after birth and blood of purity both come from <b>one source, she should</b> be required to <b>examine</b> herself during the period of the blood of purity, as <b>perhaps she established a fixed</b> menstrual <b>cycle.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Even so,</b> i.e., that both types of blood come from the same source, nevertheless a woman <b>does not establish</b> a cycle <b>from</b> her <b>days of purity</b> that transfers <b>to</b> her <b>days of impurity.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> even a woman with a fixed menstrual cycle <b>engages in intercourse while</b> using <b>examination cloths</b> to ascertain whether her menstrual flow began, except for a woman after childbirth who is observing the period of the blood of purity, and a virgin whose blood is ritually pure for four days after engaging in intercourse for the first time. In this connection, the Gemara notes that <b>we learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (64b): With regard to <b>a young girl whose time to see</b> the flow of menstrual blood <b>has not arrived,</b> as she has not yet reached puberty, <b>and she married, Beit Shammai say:</b> The Sages <b>give her four nights</b> after intercourse during which the blood is attributed to her torn hymen and she is ritually pure. Thereafter, any blood is menstrual blood and she is impure. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> The blood is attributed to the torn hymen <b>until the wound heals.</b>

### Part 5
With regard to Beit Hillel’s statement, <b>Rav Giddel says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> They <b>taught</b> this <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> she <b>does not stop</b> seeing blood <b>due to intercourse.</b> In other words, every time she engages in intercourse she experiences bleeding. In that case, even if <b>she saw</b> blood <b>not due to intercourse,</b> Beit Hillel still attribute the blood to the torn hymen. <b>But</b> if she <b>stops seeing</b> blood <b>due to intercourse, and</b> then she subsequently <b>saw</b> blood on another occasion, that blood renders her <b>impure.</b>

### Part 6
He continues: Similarly, if <b>one night passed without</b> them engaging in <b>intercourse and she</b> subsequently <b>saw</b> blood without connection to intercourse, this indicates that the blood is no longer from her torn hymen and therefore she is deemed <b>impure.</b> Likewise, if the <b>appearance</b> of <b>her blood</b> had changed since her initial blood from her torn hymen, she is <b>impure. Rabbi Yona raises an objection</b> to this last <i>halakha</i> from the mishna: <b>And a virgin whose blood is ritually pure</b> is not required to examine herself when she engages in intercourse. <b>Why</b> not? <b>She should engage in intercourse while</b> using <b>examination cloths, as perhaps</b> she will find that the <b>appearance of her blood</b> has <b>changed,</b> which would mean that her blood is no longer ritually pure blood from her torn hymen.

### Part 7
<b>Rava says: Say the first clause:</b> All women must engage in intercourse while using examination cloths, <b>except for a menstruating woman</b> whose impure status is certain <b>and</b> a woman after childbirth <b>who is observing</b> the period of the <b>blood of purity.</b> It can be inferred from here that these two exceptions are not required for women to examine themselves, <b>but a virgin whose blood is pure</b> is <b>required</b> to perform <b>an examination.</b> This ruling apparently supports Shmuel’s opinion that examination is required to determine if there is a change in the appearance of her blood. <b>But</b> if so, then the two clauses of the mishna are <b>difficult,</b> as they contradict <b>each other.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>Here,</b> in the latter clause that indicates that a virgin requires no examination, it is referring to a case <b>where she had engaged in intercourse.</b> In such a situation an examination would be inconclusive, <b>as</b> even if the appearance of her blood had changed, one can <b>say</b> that it was because the man’s <b>organ soiled it,</b> i.e., perhaps the intercourse caused the change of appearance in her blood. By contrast, <b>there,</b> in the first clause, it is referring to a case <b>where she</b> had <b>not engaged in intercourse,</b> and therefore she is required to perform an examination to determine if there was a change in appearance in her blood, as any difference in appearance would indicate a change from pure blood to impure blood.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes <b>that</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>. With regard to the opinion of Beit Hillel that blood is attributed to the torn hymen until the wound heals, the <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case <b>where she does not stop</b> seeing blood <b>due to intercourse,</b> i.e., every time she engages in intercourse she experiences bleeding. If so, even when <b>she sees</b> blood <b>not due to intercourse,</b> it is deemed pure.

### Part 10
<b>But</b> if she <b>stopped seeing</b> blood <b>due to intercourse, and</b> she subsequently <b>sees</b> blood at a different time, that sighting renders her <b>impure.</b> Similarly, if <b>one night passed without</b> her engaging in <b>intercourse and</b> then <b>she saw</b> blood without connection to intercourse, she is deemed <b>impure.</b> Furthermore, if she sees blood and the <b>appearance</b> of <b>her blood</b> had changed from her initial blood from her torn hymen, she is <b>impure.</b>

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And she is required</b> to examine herself <b>twice</b> each day, in the morning and at twilight. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The mishna <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only with regard to</b> touching ritually <b>pure</b> items. <b>But with regard to her husband, she is permitted</b> to him without any requirement to perform examinations. The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious,</b> as <b>we learn</b> in the mishna that she must examine herself twice a day, and the first time is in the <b>morning?</b> This indicates that the mishna is concerned about the status of ritually pure items that she will handle during the day, but not about intercourse with her husband, as a couple usually engages in relations at night rather than during the day.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, if</b> the statement of Rav Yehuda citing Shmuel <b>was stated,</b> it <b>was stated with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>And</b> she is also required to examine herself <b>at a time that she is about to engage in intercourse with her husband. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The mishna <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only with regard to a woman who is engaged in</b> handling <b>pure</b> items. She alone is required to examine herself before intercourse. The reason is <b>that since</b> she is <b>required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> in preparation <b>for</b> handling <b>pure</b> items, she <b>also requires an examination</b> in preparation <b>for</b> intercourse with <b>her husband. But</b> with regard to a woman who <b>is not engaged in</b> handling <b>pure</b> items, she is <b>not required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> in preparation for intercourse with her husband.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Rav Yehuda <b>teaching us? We</b> already <b>learn</b> this from the mishna (15a): <b>All women have the presumptive status of purity to their husbands,</b> and therefore the husband does not need to ascertain whether she is ritually pure before engaging in intercourse. The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> this <i>halakha</i> is learned <b>from the mishna</b> alone, <b>I would say</b> that <b>this statement</b> applies only <b>to a woman who has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle. But</b> in the case of <b>a woman who does not have</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle,</b> she is <b>required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> before intercourse. Consequently, Rav Yehuda teaches us that even a woman who does not have a fixed menstrual cycle is not required to perform an examination before intercourse, unless she handles pure items.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But aren’t we are dealing</b> in <b>the mishna with</b> a case <b>of a woman who has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle?</b> The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is dealing both</b> with a case <b>where she has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle</b> and with a case where <b>she does not have</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle. And this</b> is what the mishna <b>teaches us: That even though she has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle,</b> and therefore one might think that she is exempt from examination, nevertheless if she handles pure items, <b>since</b> she is <b>required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> in preparation <b>for</b> handling those <b>pure</b> items, she is <b>also required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> in preparation <b>for</b> intercourse with <b>her husband.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Shmuel</b> already <b>state</b> this <i>halakha</i> on <b>another occasion? As Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rabbi Abba bar Yirmeya says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> With regard to <b>a woman who does not have</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle,</b> it is <b>forbidden</b> for her to engage in intercourse with her husband <b>until she examines</b> herself and determines that she is pure. <b>And we interpreted</b> this <i>halakha</i> as referring to a case <b>where she is engaged in</b> handling <b>pure</b> items. The Gemara answers: Shmuel did not in fact issue two statements; rather, <b>one was stated by inference from the other.</b> In other words, Shmuel said one of these statements explicitly; the other was reported by his students in his name based on an inference from what he had said.

### Part 16
The Gemara adds: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> that a woman requires an examination, <b>said?</b> It is said with regard to a woman who is preparing <b>for</b> handling <b>pure</b> items. <b>But</b> with regard to engaging in intercourse <b>with her husband, she is permitted</b> to do so without performing an examination. The <i>baraita</i> qualifies this ruling: And <b>in what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> that she is not required to perform an examination, <b>said?</b> It is said <b>when</b> her husband traveled and <b>left her with the presumptive status of ritual purity.</b> If so, upon his return she does not need to perform an examination before they engage in intercourse. <b>But</b> if he <b>left her with the presumptive status of ritual impurity,</b> she remains <b>forever in her status of impurity, until she says to him: I am ritually pure.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC