### Part 1
<b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the case of a woman who gave birth when she was a <i>zava</i>? There are seven <b>days of</b> impurity following the <b>birth</b> of a son and fourteen days of impurity following the birth of a daughter, during which the mother is impure even if she did not experience bleeding. With regard to those days during this period <b>on which she does not see</b> blood, are they <b>reckoned in the counting of her</b> seven clean days required to become purified from the status of <b><i>ziva</i>?</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Kahana says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: A woman <b>saw</b> blood on <b>two</b> consecutive days during the period of <i>ziva</i>, <b>and on the third</b> day <b>she miscarried, but she does not know what she miscarried,</b> i.e., whether it was a stillborn human fetus for which a woman contracts the impurity of childbirth, or whether she discharged an amorphous piece of tissue. In addition, she does not know whether she emitted blood during the miscarriage.

### Part 3
In such a case, <b>it is uncertain</b> whether <b>she</b> has the status of one who experienced <b><i>ziva</i> or</b> whether she has the status of a woman who gave <b>birth.</b> If she gave birth to a fetus and did not emit blood, she is a woman after childbirth but not a <i>zava</i>. If the discharge was an amorphous piece of tissue and she saw blood, she is a <i>zava</i>. If it was a human fetus and she saw blood, she is one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>. Finally, if she did not emit blood and it was a discharge of an amorphous piece of tissue, she is not obligated to bring an offering at all.

### Part 4
Consequently, <b>she brings an offering but it is not eaten</b> by the priests, as it is uncertain whether it is an offering of <i>ziva</i> or an offering for her childbirth, or whether it is non-sacred. <b>And</b> the <b>days of</b> impurity following this uncertain <b>birth, on which she does not see</b> blood, <b>are reckoned in the counting of her</b> seven clean days required to become purified from the status of <b><i>ziva</i>.</b> This resolves the dilemma raised by the Sages.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa says</b> that this does not resolve the dilemma, as it <b>is different there, since it can be said</b> that <b>she is a woman who gave birth to a male, and</b> it is only for that reason that <b>all of these additional seven</b> days <b>that we give her</b> due to the concern that she might have given birth to a female, which would render her impure for fourteen days, <b>are reckoned in the counting of her</b> seven clean days of <b><i>ziva</i>.</b> But if it was certain that she gave birth to a female, those days after the birth would not count toward her period of <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to Rav Pappa:</b> Is <b>there uncertainty that</b> perhaps she is <b>a woman who gave birth to a male,</b> but <b>there</b> is <b>no uncertainty that</b> she might be <b>a woman who gave birth to a female?</b> In fact, both possibilities must be taken into account. And yet, despite the fact that she might have given birth to a female, these seven days are included in the counting of her seven clean days. <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from</b> it that such days <b>are reckoned</b> in the counting? The Gemara comments: Indeed, <b>conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that these days do count.

### Part 7
The Gemara concludes its citation of the <i>baraita</i>: In the case of a woman whose set pattern is that <b>nine days</b> she is <b>impure,</b> i.e., experiences bleeding, <b>and nine days</b> she is <b>pure,</b> she <b>may engage in intercourse</b> with her husband during <b>eight days out of eighteen.</b> The last two days of the nine with blood are part of her <i>ziva</i> period, after which she must observe one clean day, leaving her with eight days when she may engage in intercourse before the cycle begins again.

### Part 8
In the case of a woman whose set pattern is that <b>ten days</b> she is <b>impure and ten days</b> she is <b>pure,</b> the number of <b>days of her</b> being permitted to <b>engage in intercourse</b> with her husband <b>is equivalent to</b> the number of <b>days of her</b> experiencing the flow of <b><i>ziva</i>.</b> In the first seven days she is a menstruating woman, followed by three days of blood that render her a <i>zava</i>. She must count seven of the ten days without blood to be purified from her <i>ziva</i>, which leaves her three days in which she may engage in intercourse, exactly the same as the three days of <i>ziva</i> on which she saw blood. <b>And so too,</b> the same applies in the case <b>of one hundred</b> days, as she experiences bleeding of <i>ziva</i> for ninety-three days, and is subsequently permitted to her husband for ninety-three days, <b>and so too</b> in the case <b>of one thousand</b> days.

### Part 9
end of chapter

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The blood of a menstruating woman and the flesh of a corpse transmit impurity</b> by contact and by carrying when they are <b>moist, and</b> likewise <b>transmit impurity</b> when they are <b>dry. But</b> with regard to <b>the</b> gonorrhea-like <b>discharge of a <i>zav</i> [<i>ziva</i>], and the mucus and the saliva</b> of a <i>zav</i>, <b>and</b> the carcass of <b>a creeping animal, and an animal carcass, and semen,</b> all <b>transmit impurity</b> when they are <b>moist but do not transmit impurity</b> when they are <b>dry. And if one could soak</b> those dry substances in water <b>and</b> thereby <b>restore</b> them <b>to their</b> previous <b>state, they transmit impurity</b> when <b>moist and transmit impurity</b> when <b>dry.</b>

### Part 11
The mishna asks: <b>And how long is the</b> process of <b>soaking these</b> substances that determines whether they can be restored to their previous state? This is referring to soaking them <b>in lukewarm</b> water <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to <b>the flesh of a corpse</b> that is <b>dry and cannot be soaked to restore</b> it <b>to</b> its <b>previous state,</b> it is <b>ritually pure,</b> in the sense that an olive-bulk of the flesh does not transmit impurity imparted by a corpse. But a ladleful of the flesh transmits the impurity of the decayed flesh of a corpse.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the blood of a menstruating woman transmits impurity by contact and by carrying both when moist and when dry. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Ḥizkiyya says:</b> They are derived from a verse, <b>as the verse states</b> with regard to a menstruating woman: “This is the law of him that has an issue…<b>And of her who experiences the flow of her menstrual impurity”</b> (Leviticus 15:32–33). The verse compares the status of the menstrual flow to that of the menstruating woman. This teaches that the status of <b>the menstrual flow is like</b> the status of the woman <b>herself: Just as she transmits impurity</b> by contact and by carrying, <b>so too, the menstrual flow transmits impurity</b> by contact and by carrying.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for the impurity of the menstrual blood when it is <b>moist,</b> since it is called the menstrual flow; <b>from where do we</b> derive that <b>dry</b> menstrual blood also transmits impurity? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says</b> that <b>the verse states</b> with regard to menstrual impurity: “And if a woman should have an issue, and her issue in her flesh <b>shall be</b> blood, she shall be in her impurity seven days, and whoever touches her shall be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 15:19). The term “shall be” indicates that the blood <b>shall</b> remain <b>in its</b> impure <b>status</b> even once it is dry.

### Part 14
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> one may <b>say</b> that <b>this statement</b> applies only <b>to</b> blood that was initially <b>moist and</b> subsequently <b>became dry,</b> as it retains its initial status. With regard to blood that was <b>dry at the outset, from where do we</b> derive that it too transmits impurity? <b>And furthermore,</b> this inference does not provide a source for <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna (21a): In the case of a woman <b>who discharges</b> an item whose shape is <b>similar to a type of shell, similar to a type of soil, similar to a type of hair,</b> or <b>similar to a type of mosquito,</b> if such items are <b>red, she should cast</b> them <b>into water</b> to ascertain their nature. <b>If they dissolved,</b> it is blood, and the woman is <b>impure. From where do we</b> derive that even this type of blood is impure? The Gemara explains: The term <b>“shall be” is an amplification,</b> indicating that menstrual blood in all these forms is impure.

### Part 15
The Gemara objects: <b>If</b> so, one can likewise infer the following: <b>Just as she,</b> a menstruating woman, <b>renders</b> an item designated for <b>lying or sitting</b> impure <b>to</b> the extent that it <b>transmits impurity to a person and</b> to the extent that that person <b>transmits impurity to</b> his <b>garments,</b> despite the fact that the garments did not come into contact with the couch, <b>so too, her blood also renders</b> items designated for <b>lying or sitting</b> impure <b>to</b> the extent that they <b>transmit impurity to a person and</b> to the extent that he <b>transmits impurity to</b> his <b>garments,</b> in the manner of a primary source of ritual impurity. The Gemara replies: <b>Is that to say</b> that the concepts of <b>lying and sitting apply</b> to <b>her</b> menstrual <b>blood?</b> These categories of impurity are limited to people.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to your reasoning</b> that this category of impurity is limited to people, <b>do</b> the concepts of <b>lying and sitting apply</b> to <b>a stone afflicted</b> with leprosy, so <b>that a verse was necessary to exclude</b> it? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a stone afflicted</b> with leprosy <b>should render</b> an item designated for <b>lying or sitting</b> impure <b>to</b> the extent that it <b>transmits impurity to a person and</b> to the extent that he <b>transmits impurity to</b> his <b>garments.</b>

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>And</b> this ruling might be derived by <b>logical inference:</b> If one enters a house where there is a stone afflicted with leprosy he becomes impure, but one who enters a house together with a man who experienced a gonorrhea-like discharge [<i>zav</i>] does not become impure. One may therefore infer as follows: <b>If a <i>zav</i>, who does not transmit impurity by entering</b> a house, nevertheless <b>renders</b> an item designated for <b>lying or sitting</b> impure <b>to</b> the extent that it <b>transmits impurity to a person</b> and to the extent that that person <b>transmits impurity to</b> his <b>garments,</b> then with regard to <b>a stone afflicted</b> with leprosy, <b>which does transmit impurity by entering</b> a house, <b>is it not logical that</b> it <b>renders</b> an item designated for <b>lying or sitting impure to</b> the extent that it <b>transmits impurity to a person</b> and to the extent that he <b>transmits impurity to</b> the <b>garments</b> he is wearing?

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “Every bed upon which the <i>zav</i> lies shall be impure, and every item upon which he sits shall be impure” (Leviticus 15:4). The term <b>“the <i>zav</i>”</b> indicates that only <b>the <i>zav</i>, and not a stone afflicted</b> with leprosy, renders items designated for lying or sitting impure. The Gemara infers from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The reason</b> a stone afflicted with leprosy does not transmit impurity to items designated for lying or sitting is <b>that the verse excluded it, but</b> were it <b>not so,</b> the stone <b>would transmit impurity</b> to items designated for lying or sitting, despite the fact that the concepts of lying and sitting do not apply to a stone.

### Part 19
The Gemara replies that <b>from this</b> same derivation one can infer that menstrual blood does not render items designated for lying or sitting impure: <b>Didn’t you say</b> that the term “the <i>zav</i>” teaches that only <b>the <i>zav</i>, and not a stone afflicted</b> with leprosy, renders items designated for lying or sitting impure? <b>So too,</b> a verse excludes menstrual blood from this category of impurity, as <b>the verse states:</b> “And he if is on the bed, or on any item <b>upon which she sits,</b> when he touches it, he shall be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 15:23). The term “she” indicates that <b>she,</b> the menstruating woman, <b>but not her blood,</b> transmits impurity to items designated for lying or sitting.