
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> A woman <b>who sees</b> a blood <b>stain on her flesh adjacent to</b> her <b>vagina [<i>beit haturpa</i>],</b> i.e., a place where blood that originated in her vagina could be found, <b>becomes ritually impure,</b> as there is a concern that it originated in the uterus and is menstrual blood. <b>And</b> if it was discovered on her flesh in an area <b>not adjacent to</b> her <b>vagina</b> she remains <b>ritually pure,</b> as it certainly did not originate in the uterus. If the stain was discovered <b>on her heel or on the tip of her large toe,</b> although it is not adjacent to her vagina she is <b>ritually impure,</b> as blood from the uterus could have reached there.

### Part 2
In a case where the stain was discovered <b>on her leg or on her feet,</b> if it was <b>on the inner</b> side she is <b>ritually impure,</b> as blood from the uterus could have reached there. If it was <b>on the outer</b> side she is <b>ritually pure, and</b> if it was <b>on the sides,</b> either <b>from here,</b> i.e., on the front of her leg or foot, <b>or from there,</b> i.e., on the back of her leg or foot, she is also <b>ritually pure,</b> as blood from the uterus could not have reached there.

### Part 3
In a case where the woman <b>saw</b> a blood stain <b>on her robe,</b> if it was <b>from the belt and below</b> she is <b>ritually impure,</b> as blood from the uterus could have reached there; if it was <b>from the belt and above</b> she is <b>ritually pure.</b> In a case where <b>she saw</b> the stain <b>on the</b> end of the <b>sleeve of the robe, if</b> the sleeve can <b>reach adjacent to</b> her <b>vagina</b> she is <b>ritually impure; and if not,</b> i.e., if the stain is in a place on the sleeve that does not reach adjacent to the vagina, she is <b>ritually pure.</b>

### Part 4
If it was a robe which <b>she would remove and with which she would cover</b> herself <b>at night, wherever</b> on the robe <b>that the stain is found,</b> the stain renders her <b>ritually impure, due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the robe <b>moves</b> while the woman is asleep and therefore the blood could have originated in the uterus. <b>And likewise with regard to a kerchief [<i>bapoleyos</i>],</b> no matter where the blood is found on the kerchief, the woman is impure.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the cases discussed in the mishna concerning a blood stain found on a woman, <b>Shmuel says:</b> If a woman <b>examined the ground</b> beneath her to see if it was clean from blood and other substances, and she found nothing, <b>and</b> subsequently she <b>sat upon it and</b> then <b>found blood on it,</b> although it might be assumed that this blood came from her, <b>she is ritually pure.</b> The reason is <b>as it is stated:</b> “And her issue <b>in her flesh</b> shall be blood, she shall be in her menstrual state seven days” (Leviticus 15:19). This verse teaches that a woman does not become impure <b>unless she senses,</b> i.e., experiences some type of sensation, <b>in her flesh</b> that she emitted blood from her uterus. Since this woman did not sense an emission of blood, she is pure.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: How can Shmuel interpret the verse in this manner? After all, <b>he requires this</b> term: <b>“In her flesh,”</b> to teach a different <i>halakha</i>, <b>that</b> a woman <b>becomes impure</b> by finding blood <b>inside</b> her body <b>just as</b> by seeing blood <b>outside</b> her body, i.e., provided that the blood is uterine blood, even if it is currently situated inside her vaginal canal, she is impure. The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> if it serves to teach only that blood inside is like blood outside, <b>let the verse say: In the flesh. What</b> is the reason that the verse states: <b>“In her flesh”? Conclude from</b> this term that a woman does not become impure <b>unless she senses in her flesh.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And still,</b> Shmuel <b>requires</b> the term <b>“in her flesh”</b> to teach that she is impure only if the blood touches her flesh, <b>and not</b> through blood found <b>in a gestational sac, nor</b> through blood found <b>in</b> an amorphous <b>piece</b> of tissue that she emitted. The Gemara answers: <b>Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from</b> this verse, as the plain meaning of the term teaches all these <i>halakhot</i>.

### Part 8
With regard to the opinion of Shmuel, the Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a mishna at the beginning of the next chapter (59b): In the case of <b>a woman who is urinating and sees blood</b> intermingled with the urine, <b>Rabbi Meir says: If</b> she urinates while <b>she is standing</b> she is <b>ritually impure,</b> as the blood could have originated in the uterus. <b>And if she is sitting</b> she is <b>ritually pure,</b> as it is clear that the blood is from a wound.

### Part 9
The Gemara analyzes this mishna: <b>What are the circumstances? If she sensed</b> while urinating, then in the case where <b>she is sitting, why is she ritually pure,</b> according to Shmuel? <b>Rather, is it not</b> referring to a case <b>where she did not sense</b> while urinating? <b>And</b> yet the mishna <b>teaches</b> that if she urinates while <b>she is standing</b> she is <b>ritually impure.</b> This indicates that her status does not depend on her sensing, which contradicts the statement of Shmuel.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: This affords no proof, as the mishna is <b>actually</b> referring to a case <b>where she sensed</b> while urinating, <b>and</b> yet since this feeling accompanied urination, one might <b>say</b> it <b>was the sensation of urine.</b> Consequently, if she urinated while <b>standing,</b> the <b>urine would return to</b> her <b>uterus and bring blood</b> with it. <b>But</b> if she urinated while <b>sitting</b> the urine cannot return to the uterus and therefore she is <b>pure,</b> as the sensation is attributed to her urine.

### Part 11
The Gemara further suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the mishna below (58b): With regard to <b>an examination cloth that was placed beneath the pillow and blood was</b> later <b>found on</b> the cloth, and it is unclear whether it is the blood of an examination or the blood of a louse that was crushed beneath it, <b>if</b> the stain is <b>round</b> it is <b>ritually pure.</b> There is no concern that this blood might have come from her examination, as a woman examines through an act of wiping and a stain produced in this manner would not be round. <b>And if</b> the stain is <b>elongated</b> it is <b>ritually impure,</b> as this shape can be formed by an examination.

### Part 12
The Gemara analyzes the mishna: <b>What are the circumstances? If she sensed,</b> then in the case where the stain is <b>round why</b> is it <b>pure? Rather, is it not</b> referring to a case <b>where she did not sense? And</b> yet the mishna <b>teaches</b> that <b>an elongated</b> stain is <b>impure.</b> This contradicts the opinion of Shmuel that a woman is rendered impure only if she sensed.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the mishna is <b>actually</b> referring to a case <b>where she sensed, but</b> since she also performed an examination one might <b>say</b> this <b>was the sensation of the examination cloth.</b> Consequently, if the stain was <b>elongated,</b> as appropriate for a stain produced by an examination, the blood <b>certainly came from her body,</b> whereas if the stain was <b>round</b> it is <b>pure,</b> as this is not the usual appearance of a stain from an examination.

### Part 14
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another mishna (14a): If blood <b>was found on his,</b> i.e., the husband’s, examination cloth following intercourse, the woman and her husband are both <b>ritually impure</b> for seven days, in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> of a menstruating woman and one who engages in intercourse with her, <b>and they are</b> each <b>liable to</b> bring a sin <b>offering</b> for unwittingly performing an action punishable with excision from the World-to-Come [<i>karet</i>]. If blood <b>was found on her</b> cloth <b>immediately</b> after intercourse, the woman and her husband are likewise <b>ritually impure</b> for seven days <b>and are</b> each <b>liable to</b> bring a sin <b>offering.</b> If blood <b>was found on her</b> swatch <b>after time</b> passed, they are both <b>ritually impure due to uncertainty,</b> as it is possible that the blood appeared only after intercourse, <b>and they are exempt from</b> bringing <b>the</b> sin <b>offering.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara analyzes this mishna: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is referring to a situation <b>where she sensed,</b> then in the case where blood was found on her cloth <b>after time</b> passed, <b>why are they exempt from</b> bringing <b>the</b> sin <b>offering? Rather, is it not</b> referring to a case <b>where she did not sense? And</b> yet the mishna <b>teaches</b> that if blood <b>was found on her</b> cloth <b>immediately</b> after intercourse, they are <b>ritually impure</b> for seven days <b>and are</b> each <b>liable to</b> bring a sin <b>offering.</b> Once again, this contradicts the opinion of Shmuel. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the mishna is <b>actually</b> referring to a case <b>where she sensed, but</b> since she was engaging in intercourse at the time, one might <b>say</b> this <b>was the sensation</b> of the male <b>organ.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>You are found</b> to <b>say</b> that there are <b>three uncertainties</b> involving cases where blood is found <b>on a woman</b> or her garments. If a stain is discovered <b>on her flesh</b> and there is <b>uncertainty whether it is impure or pure,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that it is <b>impure.</b> If it is found <b>on her robe</b> and there is <b>uncertainty whether it is impure or pure,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that it is <b>pure. And</b> in the case of a woman whose status as a menstruating woman is uncertain, <b>with regard to</b> her <b>touching</b> items <b>and with regard to</b> her <b>moving</b> items, one should <b>follow the majority.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>Follow the majority,</b> with regard to this woman of uncertain status? Does this <b>not</b> mean that <b>if</b> for <b>the majority of her days</b> she is in a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> as she emits impure blood on many days, then <b>she is</b> considered <b>impure</b> even when her status is uncertain? <b>And</b> since this <i>baraita</i> does not differentiate between cases where she did and did not sense, the ruling that one follows the majority, and that she is impure, evidently applies <b>even though she did not sense,</b> which contradicts the opinion of Shmuel.

### Part 18
The Gemara answers: <b>No</b> proof may be brought from here, as this is what the <i>baraita</i> means: <b>If</b> on <b>the majority of her days</b> this woman <b>sees</b> blood accompanied <b>by a sensation, she is impure,</b> despite the fact that she is uncertain whether she had a sensation, <b>as</b> one can <b>say she sensed</b> on this occasion as well, <b>but</b> it was <b>not on her mind,</b> i.e., she did not pay attention to it at the time.

### Part 19
Before returning to the opinion of Shmuel, the Gemara analyzes the other clauses of this <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> above: If a stain is discovered <b>on her flesh</b> and there is <b>uncertainty whether it is impure or pure,</b> it is <b>impure;</b> if it is found <b>on her robe</b> and there is <b>uncertainty whether it is impure or pure,</b> it is <b>pure.</b> The juxtaposition of these two cases indicates that the blood is found in the same area in both instances.

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> the blood was discovered <b>from the belt and below,</b> then when it was found <b>on her robe why is she pure? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: In a case where the woman saw a blood stain on her robe, if it was <b>from the belt and below</b> she is <b>ritually impure? And if</b> the blood was <b>from the belt and above,</b> then if it was discovered <b>on her flesh why is she impure? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that if <b>she saw blood on her flesh</b> in an area <b>not adjacent to</b> her <b>vagina</b> she remains <b>ritually pure?</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the blood was discovered <b>from the belt and below, and if you wish, say</b> instead that it was found <b>from the belt and above.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the blood was found <b>from the belt and below,</b> as the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a situation where the blood can be attributed to an external factor, <b>e.g.,</b> a case <b>where she passed through a marketplace of butchers [<i>tabbaḥim</i>].</b> Consequently, if the blood is found <b>on her flesh</b> it is assumed that <b>it came from her body, as, if it came from the</b> outside <b>world, it should have been found on her robe</b> as well. If it is discovered <b>on her robe</b> it is assumed that <b>it came from the</b> outside <b>world, as, if it came from her body, it should have been found on her flesh</b> as well.

### Part 22
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the blood was found <b>from the belt and above,</b> and the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a situation where it is possible the blood came from her body, <b>e.g.,</b> a case <b>where she jumped</b> backward. Therefore, if the blood is found <b>on her flesh it certainly came from her body, as, if it came from the</b> outside <b>world, it should have been found on her robe</b> as well. And if it is discovered <b>on her robe</b> the assumption is that <b>it came from</b> the outside <b>world, as, if it came from her body, it should have been found on her flesh</b> as well.

### Part 23
The Gemara raises an objection from the <i>baraita</i> to the opinion of Shmuel: <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that if a stain is discovered <b>on her flesh</b> and there is <b>uncertainty whether it is impure or pure,</b> it is <b>impure, and</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though she did not sense,</b> which contradicts the opinion of Shmuel. <b>And furthermore, we learned</b> in the mishna that a woman <b>who sees</b> a blood <b>stain on her flesh adjacent to</b> her <b>vagina becomes ritually impure, and</b> this is apparently the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though she did not sense. Rav Yirmeya of Difti says:</b> The ruling of Shmuel that a woman must sense in order to be rendered impure applies only by Torah law. But <b>Shmuel concedes that</b> in all the cases cited above, where it is indicated that a woman is impure despite the fact that she did not sense, <b>she is impure</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC