
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to a pregnant woman <b>who experiences</b> labor <b>pains,</b> and they are accompanied by an emission of blood<b>,</b> her status is that of <b>a menstruating woman.</b> If <b>she experienced</b> these <b>pains</b> accompanied by emissions of blood for <b>three</b> consecutive <b>days within the eleven days</b> between periods of menstruation<b>,</b> during which time emissions of blood render a woman a <i>zava</i>, <b>and she rested</b> from labor <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period, i.e.,</b> the pangs subsided<b>, and</b> she then <b>gave birth,</b> it indicates that the emissions were not due to her imminent labor<b>,</b> and <b>this</b> woman <b>is</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> She is considered a <i>zava</i> only if the pangs subsided for a twenty-four-hour period of <b>a night and</b> the following <b>day, like Shabbat evening and its</b> accompanying <b>day.</b> Additionally, she is considered a <i>zava</i> in a case <b>where she rested from the pain</b> of labor <b>but not</b> necessarily <b>from the</b> flow of <b>blood.</b> In other words, the presence of labor pangs determines whether this blood is due to labor or the impure blood of <i>ziva</i>. Accordingly, if the pangs cease for twenty-four hours, she is considered a <i>zava</i> even if blood was discharging continuously from when she experienced her labor pains.

### Part 3
<b>How long</b> before birth <b>is</b> pain attributable to <b>her</b> labor <b>pains,</b> which means that the blood is not considered blood of <i>ziva</i>? <b>Rabbi Meir says: Even forty or fifty days</b> before the birth, any blood she sees during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> is not considered blood of <i>ziva</i>. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>sufficient</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies only from within one <b>month</b> of <b>her</b> due date. <b>Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Shimon say:</b> Labor <b>pains</b> do <b>not</b> occur <b>more than two weeks</b> before birth. Accordingly, if she experiences bleeding for three consecutive days during eleven days of <i>ziva</i> that occur before this time, she is a <i>zava</i>.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that a pregnant woman who experiences an emission of menstrual blood due to labor pains is considered a menstruating woman. This statement apparently applies to all blood due to labor. The Gemara therefore asks: <b>Is this to say that any</b> woman <b>who experiences</b> an emission due to labor <b>pains is a menstruating woman?</b> But if a woman experiences an emission due to labor pains in the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, she is not rendered a <i>zava</i>, nor can this render her a menstruating woman.

### Part 5
<b>Rav said:</b> It is correct that a woman who experiences an emission of blood due to labor during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> is not rendered a <i>zava</i>, or even a lesser <i>zava</i>, who must observe one clean day for the day she experienced an emission. But she is <b>a menstruating woman for</b> one <b>day,</b> i.e., she is prohibited to her husband on the day of the emission, and in the evening she may immerse and become permitted to him. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> It is a rabbinic decree that she must observe a clean day, as <b>we are concerned lest she rest</b> from labor and thereby be rendered a lesser <i>zava</i>, as the cessation of pangs would indicate that her emission was not due to her imminent labor.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> A woman <b>who experiences</b> labor <b>pains</b> during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> <b>is nothing,</b> i.e., she is completely pure and is permitted to her husband. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the mishna that a woman <b>who experiences</b> labor <b>pains</b> is <b>a menstruating woman?</b> This apparently includes all women who experience an emission due to labor, even if it occurs during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said:</b> The mishna means that if she experienced an emission due to labor <b>during the days of menstruation,</b> she is considered <b>a menstruating woman;</b> if she experienced the emission <b>during the days of <i>ziva</i>,</b> she is <b>pure. And it is taught</b> likewise in a <i>baraita</i>: A woman <b>who experiences</b> labor <b>pains during the days of menstruation</b> is a menstruating woman; if she experiences them <b>during the days of <i>ziva</i>,</b> she is <b>pure.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>How</b> so, i.e., when does an emission during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> render a woman one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>? If <b>she experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for <b>one day and</b> then <b>rested</b> from labor for <b>two</b> days, and she experienced an emission on all three days; <b>or</b> if <b>she experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for <b>two</b> days <b>and rested</b> from labor for <b>one day,</b> and she experienced bleeding on all three days; <b>or</b> if <b>she rested</b> from labor for one day <b>and she</b> then <b>experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for one day, <b>and again rested</b> from labor for one day, and she experienced bleeding on all three days; in each of these cases <b>this</b> woman <b>is</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>,</b> as the cessation of labor pains indicates that the emission of blood is not due to her imminent labor.

### Part 9
<b>But</b> if she <b>rested</b> from labor for <b>one day and</b> then <b>experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for <b>two</b> days; <b>or</b> if <b>she rested</b> from labor for <b>two</b> days <b>and experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for <b>one day; or</b> if <b>she experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for one day <b>and</b> then <b>rested</b> from labor for one day, <b>and again experienced</b> labor <b>pains</b> for one day; <b>this</b> woman <b>is not</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>,</b> since the labor pains indicate that the blood is due to her imminent labor. This is <b>the principle of the matter:</b> If she experienced labor <b>pains adjacent to</b> giving <b>birth, this</b> woman <b>is not</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>;</b> if she was <b>resting</b> from labor <b>adjacent to</b> giving <b>birth, this</b> woman <b>is</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Ḥananya, son of Rabbi Yehoshua’s brother, says:</b> In <b>any</b> situation <b>where</b> she experiences an emission due to <b>her</b> labor <b>pains</b> that <b>occur on her third day,</b> she is not a <i>zava</i>. <b>Even</b> if she was in a state <b>of resting</b> from labor for <b>the entire</b> third <b>day,</b> with the exception of one hour of labor pains, <b>this</b> woman <b>is not</b> considered <b>one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>,</b> since a woman is considered to be resting from labor on the third day only if she was resting for the entire day.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: The statement that this is <b>the principle of the matter</b> serves <b>to add what?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to add</b> the ruling <b>of Ḥananya,</b> son of Rabbi Yehoshua’s brother, that for a woman to be considered one who gives birth as a <i>zava</i>, she must have rested from labor for the entire third day.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches that if a woman experiences bleeding due to labor pains during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> she is not considered a <i>zava</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to a <i>zava</i>: “And if a woman has an issue of her blood many days” (Leviticus 15:25). The term <b>“her blood”</b> indicates that only <b>her blood</b> that comes <b>due to herself</b> is impure as blood of <i>ziva</i>, <b>but not</b> blood that comes <b>due to</b> her <b>child.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Do you say</b> the verse excludes blood that comes <b>due to</b> her <b>child? Or</b> is it <b>only</b> excluding blood that comes <b>due to circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control? When</b> the verse <b>states: “And if a woman has an issue of her blood,”</b> the inclusion of <i>ziva</i> due to <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control is</b> already <b>stated</b> in the inclusive phrase: Has an issue. If so, <b>how do I realize</b> the meaning of the term <b>“her blood”?</b> The verse is teaching that only <b>her blood</b> that comes <b>due to herself</b> is impure as blood of <i>ziva</i>, <b>but not</b> blood that comes <b>due to</b> her <b>child.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> given that the verse contains both an inclusion and an exclusion, <b>what did you see to deem pure</b> the blood emitted due to <b>the child, and to deem impure</b> the blood she sees <b>due to circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control?</b> Perhaps the opposite is the case, that blood emitted due to circumstances beyond her control is pure, whereas blood caused by labor is impure. The Gemara answers: <b>I deem pure</b> the blood emitted <b>due to the child, as there is</b> a period of <b>purity after it,</b> i.e., her days of purity following her days of impurity; <b>and I deem impure</b> the blood she sees <b>due to circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control, as there is no</b> period of <b>purity after it.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara objects: <b>On the contrary, I</b> should <b>deem</b> the blood <b>pure in</b> a case where it was emitted due to <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control, as</b> an emission of <i>ziva</i> due <b>to circumstances beyond</b> one’s <b>control</b> in the case <b>of</b> a male <b><i>zav</i> is pure.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Now, in any event, we are dealing with</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a woman, and in</b> the case of <b>a woman we do not find</b> that an emission caused by <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control</b> is pure. It is therefore preferable to deem impure an emission caused by circumstances beyond her control, and to deem pure an emission due to childbirth.

### Part 16
The Gemara adds: <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>What is your opinion, that</b> one should <b>deem</b> the blood <b>pure in</b> a case where it was emitted due to <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control, and deem</b> the blood <b>impure</b> in a case where it was emitted <b>due to the child?</b> But <b>you have no greater</b> instance of <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control than this,</b> the experience of labor pains.

### Part 17
The Gemara objects: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the above verse is interpreted in such a manner, then in the case <b>a menstruating woman as well,</b> with regard to whom the verse states: “And a woman, if she has an issue, and her issue in her flesh is blood, she shall be in her menstruation seven days” (Leviticus 15:19), <b>let us say</b> that when the verse states <b>“her issue”</b> this indicates that only <b>her issue</b> that comes <b>due to herself</b> renders her a menstruating woman, <b>but not</b> an issue that comes <b>due to</b> her <b>child.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Do you say</b> that the verse excludes an issue that comes due to her <b>child? Or</b> is it excluding <b>only</b> an issue that comes due to <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control? When</b> the verse <b>states: “And a woman if she has an issue,”</b> the inclusion of an issue due to <b>circumstances beyond</b> her <b>control is</b> already <b>stated.</b> If so, <b>how do I realize</b> the meaning of the term <b>“her issue”?</b> The verse is teaching that only <b>her issue</b> that comes <b>due to herself</b> renders her a menstruating woman, <b>but not</b> an issue that comes <b>due to</b> her <b>child.</b> If the verse can be interpreted in this manner, why does the <i>baraita</i> teach that a woman who experiences labor pains during the days of menstruation is considered a menstruating woman?

### Part 19
<b>Reish Lakish said:</b> The <b>verse states</b> with regard to the days of purity after childbirth: <b>“She shall observe</b> the blood of purity” (Leviticus 12:5). This indicates that <b>you have another</b> instance of an <b>observance that is like this one,</b> i.e., where the woman is not rendered impure by an emission of blood. <b>And which</b> is <b>this</b> other case? <b>This</b> is the case of blood that is emitted due to labor <b>pains during</b> the eleven <b>days of <i>ziva</i>.</b> An emission during the days of menstruation, by contrast, renders the woman a menstruating woman. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that <b>this</b> other case is where a woman has an emission of blood due to labor <b>pains during the days of menstruation,</b> not where she experiences an emission during the days of <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 20
<b>Rather, Shmuel’s father said</b> the <b>verse states: “And she shall be impure two weeks, as in her menstruation”</b> (Leviticus 12:5), <b>and not: As in her <i>ziva</i>. By inference,</b> one may conclude <b>that</b> there is an instance in which an emission of blood that occurs during <b>her</b> days of <b><i>ziva</i></b> is <b>pure. And which</b> case is <b>this? This</b> is the case of blood that is emitted due to labor <b>pains during</b> the eleven <b>days of <i>ziva</i>.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: <b>And now that it is written: “And she shall be impure two weeks as in her menstruation,” why do I</b> need the term <b>“her blood”</b> (Leviticus 15:25) from which it is likewise derived that blood emitted due to labor pains during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> is pure? The Gemara answers: <b>If not</b> for the term <b>“her blood,” I would say</b> the verse is teaching that a woman who gives birth is impure <b>as in her menstruation, and not as in her <i>ziva</i>, and</b> therefore, <b>even</b> if she experienced bleeding during her days of <i>ziva</i> <b>in</b> a state of <b>resting</b> from labor pains, she remains pure. Consequently, the term “her blood” <b>teaches us</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies only if she experiences bleeding due to labor pains.

### Part 22
§ According to Rav, a woman who emits blood during the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> due to labor pains is considered like a menstruating woman for that day, i.e., she is prohibited to her husband until she immerses in the evening. The Gemara relates that <b>Sheila bar Avina ruled</b> in an actual <b>case in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav.</b> The Gemara further relates that <b>when Rav was dying, he said to Rav Asi: Go</b> and <b>hide</b> this <i>halakha</i>, i.e., inform Sheila bar Avina that my ruling is incorrect. <b>And if he does not listen</b> to you, <b>drag him [<i>garyei</i>]</b> to your side with convincing claims. Rav Asi misheard and <b>thought</b> that Rav <b>said to him <i>gadyei</i>,</b> excommunicate him.

### Part 23
<b>After Rav died,</b> Rav Asi went to Sheila bar Avina and <b>said to him: Retract your</b> ruling, <b>as Rav</b> himself <b>retracted his</b> opinion. Sheila bar Avina <b>said to</b> Rav Asi: <b>If it is so, that he retracted his</b> opinion, <b>he would have told me,</b> as I was his student; he would not have sent a messenger to inform me of such a retraction. Consequently, Sheila bar Avina <b>did not listen</b> to Rav Asi. Rav Asi <b>excommunicated him,</b> as he thought that this was Rav’s instruction. Sheila bar Avina <b>said to</b> Rav Asi: <b>But is the Master not afraid of the fire,</b> i.e., of a punishment for offending me?

### Part 24
Rav Asi <b>said to him,</b> linking in a fanciful manner his own name to the various names of an important <i>tanna</i>: <b>I am Isi ben Yehuda, who is Isi ben Gur Arye, who is Isi ben Gamliel, who is Isi ben Mahalalel,</b> and this name alludes to <b>a copper mortar [<i>asita</i>], over which rot has no power,</b> i.e., no harm will befall me. Sheila bar Avina <b>said to</b> Rav Asi: <b>And I am Sheila bar Avina,</b> and my father’s name alludes to <b>an iron pestle [<i>bukhna</i>], which smashes a copper mortar,</b> i.e., harm may befall you through the merit of my ancestors.

### Part 25
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Asi fell ill</b> and contracted one sickness after another, so that when <b>he entered the heat</b> of a fever, <b>he exited</b> a sickness where he felt <b>cold,</b> and when <b>he entered into</b> a sickness where he felt <b>cold, he exited the heat</b> of a fever. Eventually, <b>Rav Asi died.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC