
### Part 1
It is <b>any</b> woman who is old enough <b>that</b> people <b>call her: Mother [<i>Imma</i>], Mother, and she is not embarrassed. Rabbi Zeira and Rabbi Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak</b> disagree with regard to this matter. <b>One says</b> that the definition is <b>any</b> woman <b>who does not take offense</b> about being called: Mother, Mother. <b>And</b> the other <b>one says</b> that it is <b>any</b> woman <b>who is not embarrassed</b> by this. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the difference between</b> their definitions? The Gemara answers: The practical difference <b>between</b> them is in a case where a woman is <b>embarrassed but she does not take offense</b> when called: Mother.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And how long</b> is a typical menstrual <b>cycle? Reish Lakish says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda Nesia:</b> The <b>average</b> menstrual <b>cycle</b> is <b>thirty days</b> long. <b>And Rava says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda</b> says: It is <b>twenty days.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> they <b>do not disagree.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rav Yehuda Nesia, <b>counts</b> all the days of her cycle, including the <b>days of impurity and days of purity. And</b> the other <b>Sage,</b> Rav Ḥisda, <b>does not count</b> the <b>days of impurity,</b> i.e., the seven days of impurity of a menstruating woman and the three days of the sighting of <i>ziva</i>.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>an elderly woman</b> for <b>whom three</b> typical menstrual <b>cycles</b> of thirty days <b>passed and</b> then <b>she saw</b> a discharge of menstrual blood, <b>her time is sufficient. And</b> if <b>a further three</b> typical menstrual <b>cycles</b> of thirty days <b>passed for her and she</b> subsequently <b>saw</b> a discharge of menstrual blood, <b>her time is sufficient. And</b> if yet <b>a further three</b> typical menstrual <b>cycles</b> of thirty days <b>passed for her and</b> then <b>she saw</b> a discharge of menstrual blood, after this third time <b>she is</b> now <b>like all</b> normal <b>women,</b> and she <b>transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period or from examination to examination.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And it is not necessary</b> to teach this <i>halakha</i> in a case <b>where she</b> experienced the three sightings in <b>even</b> intervals of ninety days, as in such a case it is obvious that she assumes the status of a normal woman who transmits impurity retroactively. <b>Rather, even if she</b> had intervals where she <b>decreased,</b> i.e., experienced bleeding at intervals smaller than that, <b>or even if she increased</b> and experienced bleeding at greater intervals, she still assumes the status of a woman who transmits impurity retroactively.

### Part 5
The Gemara infers: The wording of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Even if she</b> had intervals where she <b>decreased,</b> indicates that <b>it is not necessary</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> in the case of a woman who experienced bleeding at <b>even</b> intervals. This is puzzling, as <b>on the contrary, if she</b> experienced bleeding at <b>even</b> intervals she thereby <b>fixes her</b> menstrual <b>cycle</b> as being every thirty days, <b>and</b> according to Rabbi Dosa (4b) the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>her time is sufficient.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say</b> that this <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who disagree with Rabbi Dosa, as they say</b> that <b>a woman who has</b> a fixed menstrual <b>cycle transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period,</b> then the <i>baraita</i> <b>should have</b> been written in the <b>opposite</b> fashion: <b>Let</b> it <b>say: And</b> the <i>halakha</i> that an elderly woman who sees menstrual blood at intervals returns to the status of normal women and transmits impurity retroactively applies <b>not</b> only to a case where she had intervals where <b>she decreased or increased,</b> i.e., she experienced bleeding less or more than ninety days apart, <b>but</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even</b> if she experienced bleeding at <b>even</b> intervals.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Teach</b> in the <i>baraita</i> in accordance with this altered version: <b>And</b> the <i>halakha</i> applies <b>not</b> only to a case where she had intervals where <b>she decreased or increased, but</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if she experienced bleeding at <b>even</b> intervals. <b>And if you wish say</b> instead that <b>this</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that an elderly woman is retroactively impure does <b>not</b> apply to a case when she saw menstrual blood at <b>even</b> intervals. <b>Rather,</b> it applies only if <b>she decreased or increased,</b> i.e., she experienced bleeding at intervals less or more than ninety days apart. <b>But</b> if she saw blood at <b>even</b> intervals, she thereby <b>fixes</b> a set menstrual <b>cycle</b> of ninety days and her time is sufficient. The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> if so, in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Dosa.</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> With regard to <b>any woman</b> for <b>whom</b> three typical menstrual cycles <b>passed</b> during which she saw no menstrual blood, if she experiences bleeding, her time is sufficient. Rabbi Yosei says: In the case of a pregnant woman and a nursing woman for whom three menstrual cycles passed during which they saw no menstrual blood, if she then saw blood her time is sufficient. Rabbi Eliezer cites a proof for his opinion. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>an incident involving a certain girl in</b> the village of <b>Hitlo who stopped</b> menstruating <b>for three</b> typical menstrual <b>cycles,</b> after which she experienced menstruation. <b>And the matter came before the Sages, and they said</b> that <b>her time is sufficient</b> and she does not transmit impurity retroactively.

### Part 9
The other Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer: Decisions rendered <b>in exigent circumstances are no proof.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> were the <b>exigent circumstances? Some say</b> that <b>it was</b> during the <b>years of famine,</b> and <b>some say</b> that the girl had <b>handled many ritually pure</b> items <b>and the Sages were concerned for the loss</b> of those <b>pure</b> items if they were ruled retroactively impure.

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>an incident</b> in which <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>acted</b> by ruling that the <i>halakha</i> <b>is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer. After he remembered</b> that Rabbi Eliezer’s colleagues disagree with him on this matter and that he had apparently ruled incorrectly, <b>he</b> nevertheless <b>said: Rabbi Eliezer is worthy to rely upon in exigent circumstances.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>After he remembered? If we say</b> that this means <b>after he remembered</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, but in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> if so, <b>how could he act in accordance with</b> Rabbi Eliezer even <b>in exigent circumstances,</b> since the <i>halakha</i> has been decided against him?

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> one must say <b>that</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> had <b>not been stated</b> on this matter, <b>neither in accordance with</b> the opinion of this <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>nor in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that Sage,</b> the Rabbis. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of: <b>After he remembered? After</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>remembered that it was not a lone</b> authority who <b>disagrees with</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>but</b> it was several Sages who <b>disagreed with him,</b> and there is a principle that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of the many over the opinion of an individual, he nevertheless <b>said: Rabbi Eliezer is worthy to rely upon in exigent circumstances.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara continues the discussion of a woman who fails to experience menstruation for three typical menstrual cycles. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a young girl,</b> less than twelve years old, <b>whose time to see</b> the flow of menstrual blood <b>has not arrived and she saw</b> menstrual blood, after the <b>first time her time is sufficient.</b> After the <b>second time,</b> again <b>her time is sufficient.</b> After the <b>third time, she is like all</b> normal adult <b>women, and</b> therefore <b>she transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four<b>-</b>hour <b>period or from examination to examination.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If she then <b>passed three</b> expected menstrual <b>cycles</b> without experiencing bleeding, <b>and</b> then <b>she saw</b> menstrual blood, she returns to the status of a young girl and <b>her time is sufficient. And</b> if it <b>further</b> happens that she again <b>passed three</b> expected menstrual <b>cycles</b> without experiencing bleeding, <b>and</b> then <b>she saw</b> menstrual <b>blood, her time is sufficient. And</b> if she <b>passed three further cycles</b> without experiencing bleeding, and <b>she</b> subsequently <b>saw</b> menstrual <b>blood, she is like all</b> normal adult <b>women.</b> She is considered a woman who experiences regular menstruation at long intervals with breaks of ninety days. <b>And</b> therefore <b>she transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period or from examination to examination.</b>

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>And</b> with regard to a girl <b>whose time to see</b> the flow of menstrual blood <b>has arrived,</b> i.e., she has reached the age of twelve, when she sees menstrual blood for the <b>first time, her time is sufficient.</b> After the <b>second</b> time, <b>she transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period or from examination to examination.</b> If <b>three</b> menstrual <b>cycles</b> then <b>passed</b> without her experiencing bleeding, <b>and</b> afterward <b>she saw</b> menstrual <b>blood, her time is sufficient.</b> This is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, who holds that any woman who passed three expected menstrual cycles without experiencing bleeding is presumed not to be menstruating.

### Part 15
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: If the young girl who had started menstruating <b>passed three</b> expected menstrual <b>cycles</b> without experiencing bleeding and then saw menstrual blood, she returns to the status of a young girl and <b>her time is sufficient.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC