
### Part 1
<b>When the verse was necessary,</b> it was <b>to</b> teach that <i>ziva</i> transmits impurity by <b>carrying.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> yet one may <b>say</b> that <i>ziva</i> <b>transmits impurity</b> to <b>a person and</b> to his <b>garments</b> only <b>by carrying, but</b> as for impurity <b>by contact,</b> although <i>ziva</i> <b>transmits impurity</b> to the <b>person</b> who touches it, <b>it does not transmit impurity</b> to his <b>garments, just as is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to contact</b> with an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass.</b> If one touches a carcass he is rendered impure but his garments remain pure, despite the fact that if one carries a carcass his garments are also rendered impure.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: This could <b>not enter your mind, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b><i>Aḥerim</i> say,</b> with regard to the verse: “This is the law of him that has an issue…And of her who experiences the flow of her menstrual impurity, and <b>of one who emits his issue [<i>zovo</i>], in the case of a male or a female”</b> (Leviticus 15:32–33). The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the impurity of <b>the issue of the <i>zav</i> to</b> the impurity of the <i>zav</i> <b>himself: Just as</b> with regard to <b>him you did not distinguish between</b> impurity transmitted by <b>contact with him and</b> impurity transmitted by <b>carrying him, as</b> in both cases the <i>zav</i> <b>transmits impurity to a person and transmits impurity to</b> his <b>garments, so too,</b> with regard to <b>the issue of the <i>zav</i></b> the <i>halakha</i> is <b>the same.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And now that we have derived</b> the impurity of the discharge of a <i>zav</i> <b>from</b> the verse: “And <b>of one who emits his issue”</b> (Leviticus 15:33), <b>why do I</b> need the verse: “When any man has an issue out of his flesh, <b>his issue,</b> it is <b>impure”</b> (Leviticus 15:2)?

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yehuda of Diskarta said:</b> This verse <b>was necessary,</b> as it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that the case of the <b>scapegoat may prove</b> that the discharge of a <i>zav</i> is not impure, <b>as</b> the scapegoat <b>causes impurity to others and</b> yet the goat <b>itself is pure.</b> Likewise, one might conclude that although the discharge of a <i>zav</i> causes impurity to others, <i>ziva</i> itself is pure. <b>And if</b> one were to dismiss this possibility, <b>due to</b> the verse: “And <b>of one who emits his issue [<i>zovo</i>],</b> in the case of a male or a female” (Leviticus 15:33), one could reply <b>that</b> it does not indicate the impurity of <i>ziva</i>. Rather, <b>it comes to</b> teach the <b>number</b> of emissions by which one becomes impure with the impurity of a <i>zav</i>.

### Part 5
Rav Yehuda of Diskarta clarifies this interpretation of the verse. The term: <b>An issue [<i>zov</i>],</b> would indicate <b>one</b> emission of <i>ziva</i>. Since the verse uses the term <b>“his issue [<i>zovo</i>],”</b> the superfluous addition indicates <b>two</b> emissions of <i>ziva</i>. With regard to these two emissions, the verse states: “In the case of a male,” indicating that the status of a male <i>zav</i> differs from the status of a female <i>zava</i> in that he is not rendered impure if the emission occurred due to an accident, which would render a female impure. <b>But in</b> the case of <b>the third</b> emission of <i>ziva</i> <b>the Merciful One juxtaposed</b> the status of a male <i>zav</i> <b>to</b> that of <b>a female,</b> as the verse states: “Or a female,” indicating that even if the third emission was due to an accident he is nevertheless obligated to bring an offering.

### Part 6
Since one would not have derived the impurity of <i>ziva</i> from this verse, <b>the Merciful One wrote: “His issue,</b> it is <b>impure”</b> (Leviticus 15:2). <b>And now that the Merciful One states: “His issue, it is impure,”</b> one <b>may derive from</b> the verse “and of one who emits his issue” not only the number of emissions, but <b>also this</b> interpretation, that there is no difference between the impurity imparted by <i>ziva</i> by contact and by carrying.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: And the mucus <b>and the saliva</b> of a <i>zav</i> transmit impurity when moist but not when dry. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive the ritual impurity of the <b>saliva</b> of a <i>zav</i>? The Gemara answers that this is derived <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And if</b> one who has an issue <b>spits</b> on the pure person, then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and he is impure until the evening” (Leviticus 15:8). One <b>might</b> have thought that the saliva transmits impurity even if the <i>zav</i> merely spat in the direction of a pure person, <b>despite</b> the fact <b>that it did not</b> come into <b>contact</b> with him. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And if one who has an issue spits <b>on the pure person,”</b> which teaches that <b>unless</b> the saliva comes into <b>contact with the pure person</b> he is not rendered impure.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>his saliva</b> is impure. <b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>his phlegm, his mucus, and his nasal fluids</b> are also impure? <b>The verse states: “And if</b> one who has an issue <b>spits.”</b> The superfluous “and” is an amplification, indicating that these substances also transmit impurity.

### Part 9
<b>The Master said</b> above: One <b>might</b> have thought that the saliva transmits impurity even if the <i>zav</i> merely spat in the direction of a pure person, <b>despite</b> the fact <b>that it did not</b> come into <b>contact</b> with him. The Gemara asks: <b>From where would this be derived?</b> Why would one think that a person becomes impure from saliva that did not come into contact with him, making it necessary for a verse to exclude this possibility?

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: It might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>we should derive</b> a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the term <b>saliva</b> in the verse “and if one who has an issue spits,” and the term <b>saliva</b> stated in connection with <b>a <i>yevama</i>,</b> a widow whose husband died childless and who participates in <i>ḥalitza</i>, as the verse states: “His <i>yevama</i> shall approach him, before the Elders, and remove his shoe from on his foot and spit before him” (Deuteronomy 25:9). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i>, the ritual is valid <b>even though</b> the saliva <b>did not touch</b> her brother-in-law, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the saliva of a <i>zav</i>, it transmits impurity despite the fact <b>that it did not</b> come into <b>contact</b> with the pure person. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that the saliva of a <i>zav</i> transmits impurity only if it comes into contact with the pure person.

### Part 11
The Gemara objects: <b>And</b> yet one <b>may say</b> that <b>this statement,</b> that the saliva of a <i>zav</i> transmits impurity, applies only to transmitting impurity <b>by contact. But</b> with regard to transmitting impurity <b>by carrying</b> it does <b>not</b> transmit impurity, <b>just as is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to</b> the carcass of <b>a creeping animal,</b> which transmits impurity by contact but not by carrying. <b>Reish Lakish said</b> that <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The verse states:</b> “And if one who has an issue spits <b>on the pure person.”</b> The term “on the pure person” is interpreted to mean that in any case where <b>something</b> of the saliva <b>is in the hand of</b> the <b>pure person I deemed</b> him <b>impure for you,</b> even if he did not come into direct contact with the saliva but merely carried it.

### Part 12
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> one may <b>say</b> that although the saliva of a <i>zav</i> transmits impurity both by carrying and by contact, nevertheless there is the following difference between them: <b>By carrying</b> the saliva of a <i>zav</i>, <b>it transmits impurity</b> to <b>a person and</b> to his <b>garments,</b> but <b>by contact,</b> although it <b>transmits impurity</b> to the <b>person</b> who touches it, <b>it does not transmit impurity</b> to his <b>garments, just as is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to contact</b> with an unslaughtered <b>animal carcass.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Reish Lakish said, and so</b> too <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught,</b> that <b>the verse states:</b> “And if one who has an issue spits <b>on the pure person.”</b> The term “on the pure person” teaches that a case of <b>purity,</b> i.e., that <b>which I deemed pure for you in a different case, I have deemed impure for you here. And which</b> case <b>is this? This is</b> referring to <b>contact</b> with <b>an animal carcass,</b> which renders only the one touching it impure, but not his garments, whereas the saliva of a <i>zav</i> renders them both impure.

### Part 14
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that the case deemed pure elsewhere but deemed impure here is that <b>of carrying</b> the carcass of <b>a creeping animal.</b> Perhaps the verse is teaching that whereas a creeping animal does not transmit impurity by carrying, the saliva of a <i>zav</i> does transmit impurity by carrying. By contrast, contact with the saliva of a <i>zav</i> renders only the one touching it impure, but not his garments, as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an animal carcass. The Gemara responds: <b>If that is so, let the verse write:</b> If one who has an issue spits <b>on the person. What</b> is the reason the verse states specifically: <b>“On the pure person”? Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from it,</b> both that the saliva of a <i>zav</i> transmits impurity by carrying and that contact with the saliva renders impure both the person and his garments.

### Part 15
§ The aforementioned <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>And the nasal fluids</b> of a <i>zav</i> also transmit impurity. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are these <b>nasal fluids? Rav says:</b> This is referring to fluids <b>that are emitted via the mouth</b> of a person. They are impure <b>because</b> it is <b>impossible for the nasal fluids</b> to flow through the mouth <b>without</b> containing <b>traces of saliva,</b> which are impure. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>even</b> to fluids <b>that are emitted via the nose. Evidently,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>maintains</b> that nasal fluids <b>are</b> categorized as <b>a flow</b> of bodily fluids, <b>and the Merciful One included it</b> among the impure bodily fluids of a <i>zav</i>, by the amplification: “And if one who has an issue spits.”

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to <b>Rav,</b> who maintains that nasal fluids are impure because they contain traces of saliva, this is difficult: <b>Let</b> the mishna <b>also count</b> among the impure bodily fluids of the <i>zav</i> <b>the tears of his eye, as Rav said: He who desires to blind his eye should have a gentile paint [<i>likhḥol</i>]</b> his eye, as the gentile is apt to add a substance that causes blindness. <b>And Levi said: He who desires to die should have a gentile paint</b> his eye, as the gentile is apt to add poison to the paint.

### Part 17
The Gemara continues: <b>And Rav Ḥiyya bar Gurya said: What is the reasoning of Rav, that he did not say</b> like Levi: <b>He who desires to die</b> should have a gentile paint his eye? Rav did not say this because he maintains one can prevent the poisonous substances from killing him, <b>since he can suck</b> the poisonous substances into his mouth by inhaling <b>and emit them via the mouth.</b> This indicates that the fluids of the eye can also be emitted through the mouth, and if so, the tears of a <i>zav</i> should likewise transmit impurity. The Gemara answers: <b>And Rav</b> would say that <b>although the poison [<i>dezihara</i>]</b> placed in one’s eye can <b>exit</b> the body via the mouth, <b>the tears themselves do not exit</b> the body through the mouth.

### Part 18
The Gemara states: With regard to the above dispute between Rav and Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There are nine</b> types of <b>fluids</b> of <b>the <i>zav</i>. The sweat, the foul secretion</b> from an infected wound, <b>and the excrement are pure from any</b> form of impurity. The <b>tears</b> that emerge <b>from his eye,</b> the <b>blood from his wound, and the milk of a woman</b> who is a <i>zava</i> all <b>transmit the ritual impurity of liquids,</b> i.e., they render food and liquids impure, as other impure liquids do, in a situation <b>where</b> there is at least <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> of the fluid. <b>But his <i>ziva</i>, his saliva, and his urine</b> all <b>transmit a severe</b> form of <b>ritual impurity.</b> The Gemara comments: The <i>baraita</i> lists many substances, <b>and yet it does not teach</b> that <b>nasal fluids</b> are impure.

### Part 19
<b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>does not teach</b> that nasal fluids are impure, <b>as he could not teach it categorically,</b> since <b>sometimes</b> the nasal fluid <b>comes via the mouth,</b> and is impure, <b>and sometimes it comes via the nose,</b> and is not impure. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> that nasal fluids are impure.

### Part 20
The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning, does</b> this <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> that <b>his phlegm and his mucus</b> are impure? <b>Rather, he taught</b> that <b>saliva</b> is impure, <b>and</b> this includes the impurity of <b>all</b> substances <b>that are derived from</b> its <b>amplification,</b> e.g., his phlegm and his mucus. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to nasal fluids, the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>his saliva, and</b> this includes <b>all</b> substances <b>that are derived from</b> its <b>amplification,</b> including nasal fluids.

### Part 21
The <i>baraita</i> teaches that in the case of a <i>zav</i> or <i>zava</i>, the tears of their eyes and the blood from their wounds, as well as the milk of a <i>zava</i>, all transmit the ritual impurity of liquids. The Gemara cites the source for these cases of impurity: <b>The tears of his eye</b> are classified as a liquid, <b>as it is written:</b> “You have fed them with the bread of tears, <b>and given them tears to drink in great measure”</b> (Psalms 80:6). <b>And</b> the <b>blood from his wound</b> is classified as a liquid, <b>as it is written: “And he shall drink the blood of the slain”</b> (Numbers 23:24). Although the verse is referring to the blood of a dead person, and not to the blood of a wound, <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if one <b>killed all of him,</b> and <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if one <b>killed part of him,</b> i.e., wounded him? With regard to the <b>milk of a woman,</b> it too is classified as a liquid, <b>as it is written: “And she opened the bottle of milk, and gave him to drink”</b> (Judges 4:19).

### Part 22
The <i>baraita</i> teaches that the urine of a <i>zav</i> transmits a severe form of ritual impurity, as do his <i>ziva</i> and his saliva. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that the <b>urine</b> of a <i>zav</i> is impure? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “When any man has an issue out of his flesh, <b>his issue,</b> it is <b>impure. And this</b> shall be his impurity” (Leviticus 15:2–3). The term “and this” comes <b>to include his urine with regard to</b> a severe form of <b>ritual impurity.</b> The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>And could this not be</b> derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference? If saliva, which comes from a place of purity,</b> i.e., one’s mouth, whose secretions are not usually impure, is nevertheless <b>impure,</b> then with regard to <b>his urine, which comes</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC