
### Part 1
<b>one grain of dirt</b> in a certain place in the mixture. That grain of dirt is thereby nullified by the dust of the corpse, <b>and</b> consequently <b>the measure</b> of the dust <b>increases.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Rabba said</b> that <b>this is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon:</b> The <i>halakha</i> with regard to a corpse in <b>its ultimate state</b> of dust <b>is like</b> the <i>halakha</i> in <b>its initial state</b> of decomposition: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>its initial state,</b> if <b>another matter</b> is mixed with the decomposing corpse it <b>serves as a nullification [<i>gangilon</i>] of</b> the corpse’s impurity, as the dust of a decomposed corpse can impart impurity only if it is not mingled with the dust of any other substance, <b>so too,</b> in the corpse’s <b>ultimate state</b> of dust, if <b>another matter</b> is mixed with it, that <b>serves as a nullification of</b> the impurity of the dust.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the source for the <i>halakha</i> that the dust of a corpse imparts impurity only if it is not mingled with the dust of any other substance? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Which is a corpse that has</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>dust,</b> i.e., whose dust imparts impurity; <b>and which is a corpse that does not have</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>dust?</b> If a corpse <b>was buried naked in a marble coffin or on a stone floor, that is a corpse that has</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>dust</b> that imparts impurity. Since any dust found there must have come from the corpse, it imparts impurity.

### Part 4
<b>And what is a corpse that does not have</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>dust?</b> If a corpse <b>was buried in its cloak, or in a wooden coffin, or on a brick floor, that is a corpse that does not have</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>dust</b> that imparts impurity, as it is assumed that some of the dust is from particles of the clothes, wood, or bricks, and the dust from a decomposed corpse imparts impurity only if it is not mingled with the dust of any other substance. The <i>baraita</i> adds another <i>halakha</i> with regard to the impurity of the dust of a corpse: <b>And</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that the <b>dust</b> of a corpse is impure <b>only with regard to</b> the corpse of a person who <b>died</b> naturally, <b>excluding one who was killed, whose</b> dust <b>is not</b> impure.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara returns to discuss <b>the</b> matter <b>itself,</b> i.e., the <i>baraita</i> cited above that clarifies the opinion of Rabbi Shimon: In the case of <b>a ladleful of dust</b> from a corpse <b>into which any amount of dirt fell,</b> the house <b>is impure; and Rabbi Shimon deems</b> it <b>pure.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: In the case of <b>a ladleful of dust</b> from a corpse <b>that was scattered in the house, the house is impure.</b> Provided that there is a sufficient amount of dust in the house, the house is impure, even if the dust is scattered. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems</b> it <b>pure.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>And it is necessary</b> for the <i>baraita</i> to state both of these <i>halakhot</i>. <b>As, if</b> the <i>baraita</i> had <b>taught us</b> only <b>the first</b> <i>halakha</i>, with regard to dust from a corpse in which dirt was mixed, one might have thought that it is specifically <b>in that</b> case that <b>the Rabbis say</b> the house is impure, <b>because</b> the dust is <b>concentrated</b> in one place; <b>but</b> if the dust <b>was scattered,</b> one might <b>say</b> that the Rabbis <b>concede to Rabbi Shimon that</b> the house is pure. The reasoning is <b>that</b> if an item <b>overlies</b> a collection of dust of a corpse that is insufficient to render it impure <b>and also overlies</b> another collection of similar size, where together these collections constitute a sufficient amount to render the item and everything under it impure, it <b>is not</b> impure.

### Part 7
<b>And if</b> the <i>baraita</i> had <b>taught us</b> the <i>halakha</i> only <b>with regard to this</b> second case, where the dust of the corpse was scattered, one might have thought that it is specifically <b>in this</b> case that <b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> that the house is pure, <b>as</b> an item that <b>overlies</b> an insufficient collection of the dust of a corpse <b>and also overlies</b> another collection, where together these collections constitute a sufficient amount to render the item impure, <b>is not</b> impure. <b>But in that</b> first case, where dirt was mixed with the dust of the corpse, one might <b>say</b> that Rabbi Shimon <b>concedes to the Rabbis</b> that the house is impure. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> for the <i>baraita</i> to teach both cases.

### Part 8
There is a different dispute between Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis that <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> mishna (<i>Oholot</i> 2:2): If a house contains <b>a ladleful of dirt from a cemetery and</b> slightly <b>more,</b> the house <b>is impure; and Rabbi Shimon deems</b> it <b>pure.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the Rabbis?</b> The Gemara answers: They deem the house impure <b>as it is impossible for</b> slightly <b>more than a ladleful of dirt from a cemetery not to contain a ladleful of dust</b> from a corpse.

### Part 9
§ The Gemara asks: <b>Now that you say</b> that <b>the reason that Rabbi Shimon</b> deems the house pure, in a case where it contains dust from a corpse in which dirt was mixed, is <b>that</b> in his opinion the <i>halakha</i> of a corpse in <b>its ultimate state</b> of dust <b>is like</b> the <i>halakha</i> in <b>its initial state</b> of decomposition, then <b>with regard to</b> a case where there is <b>an afterbirth</b> in the house, <b>what is the reason</b> that Rabbi Shimon deems the house pure? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The Sages <b>touched upon it,</b> i.e., deemed the house pure, <b>due to</b> the <b>nullification</b> of the disintegrated offspring <b>by</b> the <b>majority</b> of the blood that emerged during the miscarriage, in which the afterbirth was mixed.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan follows his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> in this regard, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> both <b>said the same thing,</b> i.e., they both issued rulings based on the same principle. The relevant statement of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> is <b>that which we said,</b> i.e., that if a woman discharged an afterbirth the house is pure, as the offspring is nullified by the blood that emerged during the miscarriage. <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> ben Ya’akov said that <b>which is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 21a): <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> In the case of <b>a large animal that expelled a mass of</b> congealed <b>blood, that</b> mass <b>must be buried,</b> as perhaps there was a male fetus there, which was consecrated as a firstborn when it emerged, <b>and</b> the animal <b>is exempt from</b> having any future offspring being counted <b>a firstborn.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to that</b> <i>halakha</i>: The mass of congealed blood <b>does not impart ritual impurity, neither through</b> physical <b>contact nor through carrying</b> it. It does not have the status of an unslaughtered animal carcass, which does impart impurity in such manners. The Gemara asks: <b>But since</b> the mass <b>does not impart impurity, neither through contact nor through carrying,</b> which indicates that it is not considered a fetus, <b>why</b> must it be <b>buried?</b> The Gemara answers: It must be buried <b>in order to publicize that</b> the animal <b>is exempt from</b> having its future offspring being counted <b>a firstborn.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: If the animal’s subsequent offspring is not counted a firstborn, <b>evidently</b> the mass <b>is</b> treated like <b>a full-fledged offspring. But</b> if so, <b>why does Rabbi Ḥiyya teach</b> that <b>it does not impart impurity, neither through</b> physical <b>contact nor through carrying? Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>due to</b> the halakhic <b>nullification</b> of a foreign substance <b>in a majority</b> of permitted substances that the Sages <b>touched upon it,</b> to exclude it from impurity through contact or carrying. In other words, the fetus is considered a full-fledged offspring, but it does not impart impurity, because it is nullified by the rest of the congealed mass.

### Part 13
§ The Gemara resumes its discussion of the opinion of Rabbi Shimon that if a woman discharges an afterbirth in a house, the house is pure. <b>Rabbi Ami says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And Rabbi Shimon concedes that its mother is impure</b> with the impurity of a woman after <b>childbirth.</b>

### Part 14
<b>A certain elder said to Rabbi Ami: I will explain to you the reason</b> for the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan. As the verse states: “If a woman bears seed and gives birth to a male,</b> she shall be impure seven days, as in the days of the menstruation of her sickness she shall be impure” (Leviticus 12:2). This indicates that <b>even</b> if a woman <b>gives birth to</b> an offspring that is <b>similar only to the seed that she bore,</b> i.e., if the offspring liquefied and became similar to semen, the woman is <b>impure</b> with the impurity of a woman after <b>childbirth.</b>

### Part 15
§ <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> In the case of a fetus in <b>a gestational sac, that was mashed in its</b> amniotic <b>fluid</b> by being shaken violently, <b>it is rendered like a corpse that was deformed,</b> and therefore it does not impart impurity to other items that are under the same roof.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to Reish Lakish: From where do we</b> derive <b>that a corpse that was deformed is pure? If we say</b> it is derived <b>from that which Rabbi Shabbtai says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak from Migdal [<i>Migdala’a</i>] says, and some say</b> from that which <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak from Migdal says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shabbtai says,</b> that cannot be correct. The Gemara cites the relevant statement: With regard to <b>a corpse that was burned but its form [<i>veshildo</i>]</b> still <b>exists,</b> i.e., it still has the form of a human corpse, it <b>is impure. There was an incident</b> involving such a corpse, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>deemed impure</b> all items that were under the <b>large openings</b> of the house where the corpse was located, as these openings were fit for the removal of the corpse from the house through them.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC