
### Part 1
as with regard to blood emitted while experiencing <b>labor</b> pain <b>close to</b> the time of a proper <b>birth, the Merciful One deems it pure,</b> and it should not be treated as the blood of a <i>zava</i>. <b>Rav Pappi says:</b> The miscarriage is not considered a proper birth and therefore her blood is considered the blood of a <i>zava</i>. And <b>leave</b> aside the first <i>baraita</i> and do not raise a contradiction from it, as the <i>halakha</i> that a woman who sees menstrual blood is retroactively impure <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period,</b> which is the topic under discussion in that <i>baraita</i>, applies <b>by rabbinic law,</b> and they did not impose this stringency in the case of a woman who miscarries.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Pappa says: That reason</b> for the <i>halakha</i> that a pregnant woman is not retroactively impure when she experiences bleeding is <b>only because her head and limbs</b> feel <b>heavy to her.</b> Her physical state is compromised, which also causes her regular menstrual cycle to cease. <b>Here, too,</b> in the case of a pregnancy that precedes a miscarriage, even if it is not considered a proper birth, <b>her head and limbs</b> felt <b>heavy to her</b> during her pregnancy, and therefore it can be assumed that she did not experience a prior menstrual flow.

### Part 3
With regard to the mishna’s ruling that the time of a pregnant woman is sufficient, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya asked Rabbi Zeira:</b> If <b>she saw</b> blood <b>and</b> only <b>afterward her fetus became known</b> to all who see her, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? One can claim that <b>since at the time when she saw</b> the blood <b>her fetus was not</b> yet <b>known,</b> therefore she <b>becomes impure; or perhaps, since she saw</b> blood <b>in close</b> proximity <b>to</b> the time that her fetus became known, she does <b>not become impure.</b>

### Part 4
Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: That reason</b> for the <i>halakha</i> that a pregnant woman’s time is sufficient is <b>only because her head and limbs</b> feel <b>heavy to her.</b> In this case, where she was yet unaware of her pregnancy <b>at the time when she saw</b> her menstrual flow, <b>neither her head nor her limbs</b> felt <b>heavy to her.</b> Therefore she is impure retroactively, like any other woman.

### Part 5
§ <b>A certain elder asked Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> If the <b>time</b> of a woman’s fixed menstrual <b>cycle arrived during her pregnancy and she did not perform an examination, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>I raise</b> this <b>dilemma</b> only <b>according to</b> the opinion <b>of the one who said</b> that the obligation for a woman to perform a self-examination during her fixed menstrual <b>cycle</b> applies <b>by Torah law. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? According to that opinion, one can claim that <b>since</b> the obligation of an examination during one’s fixed menstrual <b>cycle</b> is <b>by Torah law,</b> she is <b>required</b> to perform <b>an examination</b> even during her pregnancy. <b>Or perhaps, since her blood has stopped,</b> as a pregnant woman generally does not experience a flow of menstrual blood, she is <b>not required</b> to perform <b>an examination.</b>

### Part 6
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: You learned</b> the answer to your dilemma from a mishna (39a): <b>Rabbi Meir says: If</b> a woman <b>was in hiding</b> from danger, <b>and the time of her</b> fixed menstrual <b>cycle came and she did not examine</b> herself, nevertheless she is <b>ritually pure, as</b> it may be assumed that she did not experience bleeding because <b>fear dispels</b> the flow of menstrual <b>blood.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan explains the proof: The <b>reason</b> she is pure is <b>that there is fear,</b> from which it may be inferred that in a case where <b>there is no fear and the time of her</b> fixed menstrual <b>cycle arrived and she did not examine</b> herself, she would be <b>impure.</b>

### Part 7
Rabbi Yoḥanan concludes: <b>Evidently,</b> from the fact that Rabbi Meir rules that a woman is impure if the time of her period passed without a proper examination, he maintains that the obligation for a woman to perform an examination at the time of her fixed menstrual <b>cycle</b> applies <b>by Torah law. And,</b> nevertheless, <b>since there is fear, her blood has stopped and</b> she is <b>not required</b> to perform <b>an examination. Here, too,</b> in the case of a pregnant woman, <b>her blood has stopped and</b> therefore she is <b>not required</b> to perform <b>an examination.</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: The time of <b>a nursing woman</b> is sufficient <b>until she weans</b> her child from nursing. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (see <i>Tosefta</i> 2:1): With regard to <b>a nursing woman whose child dies within twenty-four months</b> of his birth, <b>she is like all</b> other <b>women</b> with regard to her impurity status after seeing menstrual blood, <b>and</b> therefore <b>she transmits ritual impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period or from examination to examination. Therefore, if</b> a woman <b>continued to nurse</b> her child <b>for four or five years, her time is sufficient</b> and she does not retroactively transmit impurity for the entire four or five years. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Shimon</b> all <b>say:</b> With regard to nursing women, <b>their time is sufficient</b> for <b>an entire twenty-four months. Therefore, if she nursed him for four or five years,</b> then after the first twenty-four months have passed, <b>she transmits ritual impurity</b> retroactively <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period or from examination to examination.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara discusses the reasoning of each opinion: <b>When</b> you analyze the matter <b>you will find</b> that one must <b>say that according to the statement of Rabbi Meir</b> the case is that menstrual <b>blood spoils and becomes milk.</b> Therefore, it follows that this status continues for as long as she is nursing. By contrast, <b>according to the statement of Rabbi Yosei and Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon, her limbs become dislocated and her spirit,</b> i.e., her full strength and her regular menstrual cycle, <b>does not return</b> to her <b>until twenty-four months</b> have passed.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the statement <b>of Rabbi Meir: Therefore,</b> if a woman continued to nurse her child for four or five years, her time is sufficient? Since his reasoning is that the menstrual blood of a nursing woman spoils and becomes milk, it is obvious that this applies as long as she continues to nurse him. The Gemara answers: This statement is indeed extraneous. It merely serves to form a parallel between the statement of Rabbi Meir and that of the other Sages. In other words, it was appended <b>due to</b> the statement: <b>Therefore,</b> if she was nursing him for four or five years, then after the first twenty-four months have passed, she transmits ritual impurity retroactively for a twenty-four-hour period or from examination to examination, which is referring to the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara further asks: <b>And why do I</b> need the statement: <b>Therefore,</b> if she was nursing him for four or five years, then after the first twenty-four months have passed, she transmits ritual impurity retroactively for a twenty-four-hour period or from examination to examination, which is referring to the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei?</b> The Gemara explains that this clause is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that there are <b>two</b> reasons that a pregnant woman’s time is sufficient, both because her blood spoils and because her limbs become dislocated. Therefore, the additional clause <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Yosei maintains that the reason is only that her limbs become dislocated, and consequently she transmits retroactive impurity after twenty-four months.

### Part 13
<b>That</b> explanation <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Menstrual <b>blood spoils and becomes milk;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosei says: Her limbs become dislocated and her spirit does not return to her until twenty-four months</b> have passed. The Gemara analyzes their respective reasons. <b>Rabbi Ilai says: What is the reason of Rabbi Meir?</b> It is based upon a verse, <b>as it is written: “Who can bring a pure thing out of an impure?</b> Is it <b>not the One?”</b> (Job 14:4). In other words, is it not true that the One, i.e., God, can bring a pure thing, such as milk, out of an impure thing, such as menstrual blood?

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And the</b> other <b>Sages,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yosei, Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon, how do they interpret this verse? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that according to those Sages <b>this</b> verse is referring to <b>semen, which is impure, and</b> yet <b>the person that is formed from it is pure.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And Rabbi Elazar says:</b> Those Sages maintain that this verse is referring to <b>the water of sprinkling,</b> i.e., the purification water mixed with the ashes of the red heifer. <b>As</b> the individual who <b>sprinkles</b> the water and the one <b>upon whom</b> the water is <b>sprinkled</b> are both <b>pure, and</b> yet one who <b>touches</b> the purification water is rendered <b>impure.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is</b> the <b>one who sprinkles</b> the water actually <b>pure? But isn’t it written: “He who sprinkles the water of sprinkling will wash his clothes,</b> and he who touches the water of sprinkling will be impure until evening” (Numbers 19:21)? The Gemara responds: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>“He who sprinkles”?</b> It means: <b>He who touches.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But it is written: “He who sprinkles,” and it is written</b> in the same verse: “And <b>he who touches.”</b> How can these two terms be referring to the same individual? <b>And furthermore,</b> that verse states that <b>one who sprinkles requires</b> the <b>washing</b> of his <b>clothes,</b> indicating a severe level of impurity, whereas <b>one who touches does not require</b> the <b>washing</b> of his <b>clothes.</b> Evidently, the phrase “he who sprinkles” is not referring to one who touches. <b>Rather,</b> the Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>“He who sprinkles”?</b> This is referring to <b>one who carries</b> the purification waters.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>let</b> the Torah <b>write</b> explicitly: <b>One who carries.</b> Why does it state “he who sprinkles” when it is referring to carrying? The Gemara answers: The use of the term sprinkling in reference to carrying <b>teaches us</b> that one becomes impure <b>only by carrying</b> the <b>measure</b> required for <b>sprinkling.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling requires</b> a minimum <b>measure</b> of water. <b>But according to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling does not require</b> a minimum <b>measure</b> of water, <b>what can be said?</b> According to this opinion, there is apparently no concept of a measure required for sprinkling.

### Part 18
The Gemara answers: <b>Even according to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling does not require</b> a minimum <b>measure</b> of water, <b>that statement</b> applies only to the measure of purification water that must be sprinkled <b>onto the back,</b> i.e., onto the body, <b>of</b> the impure <b>man.</b> In this regard, any amount will suffice. <b>But with regard to the vessel</b> into which one dips the hyssop in order to sprinkle the water, it <b>requires</b> a certain <b>measure</b> of water. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Para</i> 12:5): <b>How much</b> water must <b>be in</b> the vessel so that it <b>will be enough for sprinkling?</b> It must be <b>enough to dip the tops of the stems</b> of the hyssop branch, used in the rite of purification, into the water <b>and sprinkle</b> it.

### Part 19
The Gemara concludes the discussion of the purification waters with the following observation: <b>And that is</b> the meaning of that <b>which</b> King <b>Solomon said: “I said I would become wise, but it eludes me”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:23). According to tradition, even Solomon in his great wisdom could not understand the contradictory nature of the sprinkling of purification water, as it renders an impure person pure, and a pure person impure.

### Part 20
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Who is</b> the woman characterized as <b>an elderly woman</b> in this context? It is <b>any</b> woman for <b>whom three</b> typical menstrual <b>cycles</b> of thirty days <b>passed</b> at a stage of her life <b>close to her old age,</b> during which she saw no menstrual blood. The Gemara asks: <b>What is considered close to old age? Rav Yehuda says: Any</b> woman <b>about whom her friends say</b> that <b>she is an elderly woman. And Rabbi Shimon says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC