
### Part 1
mishna With regard to <b>a grown woman who waited twelve months</b> after her betrothal and the time arrived for her betrothed to marry her, <b>or a widow</b> who waited <b>thirty days</b> and the time arrived for her betrothed to marry her, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Since her husband is</b> already <b>obligated</b> to provide <b>for her sustenance,</b> as he is obligated to have married her by then, <b>he can nullify</b> her vows by himself, as if he were fully married to her. <b>But the Rabbis say: The husband does not nullify</b> her vows on his own <b>until she enters his jurisdiction.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabba says: Rabbi Eliezer and the initial</b> version of the <b>mishna said the same thing, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 57a): <b>A virgin is given twelve months</b> from the time of her betrothal <b>to prepare herself,</b> i.e., to prepare her trousseau. If the end of the <b>twelve-month</b> period <b>arrived,</b> even if he has not married her, she <b>partakes of his food,</b> i.e., he is obligated to provide for her. <b>And</b> if she was betrothed to a priest, <b>she partakes of <i>teruma</i></b> like a priest’s wife. <b>However, a man,</b> i.e., a priest, <b>whose married brother died childless [<i>yavam</i>], does not enable</b> the woman awaiting levirate marriage to him <b>to partake of <i>teruma</i></b> until they are actually married.

### Part 3
If the woman <b>completed six months</b> of awaiting marriage <b>under the aegis of the husband,</b> and he died, <b>and</b> then she completed <b>six months under the aegis of the <i>yavam</i>; or even</b> if she <b>completed all of those</b> months <b>under the aegis of the husband, less one day; or all of them under the aegis of the <i>yavam</i> less one day, she may not partake of <i>teruma</i>. This is</b> the <b>initial</b> version of the <b>mishna.</b> However, <b>a court</b> that convened <b>after them,</b> in a later generation, said: <b>The woman may not partake of <i>teruma</i> until she enters the</b> marriage <b>canopy,</b> thereby finalizing the marriage. Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion that her husband can nullify her vows after the completion of the period allotted after the betrothal follows the initial version, which requires the husband to support her from that point forward.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to him: Perhaps it is not so. The initial</b> version of the <b>mishna teaches us only about</b> the permissibility of her <b>partaking of <i>teruma</i></b> whose status is <b>by rabbinic law, but</b> with regard to <b>vows,</b> whose prohibitions have the force of <b>Torah law, say</b> that her betrothed <b>cannot</b> nullify them.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> perhaps <b>you did not hear Rabbi Eliezer</b> state his opinion that a betrothed woman is regarded as married <b>only with regard to vows.</b> Perhaps Rabbi Eliezer holds <b>like that</b> which <b>Rav Pineḥas</b> said <b>in the name of Rava, who said: Any</b> woman <b>who takes a vow, takes a vow</b> contingent <b>upon the consent of her husband,</b> since he provides her sustenance. Perhaps Rabbi Eliezer grants her betrothed authority over her vows only because she vows with his consent in mind, since he is now obligated to provide for her. <b>But</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> Rabbi Eliezer might hold that <b>even</b> if it is <b><i>teruma</i> by rabbinic law, she may not partake</b> of it.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC