
### Part 1
<b>if he shaves upon</b> bringing <b>one of the three</b> offerings that a nazirite must bring when completing his term as a nazirite, i.e., a burnt-offering, a sin-offering, and a peace-offering, <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation to shave and the restrictions of a nazirite are lifted, <b>he</b> therefore <b>does not violate</b> the prohibition: <b>You shall not delay,</b> for delaying the other offerings. Consequently, <b>it teaches us</b> that the prohibition against delaying applies to these offerings.

### Part 2
<b>And if you wish say: What is the novelty</b> of the nazirite? The <i>halakha</i> of naziriteship is considered a novelty <b>because</b> the offerings of a nazirite <b>cannot be accepted through a vow. And that which</b> poses <b>a difficulty for you</b> based on the fact that one cannot accept upon himself <b>a sin-offering of forbidden fat</b> through a vow either, and nevertheless the prohibition against delaying applies, can be resolved. <b>A sin-offering of forbidden fat comes for</b> the purpose of <b>atonement,</b> and therefore if one delays bringing it he violates the prohibition against delaying. However, <b>for what does the sin-offering of a nazirite come?</b> Since it does not come to atone for a sin, one might have thought that the prohibition against delaying does not apply.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> there is the precedent of <b>the sin-offering of a woman who gave birth, which</b> also <b>does not come for</b> the purpose of <b>atonement, and</b> yet if she does not bring the offering on time she still <b>transgresses due to</b> the prohibition: <b>You shall not delay.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> sin-offering of a woman who gave birth <b>permits</b> the woman <b>to eat consecrated food.</b> Although it does not come to effect atonement, it does come to permit a matter. On the other hand, the sin-offering of a nazirite does not permit anything, and therefore the fact that one cannot accept upon himself an obligation to bring this offering is a novelty. Consequently, it was necessary for there to be a separate source to indicate that one is liable for violating the prohibition against delaying in the case of this offering.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>vows, a father may nullify the vows of his daughter and a husband may nullify the vows of his wife, so too,</b> with regard to <b>nazirite</b> vows, <b>a father may nullify the nazirite</b> vows <b>of his daughter and a husband may nullify the nazirite</b> vows <b>of his wife.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>the juxtaposition</b> in the verse to teach us this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Let</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>come through</b> the method of analogy known as: <b>What do we find, from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>vows.</b> In other words, the <i>halakha</i> in the case of regular vows should serve as a legal precedent that can be applied to nazirite vows even without a biblical juxtaposition.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: If not for the juxtaposition, one might have said that <b>perhaps</b> it is only <b>with regard to vows that he may nullify</b> her statements <b>because there is no</b> time <b>limit</b> with regard to vows, <b>but with regard to naziriteship, which has a</b> time <b>limit, as unspecified naziriteship is</b> for <b>thirty days,</b> one might <b>say no,</b> he may not nullify her vows. Therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> through juxtaposition that he may nevertheless nullify her vows.

### Part 6
§ It is taught in the mishna with regard to <b>one who says to his fellow: I am avowed</b> from you, or another intimation of a vow, that the vow takes effect. <b>Shmuel said: In all</b> these cases, the vow does not take effect <b>until he says:</b> I am avowed from you with regard to <b>that</b> which <b>I eat</b> of <b>yours,</b> or: <b>That</b> which <b>I taste</b> of <b>yours.</b> Without this addition, the statement: I am avowed from you, is not considered even an intimation of a vow.

### Part 7
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on the following <i>baraita</i>: If one says: <b>I am avowed from you,</b> or: <b>I am separated from you,</b> or: <b>I am distanced from you, he is prohibited</b> from benefiting from that individual. If he says: <b>That</b> which <b>I eat</b> of <b>yours,</b> or: <b>That</b> which <b>I taste</b> of <b>yours, he is prohibited</b> from eating or tasting that individual’s food. This indicates that the phrases mentioned in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i> take effect as vows even if he does not add the phrases mentioned in the latter clause. The Gemara answers: <b>This is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said</b> i.e., if one says: I am avowed from you, or the like, the vow takes effect? It is <b>in</b> a case of <b>one who says: That</b> which <b>I eat</b> of <b>yours,</b> or: <b>That</b> which <b>I taste</b> of <b>yours.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in <b>the opposite</b> order? If one says: <b>That</b> which <b>I eat</b> of <b>yours,</b> or: <b>That</b> which <b>I taste</b> of <b>yours, he is prohibited</b> from eating or tasting that individual’s food, i.e., the vow takes effect. If he says: <b>I am avowed from you, or: I am separated from you,</b> or: <b>I am distanced from you, he is</b> likewise <b>prohibited.</b> In this case, the <i>baraita</i> cannot be interpreted as explained above, and it appears that if one said: I am avowed from you, the vow takes effect even if he did not say: I am avowed from you with regard to that which I taste of yours. The Gemara answers: <b>Teach</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>as follows:</b> The vow takes effect in the cases mentioned in the first clause when <b>he already said: I am avowed.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, this is</b> the same as <b>the first</b> <i>baraita</i> cited above. <b>And furthermore,</b> if the vow takes effect only if he combined the statements mentioned in the first and latter clauses of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>why does</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach</b> that he is <b>prohibited</b> in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i> and then repeat that he is <b>prohibited</b> in the second clause of the <i>baraita</i>? The repetition of this ruling indicates that these are two separate cases.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Shmuel</b> actually <b>said</b> as follows: <b>The reason is</b> that <b>he said:</b> I am avowed from you with regard to <b>that</b> which <b>I eat</b> of <b>yours,</b> or with regard to <b>that</b> which <b>I taste</b> of <b>yours;</b> it is for this reason <b>that he is prohibited</b> from benefiting from his fellow, <b>and his fellow is permitted</b> to benefit from him, as this formulation indicates that he is applying his vow only to himself.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC