
### Part 1
<b>And it is the man,</b> her husband, <b>whose field was flooded.</b> In other words, like one whose field was flooded and destroyed, it is he who has suffered a natural disaster, as it is his status as a priest that forces him to divorce his wife. Therefore, she is entitled to receive payment of her marriage contract. <b>And we said to</b> Rava, in response to his question: The answer to your question <b>is</b> found in <b>the mishna,</b> which states: A woman <b>who says</b> to her husband: <b>I am defiled to you,</b> is entitled to <b>receive</b> payment of her <b>marriage contract.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the mishna: <b>With what are we dealing? If we say</b> the mishna is speaking <b>of the wife of an Israelite,</b> consider the following: <b>If</b> she claims that she engaged in sexual intercourse <b>willingly, does she have any</b> right to receive payment of her <b>marriage contract? And if</b> she says it was <b>by force,</b> i.e., she was raped, <b>is she</b> thereby <b>forbidden to the man,</b> i.e., her husband? <b>But rather,</b> the mishna must be referring to <b>the wife of a priest.</b> Again, what are the circumstances? <b>If</b> she claims that she engaged in sexual intercourse <b>willingly, does she have any</b> right to receive payment of her <b>marriage contract? Is her</b> law <b>any less</b> stringent <b>than</b> that of <b>the wife of an Israelite</b> who <b>willingly</b> engaged in sexual intercourse with another man? <b>Rather, is it not</b> that the sexual intercourse was <b>by force? And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>she has</b> a right to receive payment of her <b>marriage contract.</b> This answers Rava’s question.

### Part 3
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If a woman <b>said to her husband: You divorced me, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is she believed or not? <b>Rav Hamnuna said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an answer to this question from what is stated in the mishna about a woman <b>who says: I am defiled to you, that even according to the ultimate</b> version of the <b>mishna that teaches</b> that <b>she is not believed</b> in her claim, it may be argued that <b>it is</b> only <b>there that she is</b> suspected of <b>lying</b> when she claims to have been defiled, <b>as she knows that her husband does not know</b> the truth <b>about her.</b> She is relating an incident that supposedly occurred in his absence. <b>But concerning</b> the claim: <b>You divorced me, with regard to which he knows</b> the truth <b>about</b> whether or not he actually divorced <b>her,</b> she <b>is believed.</b> Why? <b>Because</b> the court relies on the <b>presumption that a woman is not brazen</b> enough to lie <b>in the presence of her husband</b> and present a claim that he knows is patently false.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said to him: On the contrary, even according to the initial</b> version of the <b>mishna that teaches</b> that the woman <b>is believed</b> in her claim that she is defiled to her husband, it may be argued that it is only <b>there</b> that she is believed, <b>because</b> a woman <b>would not demean herself</b> by claiming she was raped if she were not telling the truth. <b>But here, where it is sometimes hard for her under</b> the authority of <b>the man,</b> i.e., her husband, <b>she would be brazen</b> to his face, and therefore the court does not believe her.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Mesharshiyya raised an objection:</b> Let the ruling <b>of</b> the <b>initial</b> version of the <b>mishna,</b> with regard to a woman who says: <b>Heaven is between me and you,</b> be a <b>conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rava,</b> as <b>here she</b> suffers <b>no embarrassment</b> on account of her claim, <b>and</b> yet the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches that</b> she <b>is believed.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rava maintains</b> that <b>there, since it is not sufficient for her</b> if she does <b>not state</b> in precise detail her claim that <b>he does not shoot like an arrow,</b> i.e., his semen is not emitted forcefully, then, <b>were it not as she said, she would not say it.</b> She would be too ashamed to speak of such things before the court. It is for this reason that she is believed.

### Part 6
The Gemara further comments: Let the ruling <b>of</b> the <b>ultimate</b> version of the <b>mishna,</b> with regard to a woman who says: <b>Heaven is between me and you, be</b> a <b>conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Hamnuna,</b> who maintains that a woman who claims that her husband divorced her is believed. <b>But here,</b> as in the case of the alleged divorce, <b>she knows and her husband</b> also <b>knows with regard to her</b> whether or not she is lying, <b>and</b> yet the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>teaches that she is not believed.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Hamnuna maintains</b> that <b>here too,</b> the woman <b>herself says</b> in her heart: <b>Though he may know</b> whether or not we engaged <b>in sexual intercourse, does he know</b> whether or not <b>he shoots like an arrow? And</b> it is <b>due to that</b> reason that <b>she lies.</b> Since the woman can make a false claim against her husband without having to fear that he will contradict her, she is not believed. A similar point cannot be made in the case of an alleged divorce, as the husband knows whether or not he divorced his wife, and therefore a woman who claims that her husband divorced her is believed.

### Part 8
§ It is related that there was <b>a certain woman, who</b> on <b>every day of</b> engaging in <b>sexual intercourse</b> with her husband, <b>would rise early</b> in the morning <b>and wash</b> her <b>husband’s hands. One day she brought him water to wash</b> his hands, in response to which <b>he said to her: This matter,</b> i.e., sexual intercourse, <b>did not occur now. She said to him: If so,</b> it may be that <b>one of</b> the <b>gentile</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC