
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One who vows that <b>pickled food</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him is <b>prohibited from</b> eating <b>only pickled vegetables,</b> as that is what people usually mean when referring to pickled food. However, if he says: <b>Pickled food</b> is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, <b>he is prohibited</b> from tasting <b>all pickled</b> foods. Similarly, one who vows that <b>boiled food</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>only boiled meat,</b> as that is the common meaning of the expression boiled food. On the other hand, if he says: <b>Boiled food</b> is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, <b>he is prohibited from</b> eating <b>all boiled foods.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Avya, said to Rav Ashi:</b> If one <b>said:</b> That <b>which is pickled</b> is forbidden to me, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If one said: That <b>which is boiled</b> is forbidden to me, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If one said: That <b>which is roasted</b> is forbidden to me, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? If one said: That <b>which is salted</b> is forbidden to me, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>What</b> do these expressions <b>indicate?</b> Do they refer to specific foods or to all foods prepared in these ways? <b>The dilemma remains</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One who vows that <b>roasted food</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>only roasted meat;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b> However, if one says: <b>Roasted food</b> is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, <b>he is prohibited from</b> eating <b>all roasted foods.</b> One who vows that <b>salted food</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>only salted fish,</b> as that is the common meaning of the expression salted food. If, on the other hand, he says: <b>Salted food</b> is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, <b>he is prohibited from</b> eating <b>all salted foods.</b>

### Part 4
If one says: <b>Fish</b> or <b>fishes</b> are <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> them, <b>he is prohibited from</b> eating all of <b>them, whether large</b> fish <b>or small, whether salted or unsalted, whether raw or cooked. But he is permitted</b> to taste <b>minced sardines and</b> to taste <b>fish brine,</b> as these are not included in the common meaning of the word fish. <b>One who vows</b> that <b><i>tzaḥana</i>,</b> a concoction of whole and chopped fish, is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>minced sardines</b> as well, <b>but he is permitted</b> to eat <b>fish brine and fish gravy [<i>morays</i>]. One who vows</b> that <b>minced sardines</b> are forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>fish brine and from</b> eating <b>fish gravy.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> If one says: <b>Fish [<i>dag</i></b>] is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, he <b>is prohibited from</b> eating <b>large</b> fish <b>and permitted to</b> eat <b>small</b> fish. If one says: <b>Fish [<i>daga</i>]</b> is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, he is prohibited <b>from</b> eating <b>small fish and permitted to eat large ones,</b> as this term is commonly used with regard to small fish. If one says: <b>Fish [<i>dag</i>]</b> or <b>fish [<i>daga</i></b>] are <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> them, <b>he is prohibited from</b> eating <b>both large and small</b> fish.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the phrase: <b>Fish [<i>dag</i></b>] is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, a reference to <b>a large</b> fish? <b>As it is written: “And the Lord prepared a great fish [<i>dag</i>] to swallow up Jonah”</b> (Jonah 2:1). The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it written</b> in the following verse: <b>“Then Jonah prayed to the Lord his God out of the belly of the fish [<i>daga</i>]”</b> (Jonah 2:2)? This indicates that a large fish can be referred to as a <i>daga</i> as well.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>perhaps a large fish spat him out and a small fish</b> then <b>swallowed him. Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is difficult according to the following verse: <b>“And the fish [<i>daga</i>] that were in the river died”</b> (Exodus 7:21). Is it possible that the <b>small</b> fish <b>died</b> but the <b>large ones did not die?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the biblical word <b><i>daga</i></b> evidently <b>indicates large</b> fish <b>and</b> also <b>indicates small</b> fish. <b>However, with regard to vows</b> one should <b>follow the language of people,</b> and the word <i>daga</i> is used only in reference to small fish.

### Part 8
The mishna teaches that <b>one who vows</b> that <b><i>tzaḥana</i></b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him is prohibited from eating minced sardines as well, but he is permitted to eat fish brine and to eat fish gravy. <b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi:</b> If one <b>said: <i>Tziḥin</i> are hereby</b> forbidden <b>to me, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is this the same as <i>tzaḥana</i> or not? <b>The dilemma remains</b> unresolved.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who vows</b> that <b>milk</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is permitted to</b> partake of <b>whey [<i>kum</i>],</b> the liquid that separates from milk when it is made into cheese. <b>But Rabbi Yosei prohibits</b> him from partaking of whey. If one vows that <b>whey</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, <b>he is permitted to</b> partake of <b>milk. Abba Shaul says: One who vows</b> that <b>cheese</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>is prohibited</b> from eating <b>it whether</b> it is <b>salted or unsalted. One who vows</b> that <b>meat</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC