
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For one who says: <b>This produce is <i>konam</i> upon me,</b> or <b>it is <i>konam</i> upon my mouth,</b> or <b>it is <i>konam</i> to my mouth,</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> to partake of the produce, or of <b>its replacements, or</b> of anything that <b>grows from it.</b> If he says: This produce is <i>konam</i> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>eat</b> it, <b>or</b> for <b>that</b> reason <b>I</b> will not <b>taste</b> it, it <b>is permitted</b> for him to partake of <b>its replacements or</b> of anything that <b>grows from it.</b> This applies only <b>with regard to an item whose seeds cease</b> after it is sown. <b>However, with regard to an item whose seeds do not cease</b> after it is sown, e.g., bulbs, which flower and enter into a foliage period and repeat the process, it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to partake even of the <b>growths of</b> its <b>growths,</b> as the original, prohibited item remains intact.

### Part 2
For <b>one who says to his wife: Your handicraft is <i>konam</i> upon me,</b> or <b>it is <i>konam</i> upon my mouth,</b> or <b>it is <i>konam</i> to my mouth,</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> to benefit from her handicraft, and from <b>their replacements and</b> anything that <b>grows from them.</b> However, if he said to his wife: Your handicraft is <i>konam</i> for me only in the sense <b>that I</b> will not <b>eat</b> from your handicraft, <b>or that I</b> will not <b>taste</b> from your handicraft, it <b>is permitted</b> for him to benefit from <b>their replacements and</b> anything that <b>grows from them.</b> This applies only <b>with regard to an item whose seeds cease</b> after it is sown. <b>However, with regard to an item whose seeds do not cease</b> after it is sown, it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to benefit even from the <b>growths of</b> their <b>growths.</b>

### Part 3
If the husband said: From that <b>which you prepare, I will not eat until Passover,</b> or, with that <b>which you prepare, I will not cover myself until Passover,</b> then, if she <b>prepared</b> it <b>before Passover,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to eat or to cover himself</b> with them <b>after Passover.</b> If, however, he said: From that <b>which you prepare until Passover, I will not eat, or</b> from that <b>which you prepare until Passover, I will not cover myself,</b> then, if she <b>prepared</b> it <b>before Passover,</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to eat or cover himself</b> with it <b>after Passover.</b> If he said to her: <b>Benefit from me until Passover if you go to your father’s house</b> from now <b>until the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> is forbidden for you, and <b>she went</b> to his house <b>before Passover,</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for her to derive <b>benefit</b> from <b>him until Passover.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC