
### Part 1
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: In the case of <b>one who separates <i>teruma</i> from his own</b> produce <b>on</b> behalf of the produce <b>of another,</b> does he <b>require the knowledge</b> and consent of the owner of the produce <b>or not? Do we say: Since it is a benefit for</b> the other to have his produce tithed, <b>it does not require his knowledge,</b> as one may act in a person’s interest in his absence? <b>Or, perhaps it is his mitzva, and</b> it is <b>preferable for him to perform</b> the mitzva himself, and therefore, it does not benefit him to have the produce tithed on his behalf.

### Part 2
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna: For one for whom benefit from him is forbidden by vow, <b>he separates his <i>teruma</i> and his tithes,</b> provided that it is <b>with his knowledge</b> and consent. The Gemara analyzes this statement: <b>With what are we dealing? If we say</b> that he separates <i>teruma</i> from the produce of the <b>owner of the pile for</b> the produce <b>of the</b> same <b>owner of the pile,</b> the question is: <b>And with the knowledge</b> and consent <b>of whom</b> may he do so? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>with the knowledge</b> of the one tithing the produce, <b>who designated him an agent</b> to do so? One cannot tithe another’s produce unless he is designated as an agent.

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that he is tithing <b>with the knowledge of the owner of the pile.</b> However, in that case, by tithing the produce <b>isn’t he benefiting</b> the owner, as <b>he is performing</b> the action in fulfillment of the <b>agency</b> of the owner? <b>Rather,</b> it must be that he separates <i>teruma</i> <b>from his own</b> produce <b>on</b> behalf of the produce of the owner of <b>the pile.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And with the knowledge</b> and consent <b>of whom</b> is he doing so? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>with the knowledge of the owner of the pile, isn’t he benefiting</b> the owner? He is performing the action in fulfillment of the agency of the owner. <b>Rather, is it not</b> that he is tithing <b>on</b> the basis of <b>his own knowledge, and he is separating from his own</b> produce <b>on</b> behalf of <b>the produce of another? And if you say that</b> in order to tithe from one’s produce on behalf of the produce of the owner, it <b>requires</b> the owner’s <b>knowledge</b> and consent, <b>isn’t he benefiting</b> the owner? <b>Rather, is it not</b> that one may conclude from here that in order to tithe from one’s produce on behalf of the produce of another, one <b>does not require</b> the <b>knowledge</b> and consent of the owner of the pile?

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects that conclusion. <b>Actually,</b> it is a case where he separates <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> the produce of the <b>owner of the pile for</b> the produce <b>of the</b> same <b>owner of the pile.</b> However, the circumstances here are parallel to those addressed by Rava in another context, <b>as Rava said</b> that there is a case <b>where one says: Anyone who wishes to come and separate <i>teruma</i> may come and separate <i>teruma</i>. Here too,</b> this is a case <b>where one says:</b> Anyone who wishes to come and separate <i>teruma</i> may come and separate <i>teruma</i>. In that case, one may tithe another’s produce without being designated as his agent.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya raised a dilemma before Rabbi Zeira:</b> In a case where <b>one separates <i>teruma</i> from his own</b> produce <b>for</b> the produce <b>of another, who</b> is entitled to <b>the discretionary benefit,</b> i.e., the right to give the <i>teruma</i> to the priest of his choosing? <b>Do we say: If not for the produce of this</b> one separating the <i>teruma</i>, <b>would the pile of that</b> owner of the produce <b>be properly tithed,</b> and therefore the one separating the <i>teruma</i> is entitled to the discretionary benefit? <b>Or, perhaps</b> we say: <b>If not for the pile of that</b> owner of the pile, <b>the produce of this</b> one separating the <i>teruma</i> <b>would not be <i>teruma</i>,</b> and therefore the owner is entitled to the discretionary benefit.

### Part 6
Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him</b> that as <b>the verse states:</b> “You shall tithe <b>all the produce of your seed…and you shall give”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:22, 26), this indicates that the discretion to give the <i>teruma</i> to the priest of his choosing is the prerogative of the one to whom the pile of the produce belongs.

### Part 7
Rabbi Yirmeya <b>raised an objection to</b> Rabbi Zeira from the mishna: For someone who is prohibited by vow from benefiting from him, <b>he separates his <i>teruma</i> and his tithes,</b> provided that it is <b>with the knowledge</b> and consent of the owner of the produce. <b>And if you say</b> that the right to <b>the discretionary benefit</b> belongs <b>to the owner of the pile,</b> by separating <i>teruma</i> for his produce, <b>isn’t he benefiting</b> the owner? <b>Rather, conclude from</b> the mishna that the right to <b>the discretionary benefit</b> belongs <b>to</b> the one separating the <i>teruma</i>. The Sages <b>say: No,</b> actually this could even be a case where one separates <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> the produce <b>of the owner of the pile for</b> the produce <b>of the owner of the pile, and</b> he does so with the <b>knowledge of the owner of the pile, where he says: Anyone who wishes to come and separate <i>teruma</i> may come and separate <i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of Rabbi Yirmeya’s dilemma, <b>as Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In a case where one consecrates an animal as an offering for another and it becomes blemished, only <b>the one who consecrates</b> the animal <b>adds one-fifth</b> to the cost of redeeming the animal, and the one seeking atonement through this offering does not. <b>And</b> since the body of the animal belongs to <b>the one seeking atonement</b> through the offering, only he <b>renders</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for the sacred animal, consecrated as <b>a substitute. And</b> in the case of <b>one who separates <i>teruma</i> from his own</b> produce <b>for</b> produce <b>that is not his, the discretionary benefit is his.</b>

### Part 9
§ We learned in the mishna that one <b>teaches</b> someone who is prohibited by vow from benefiting from him <b>midrash, <i>halakhot</i>, and <i>aggadot</i>, but he may not teach him Bible.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>he may not teach him Bible?</b> Is it <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the teacher <b>benefits</b> the one for whom benefit from him is forbidden by teaching him Bible? When he teaches him <b>midrash he also benefits him. Shmuel said:</b> The mishna is referring <b>to a place where one takes payment for</b> teaching <b>Bible and one does not take payment for</b> teaching <b>midrash.</b> By teaching him Bible, the one for whom benefit is forbidden, benefits from the fact that he does not pay. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> was the <i>halakha</i> stated <b>without qualification?</b> There is no apparent fundamental difference between Bible and midrash. Why did the mishna refer specifically to a case where payment is taken for teaching Bible?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC