
### Part 1
The Sages <b>taught:</b> If <b>most of the knives have been set aside,</b> the figs left in the field <b>are permitted with regard to</b> the laws of <b>stealing and are exempt from tithes,</b> since their owners presumably do not want them and the figs are therefore considered ownerless property.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Yehuda arrived at a certain place at a time when most of the knives had been set aside. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>ate</b> the figs left in the field, but <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Yehuda did not eat. The owner</b> of the field <b>came</b> and <b>said to them: Why are the Sages not eating? It is</b> now the period when <b>most of the knives have been set aside.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>But nevertheless, Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Yehuda did not eat,</b> since <b>he thought</b> that it was only <b>due to embarrassment over the matter</b> that <b>that man said</b> his comment, but he did not really mean to declare his figs ownerless.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Rabbi Ḥanina arrived at a certain place at a time when most of the knives had been set aside. He ate</b> from the figs that were left in the field, but when <b>he gave</b> some <b>to his attendant</b> the latter <b>did not eat.</b> Rabbi Ḥama <b>said to him: Eat,</b> as <b>Rabbi Yishmael bar Rabbi Yosei said to me the following</b> ruling <b>in the name of his father:</b> If <b>most of the knives have been set aside,</b> the figs <b>are permitted with regard to</b> the laws of <b>stealing and are exempt from the tithe.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>A certain man found Rabbi Tarfon eating</b> figs from his field <b>at the time when most of the knives had been set aside. He placed</b> Rabbi Tarfon <b>in a sack, lifted him up, and carried him to throw him into the river.</b> Rabbi Tarfon <b>said to him: Woe to Tarfon, for this</b> man <b>is killing him.</b> When <b>that man heard</b> that he was carrying the great Rabbi Tarfon, <b>he left him and fled. Rabbi Abbahu said in the name of Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel: All the days of that righteous man,</b> Rabbi Tarfon, <b>he was distressed over this matter, saying: Woe is me, for I made use of the crown of Torah,</b> as Rabbi Tarfon was only released out of respect for his Torah learning.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> with regard to this statement, <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Whoever makes use of the crown of Torah is uprooted from the world.</b> This can be derived by means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If Belshazzar, who made use of the sacred</b> Temple <b>vessels, which had</b> already <b>become non-sacred vessels</b> by that time, as after their forcible removal from the Temple the vessels lost their sanctity, <b>as it is stated</b> in the verse: <b>“And robbers shall enter into it, and profane it”</b> (Ezekiel 7:22), showing that <b>once</b> the Temple vessels <b>have been robbed they become non-sacred, was uprooted from the world</b> for his actions, <b>as it is written: “On that night Belshazzar</b> the Chaldean king <b>was killed”</b> (Daniel 5:30); <b>one who makes use of the crown of Torah, which lives and endures forever</b> and whose sanctity cannot be removed, <b>all the more so</b> shall he be uprooted.

### Part 6
The Gemara returns to the incident involving Rabbi Tarfon. <b>And</b> in the case of <b>Rabbi Tarfon, since he was eating</b> during the time <b>when most of the knives had been set aside, why did that man trouble him?</b> The Gemara explains: It was <b>because</b> someone <b>had been stealing grapes from that</b> man <b>all year, and when he found Rabbi Tarfon he thought: This is</b> the one <b>who stole from me</b> the entire year. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, why did Rabbi Tarfon berate himself?</b> Clearly he was justified in saving himself. The Gemara answers: <b>Since Rabbi Tarfon was very wealthy, he should have</b> sought <b>to appease him with money</b> in order to save himself, rather than relying on his status as a Torah scholar.

### Part 7
Apropos the story of Rabbi Tarfon’s regret for gaining personal benefit from his status as a Torah scholar, the Gemara cites similar teachings. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“To love the Lord your God, to listen to His voice, and to cleave to Him”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:20). This verse indicates <b>that a person should not say: I will read</b> the written Torah <b>so that they will call me a Sage; I will study</b> Mishna <b>so that they will call me Rabbi; I will review</b> my studies <b>so that I will be an Elder and will sit in the academy.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rather, learn out of love,</b> as the verse states: “To love the Lord your God.” <b>And the honor will eventually come</b> of its own accord, <b>as it is stated: “Bind them upon your fingers; write them on the tablet of your heart”</b> (Proverbs 7:3), <b>and it states: “Its ways are ways of pleasantness,</b> and all its paths are peace” (Proverbs 3:17), <b>and it states: “It is a tree of life to those who grasp it; happy is everyone who holds it fast”</b> (Proverbs 3:17). Consequently, one who studies in order to master Torah for its own sake, as reflected in the verse “bind them upon your fingers,” will eventually merit pleasantness, peace, and happiness.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Eliezer bar Rabbi Tzadok says: Do things for the sake of their performance,</b> not for any ulterior motive, <b>and speak</b> words <b>of</b> Torah <b>for their own sake. Do not make them a crown with which to become glorified, and do not make them nor make them a dolabra [<i>kordom</i>] with which to hoe,</b> i.e., do not use Torah study as a means of earning a livelihood. <b>And</b> this is <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If Belshazzar, who made use only of sacred vessels that had become non-sacred vessels, was uprooted from the world, one who makes use of the crown of Torah,</b> whose sanctity is permanent, <b>all the more so</b> shall he be uprooted from the world.

### Part 10
<b>Rava said:</b> In a time of need, <b>it is permitted for a person to make himself known in a place where</b> people <b>do not know him.</b> The proof is from what Obadiah said to Elijah in order to identify himself, <b>as it is written: “But I, your servant, have feared the Lord from my youth”</b> (I Kings 18:12). The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> this is <b>difficult</b> with regard to the story about <b>Rabbi Tarfon,</b> who was distraught because he revealed his identity to the man who placed him in the sack. The Gemara answers: The case of Rabbi Tarfon is different, <b>as he was very wealthy, and</b> therefore <b>he should have</b> sought <b>to appease him with money.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rava raises a contradiction: It is written</b> that Obadiah spoke highly of himself: <b>“But I, your servant, have feared the Lord from my youth.” And it is written: “Let another praise you, and not your own mouth”</b> (Proverbs 27:2). He answers: <b>This</b> verse is referring <b>to a place where</b> people <b>know him,</b> where he should not praise himself, whereas <b>that</b> verse is referring <b>to a place where</b> people <b>do not know him.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rava said</b> further: <b>It is permitted for a Torah scholar to say: I am a Torah scholar,</b> so <b>resolve my case first, as it is written: “And the sons of David were priests”</b> (II Samuel 8:18). The sons of David could not have been actual priests, as David was not a priest. Rather, the verse indicates that <b>just as a priest takes</b> his portion <b>first, so too, a Torah scholar takes</b> his portion <b>first. And a priest, from where do we</b> derive that he takes his portion first? <b>As it is written: “And you shall sanctify him, for he offers the bread of your God”</b> (Leviticus 21:8). <b>And the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> The phrase <b>“and you shall sanctify him”</b> applies with regard <b>to every matter of sanctity:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC