
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yosei said: These are not vows of affliction. Rather, these are vows of affliction:</b> For example, if <b>she said: The produce of the</b> entire <b>world is <i>konam</i> for me as if</b> it were <b>an offering, he can nullify</b> the vow, as it certainly involves affliction. If, however, she said: <b>The produce of this country is</b> <i>konam</i> <b>for me,</b> he cannot nullify the vow, as it does not involve affliction, since <b>he may</b> still <b>bring her</b> produce <b>from another country.</b> Similarly, if she said: <b>The produce of this storekeeper is</b> <i>konam</i> <b>for me, he cannot nullify</b> her vow, as he may still bring her produce from another storekeeper. <b>But if</b> he can obtain <b>his sustenance only from him,</b> that particular storekeeper, <b>he can nullify</b> the vow. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara raises a question with regard to the ruling of the mishna: Is it only <b>vows of affliction that he can nullify,</b> whereas vows <b>that do not involve affliction he cannot nullify? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse “These are the statutes that the Lord commanded Moses, <b>between a man and his wife, between a father and his daughter”</b> (Numbers 30:17) <b>teaches that a husband can nullify</b> any of his wife’s <b>vows that</b> adversely affect the relationship <b>between him and her,</b> even if they do not involve affliction?

### Part 3
The Sages <b>say</b> in response: In fact, <b>he can nullify</b> both <b>these and those.</b> There is, <b>however,</b> a difference between them. When he nullifies vows of <b>affliction, he nullifies</b> them <b>forever,</b> i.e., the vows remain nullified even if they subsequently divorce. <b>But</b> when he nullifies vows that <b>do not involve affliction</b> but merely impact upon their relationship, then, <b>while</b> they are married and <b>she is under his</b> authority <b>it is an</b> effective <b>nullification,</b> but <b>when</b> he <b>divorces her, her vow takes effect upon her,</b> i.e., his nullification is no longer effective. As stated, this is referring <b>to</b> vows concerning <b>matters that</b> adversely affect the relationship <b>between him and her, that do not involve affliction. However,</b> if he nullifies a vow that affects their relationship and also <b>involves affliction, her vow does not take effect upon her</b> even after she leaves her husband’s authority.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for vows concerning <b>matters that do not involve affliction, when</b> a man <b>divorces</b> his wife, do <b>they</b> really <b>take effect upon her? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna with regard to a woman who prohibited her handiwork to her husband by way of a vow (85a) that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says:</b> Even though the vow is presently invalid, as a woman cannot render forbidden to her husband that to which he is already entitled, <b>he should</b> nevertheless <b>nullify</b> the vow? This is because <b>perhaps he will</b> one day <b>divorce her,</b> at which point the vow will take effect <b>and she will</b> then <b>be forbidden to him,</b> since he will be unable to remarry her lest he come to benefit from her handiwork. <b>Apparently,</b> however, <b>if he divorces her</b> after <b>having nullified her</b> vow <b>from the outset,</b> before their divorce, <b>it is</b> a permanent <b>nullification,</b> and although the vow does not involve affliction it remains nullified after their divorce.

### Part 5
Consequently, the Sages <b>say</b> a different answer: With regard to both <b>these and those,</b> vows of affliction and vows adversely affecting the relationship between them, when the husband nullifies the vow, it <b>is</b> a permanent <b>nullification. Rather,</b> the difference between them is as follows: <b>Vows of affliction he can</b> fully <b>nullify, both with respect to himself and with respect to others,</b> i.e., the vow remains nullified even if he divorces her and she marries another man. Whereas vows that <b>do not involve affliction</b> but still adversely affect the relationship between him and her <b>he can</b> permanently <b>nullify with respect to himself,</b> but <b>he cannot nullify with respect to others;</b> if she marries another man, the vow takes effect. <b>And</b> according to this explanation, <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>is teaching: These are</b> the <b>vows that he can nullify both for himself and for others: Vows that involve affliction.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that, according to the first <i>tanna</i>, a woman’s vow: <b>If I bathe,</b> falls into the category of vows of affliction, whereas Rabbi Yosei disagrees and says that this is not a vow of affliction. The Gemara asks: As the phrase: If I bathe, is not the main substance of the vow, but rather the woman wishes to prohibit herself from deriving a certain benefit depending on whether or not she bathes, with regard to <b>what</b> case <b>is</b> the mishna <b>speaking? If we say that she said: The produce of the world is <i>konam</i> for me if I bathe, why,</b> according to the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>does she</b> need <b>nullification</b> at all to prevent her affliction? Let her <b>not bathe and this produce of the world will not be forbidden to her.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And furthermore,</b> this explanation is problematic for a different reason: <b>With regard to</b> a vow of <b>this</b> type, <b>would Rabbi Yosei say</b> that <b>these are not vows of affliction?</b> There is certainly room for concern that <b>perhaps she will bathe and the produce of the world will be forbidden to her,</b> a situation that certainly entails deprivation.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC