
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>a house</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, entry <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>in the upper story</b> of the house; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: An upper story is included</b> in <b>the house,</b> and therefore, entry is prohibited there as well. However, for <b>one who vows</b> that <b>an upper story</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, entry <b>is permitted in the house,</b> as the ground floor is not included in the upper story.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of leprosy that in the verse “it appears to me as it were a plague in the house” (Leviticus 14:35), the term <b>“in the house”</b> comes <b>to include the gallery,</b> a half story above the ground floor, and <b>“in the house”</b> comes <b>to include the upper story? Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> is <b>Rabbi Meir, as, if</b> the <i>tanna</i> was <b>the Rabbis, didn’t the Rabbis say</b> that <b>a second story is included in the house? Why</b> then <b>do I</b> need the <b>verse</b> containing the phrase <b>“in the house” to include</b> the second story?

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said: Even if you would say</b> that the <i>tanna</i> is <b>the Rabbis,</b> they too <b>require a verse</b> to include the second story in this case, <b>as it might enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>it is written: “In a house of the land of your possession”</b> (Leviticus 14:34), only that <b>which is attached to the ground</b> has the <b>status of a house</b> but with regard to <b>a second story, that is not attached to the ground.</b> Even according to the Rabbis, the verse is necessary to prevent the conclusion that the legal status of a second story is not that of a house with regard to leprosy.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>is that which Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya said in the name of Ulla?</b> If the seller says to the buyer: <b>A house in my house I am selling to you, he may show</b> the buyer that he purchased the <b>second story [<i>aliyya</i>].</b> The Gemara infers: <b>The reason is that</b> the seller <b>said to him: A house in my house I am selling to you. However, if</b> he sold him <b>a house, unspecified, he may not show him a second story. Let us say</b> that <b>this</b> is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who states that the second story is not included in the house. The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>Even if you would say</b> that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, what is</b> the meaning of the term <b><i>aliyya</i></b> in this context? It does not mean second story; it means <b>the most outstanding of the houses.</b> Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya said in the name of Ulla that when one says a house in my house, he must show him the most outstanding part of his house. However, if he sold him a house without specification, he may show him a second story.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>a bed</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is permitted</b> to lie <b>in a <i>dargash</i>,</b> which is not commonly called a bed; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: A <i>dargash</i> is included</b> in the category of <b>a bed.</b> Everyone agrees that for <b>one who vows</b> that <b>a <i>dargash</i></b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is permitted</b> to lie <b>in a bed.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is a <i>dargash</i>? Ulla said:</b> It is <b>a bed of</b> good <b>fortune,</b> placed in the house as a fortuitous omen, and not designated for sleeping. <b>The Rabbis said to Ulla: That which we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>When</b> the people <b>serve</b> the king the <b>meal of comfort</b> after he buries a relative, <b>all the people recline on the ground and</b> the king <b>reclines on a <i>dargash</i></b> during the meal. According to your explanation, during <b>the entire year he does not sit on</b> the bed; on <b>that day</b> of the funeral <b>he sits on it? Ravina objects to</b> the question of the Rabbis: This anomaly is <b>just as it is</b> with regard <b>to meat and wine, as</b> throughout <b>the entire year if he wishes he eats</b> them, <b>and if he wishes he does not eat</b> them; on <b>that day</b> of the funeral, <b>we give him</b> meat and wine in the meal of comfort.

### Part 7
<b>Rather, this is difficult, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the custom of overturning the beds in the house of a mourner: With regard to <b>a <i>dargash</i></b> in his house, the mourner <b>would not overturn it, but</b> he merely <b>stands it</b> on its side. <b>And if you say</b> that a <i>dargash</i> <b>is a bed of fortune, isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: A mourner <b>who</b> is required to <b>overturn his bed</b> is required to <b>overturn not only his own bed, but</b> to <b>overturn all of the beds that he has inside his house,</b> even those not used for sleeping. Why, then, is he not required to overturn the <i>dargash</i>? The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC