
### Part 1
<b>But it is prohibited</b> for them to benefit <b>from objects of that city,</b> which are considered to be jointly owned by all its residents. <b>And what are</b> examples of <b>objects belonging to those who ascended from Babylonia? For example, the Temple Mount, and the</b> Temple <b>Courtyards, and the</b> water <b>cistern in the middle of the road. And what are objects of that city? For example, the</b> city <b>square, and the bathhouse, and the synagogue, and the ark</b> which houses the Torah scrolls, <b>and the</b> Torah <b>scrolls. And one who writes,</b> i.e., signs, <b>his portion</b> of the shared objects of that city over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i>.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>both</b> one who <b>writes</b> his portion over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> and one</b> who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to a common person.</b> Rabbi Yehuda adds: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> one who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> and</b> one who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to a common person? That one who writes</b> it <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> need not</b> formally <b>confer possession</b> of the item, whereas one who writes it over <b>to a common person must confer possession</b> to him. <b>And the Rabbis say: Both this</b> one <b>and that</b> one <b>must confer possession,</b> and <b>they</b> specifically <b>mentioned the <i>Nasi</i> only</b> so as to speak <b>in the present,</b> addressing situations that were prevalent. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The people of Galilee do not have to write</b> their portion over to the <i>Nasi</i> <b>because their fathers already wrote</b> it <b>for them,</b> declaring that all the public property belongs to him.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna appears to teach that one who is prohibited by a vow from benefiting from another may not benefit from property written over to the <i>Nasi</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Why is it forbidden? Rav Sheshet said: This is what</b> the mishna <b>is teaching: And what is their remedy,</b> i.e., what can be done to enable the forbidden individuals to benefit from communal property? <b>They should write their portion</b> over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i>,</b> thereby relinquishing their shares in the communal property.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues its quotation from the mishna: This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>both</b> one who <b>writes</b> his portion over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> and one</b> who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to a common person.</b> Rabbi Yehuda adds: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> one who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> and</b> one who <b>writes</b> it over <b>to a common person? That one who writes</b> it <b>to the <i>Nasi</i> need not</b> formally <b>confer possession</b> of the item, whereas one who writes it over <b>to a common person must confer possession</b> to him. <b>And the Rabbis say: Both this</b> one <b>and that</b> one <b>must confer possession,</b> and <b>they</b> specifically <b>mentioned the <i>Nasi</i> only</b> so as to speak <b>in the present.</b>

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The people of Galilee do not have to confer possession</b> of their portion to the <i>Nasi</i> <b>because their forefathers already wrote</b> it <b>for them. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The people of Galilee were quarrelsome [<i>kanteranin</i>] and would</b> often <b>take vows prohibiting benefit from one another.</b> So <b>their forefathers arose and wrote their portions</b> of the public property over <b>to the <i>Nasi</i></b> so that they would be able to use communal property.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who is prohibited by a vow from deriving benefit from another and he does not have anything to eat,</b> the other <b>may give</b> the food <b>to someone else as a gift and he is</b> then <b>permitted</b> to eat <b>it.</b> The mishna recounts: <b>An incident</b> occurred <b>involving someone in</b> the city of <b>Beit Ḥoron whose father had vowed not to derive benefit from him, and</b> the son <b>was marrying off his</b> own <b>son</b> and wanted his father to be able to participate in the wedding meal. <b>And</b> he therefore <b>said to another: The courtyard</b> where the wedding will take place <b>and</b> the wedding <b>meal are given before you</b> as a gift, but <b>only so that my father will come and eat with us at the meal.</b>

### Part 7
The recipient <b>said: If they are mine, they are</b> all <b>hereby consecrated to Heaven,</b> i.e., the Temple, and are forbidden to everyone. The son <b>said to him</b> in anger: And <b>did I give you my</b> property <b>so that you should consecrate it to Heaven? He,</b> the recipient, <b>said to him: You gave me your</b> property <b>only</b> so that <b>you and your father would eat and drink and</b> thereby <b>appease each other, and the sin</b> of transgressing the vow would <b>be hung on his,</b> i.e., my, <b>head,</b> as I enabled the transgression. <b>The Sages</b> therefore <b>said: Any gift that is not</b> so absolute so <b>that if</b> the recipient <b>were to consecrate</b> the gift <b>it would be consecrated, is not a gift.</b> In other words, in order for it to be a gift, the recipient must have the ability to consecrate it.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: Was <b>an incident</b> cited <b>to contradict</b> that which was initially stated in the mishna? The mishna explicitly stated that one may give a gift to another in order to bypass the prohibition of a vow. The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is incomplete and is teaching like this: And if his ultimate</b> actions <b>prove</b> the nature of <b>his initial</b> intent, i.e., if the prior owner protests that he gave the gift only as a technicality in order to bypass the vow, it is <b>forbidden. And</b> to illustrate this point, <b>there was also an incident in Beit Ḥoron concerning someone whose ultimate</b> protest <b>proved</b> that <b>his initial</b> intent was not to give a true gift.

### Part 9
<b>Rava said: They taught</b> this prohibition <b>only</b> in a case <b>where he said to him: And</b> the gifts <b>are</b> given <b>before you only so that</b> my <b>father should come,</b> as he explicitly mentioned that he did not intend to give an absolute gift. <b>But</b> if <b>he said to him</b> less explicitly: <b>That they should be before you that</b> my <b>father should come,</b> there is no prohibition, <b>since he is</b> essentially <b>saying to him:</b> It is <b>up to your judgment</b> whether or not to invite him.

### Part 10
<b>Some say another version</b> of this statement. <b>Rava said: Do not say</b> that <b>the reason</b> for the prohibition <b>is because he said to him: And</b> the gifts <b>are</b> given <b>before you</b> only so that my father will come, and <b>that</b> is why <b>it</b> is <b>forbidden; but</b> if <b>he said to him: They are before you so</b> my <b>father should come and eat,</b> it would be <b>permitted.</b> This is not so. <b>Rather, even if he said to him: They are before you,</b> my <b>father should come and eat,</b> it is <b>forbidden. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>His</b> wedding <b>meal proves about him</b> that his sole intention was to bypass the vow.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC