
### Part 1
<b>And the Rabbis say: He must designate</b> poor man’s tithe <b>by name,but he need not</b> actually <b>set</b> it <b>aside</b> and give it to anyone, as a poor person cannot claim the tithe without bringing proof that he has a right to it. Rav Yosef now suggests: <b>What, is it not</b> that <b>according to the one,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>who says</b> that the <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether or not poor man’s tithe had been separated by the <i>am ha’aretz</i> <b>renders</b> the produce <b>forbidden as untithed produce</b> [<b><i>tevel</i></b>], and therefore the owner of the produce must designate the poor man’s tithe by name, he <b>holds</b> that the owner of the produce <b>has the benefit of discretion,</b> meaning that he may give the poor man’s tithe to the poor person of his choice. <b>And since he has the benefit of discretion,</b> the option that a woman who vowed not to benefit from people should take poor man’s tithe <b>is ineffective,</b> as she would be receiving benefit from the owner of the tithe, since he could have given it to someone else.

### Part 2
Rav Yosef continues: <b>And according to the one,</b> i.e., Rabbi Eliezer, <b>who says</b> that <b>he need not designate</b> poor man’s tithe <b>by name,</b> he <b>holds</b> that the <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether or not poor man’s tithe had been separated by the <i>am ha’aretz</i> <b>does not render</b> the produce <b>forbidden as untithed produce. And whenever</b> the case is <b>that uncertainty does not render</b> the produce <b>forbidden as untithed produce,</b> the owner <b>does not have the benefit of discretion</b> and does not choose to which poor person he will give it. <b>And</b> therefore one who vowed not to benefit from people <b>is permitted to</b> derive <b>benefit</b> from poor man’s tithe, as he is not receiving it from anyone.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said to him:</b> This proof is not conclusive, as it may be <b>that everyone</b> agrees that the <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether or not poor man’s tithe had been separated by the <i>am ha’aretz</i> <b>renders</b> the produce <b>forbidden as</b> untithed produce, <b>and</b> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis disagree with regard to this</b> issue: <b>Rabbi Eliezer maintains</b> that <b><i>amei ha’aretz</i> are not suspected of</b> failing to set aside <b>poor man’s tithe.</b> Therefore, one who purchases <i>demai</i> from an <i>am ha’aretz</i> need not be concerned that its poor man’s tithe might not have been set aside. Rabbi Eliezer maintains this opinion <b>because were</b> the <i>am ha’aretz</i> to <b>declare</b> all <b>his property ownerless and</b> therefore <b>become a poor man, and</b> then <b>take</b> the poor man’s tithe <b>himself, he</b> would suffer <b>no loss</b> when he set aside this tithe, and therefore it is assumed that he separated it.

### Part 4
<b>And the Rabbis maintain</b> that while it is theoretically possible for one to avoid having to actually part from his poor man’s tithe, this is uncommon, as <b>a person does not</b> ordinarily <b>declare his property ownerless</b> for this purpose, <b>as he is afraid</b> that <b>perhaps someone else will acquire it</b> in the meantime. <b>Consequently,</b> one who sets aside poor man’s tithe from his produce is assumed to incur a loss, and therefore <i>amei ha’aretz</i> <b>are suspected</b> with regard to this tithe. Accordingly, no satisfactory explanation has yet been given as to why the <i>baraita</i> permits a woman who vowed not to derive benefit from people to take poor man’s tithe.

### Part 5
<b>Rava says</b> that it is possible to explain the apparent contradiction between the sources with regard to benefit from poor man’s tithe without recourse to a tannaitic dispute: <b>Here,</b> the mishna is referring <b>to poor man’s tithe distributed in the</b> owner’s <b>house,</b> i.e., poor man’s tithe that had not been distributed in the threshing floor but was brought home and must now be distributed to the poor who visit the house, <b>as</b> the term <b>giving is written</b> in the verse <b>with regard to</b> such a tithe: <b>“And you shall give to the Levite, to the stranger,</b> to the orphan, and to the widow” (Deuteronomy 26:12), and the owner is entitled to give the tithe to the poor man of his choice, as the benefit of discretion is conferred upon him. <b>Due to that</b> reason, it <b>is prohibited</b> for one who vowed not to derive benefit from people <b>to derive benefit</b> from this type of poor man’s tithe.

### Part 6
<b>There,</b> however, the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to poor man’s tithe that is distributed in the threshing floor. Since with regard to</b> such a tithe <b>it is written: “And you shall leave it at your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:28), the owner cannot designate it for a particular person, and any poor person who comes by may take it from him. As the owner lacks the benefit of discretion, one who vows not to benefit from people <b>is permitted to benefit</b> from this poor man’s tithe.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches that if one said: I will not let <b>priests and Levites benefit from me, they can take</b> the priestly and Levitical gifts from him against his will. The Gemara notes: <b>Apparently,</b> the <b>benefit of discretion</b> to give his <i>teruma</i> and tithes to the priest or Levite of his choice <b>is not</b> considered to have <b>monetary</b> value. The priests and Levites can take the gifts from the owner of the produce against his will, and the latter is not regarded as having conferred benefit upon them.

### Part 8
But <b>say the latter clause</b> of the mishna, which states that if the person said: I will not let <b>these</b> specific <b>priests and these</b> specific <b>Levites benefit from me,</b> these gifts are <b>taken by others. But these</b> priests and Levites specified in his vow may <b>not</b> take these gifts. <b>Apparently,</b> this ruling indicates that the <b>benefit of discretion is</b> considered to have <b>monetary value,</b> and therefore the owner can prohibit specific priests or Levites from deriving benefit from him.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Hoshaya said:</b> This is <b>not difficult; this</b> second ruling is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and that</b> first ruling is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one steals another’s untithed produce and eats it, he must pay him the value of his untithed produce,</b> i.e., the full value of what he stole. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> disagrees and <b>says: He pays</b> him <b>only the value of the non-sacred</b> produce <b>it contained.</b> The thief does not have to pay him the value of the <i>teruma</i> and tithe included in the untithed produce, as these portions do not belong to the owner of the produce. <b>What, is it not</b> the case that <b>they disagree about this:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC