
### Part 1
<b>as it is stated: “Every valley shall be lifted”</b> (Isaiah 40:4). When Rav Yosef heard that interpretation, he understood that Rava was aware of the error of his ways in acting arrogantly toward his teacher, and was pacified by Rava’s display of humility.

### Part 2
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>grain [<i>dagan</i>]</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is prohibited to</b> partake <b>of the dry cowpea, and</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him to partake <b>of fresh</b> cowpea. <b>And</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him to partake <b>of rice,</b> as well as <b>of wheat kernels split into two parts [<i>ḥilka</i>], of wheat kernels crushed into three parts [<i>targeis</i>], and wheat kernels crushed into four parts [<i>tisnei</i>].</b> For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>produce of the year</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is prohibited to</b> partake <b>of all produce of the year</b> that grew from the ground or on trees, <b>and</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him to partake <b>of goats, and of lambs, and of milk, and of eggs, and of chicks</b> born that year, as they are not included in the category of produce. <b>And if he said: Growths of the year are</b> forbidden <b>to me,</b> it <b>is prohibited for him</b> to eat <b>all of them.</b>

### Part 3
For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>produce of the land</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to</b> partake <b>of all produce</b> that grow from <b>the land, and</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him to partake <b>of truffles and mushrooms</b> that are not in the category of produce of the land. <b>But if he said: The growths of the ground are forbidden to me,</b> it <b>is prohibited for him</b> to eat <b>all of them.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Berakhot</i> 40b): And <b>over</b> a food <b>item whose growth is not from the ground, one recites: By Whose word all things came to be. And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Over salt and over brine</b> [<b><i>zamit</i></b>], <b>and over truffles and mushrooms, one recites: By Whose word all things came to be.</b> Apparently, truffles and mushrooms are not in the category of growths of the ground. <b>Abaye said: They grow from the earth,</b> but with regard <b>to sustenance, they draw sustenance from the air and not from the earth.</b> The Gemara asks: Why is that distinction significant? <b>Isn’t it taught: Over</b> a food <b>item whose growth is not from the ground</b> one recites the blessing: By whose word all things came to be? Even according to Abaye, mushrooms grow from the ground. The Gemara answers: <b>Emend</b> the mishna to read: <b>Over</b> a food <b>item that does not draw sustenance from the ground,</b> one recites: By Whose word all things came to be.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For <b>one who vows</b> that a <b>garment</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is permitted to</b> wear <b>sackcloth, and to</b> wear <b>a sheet, and to</b> wear <b>a coarse curtain [<i>ḥamila</i>],</b> as these are not in the category of garments. For one who <b>said: Wool is <i>konam</i></b> for me and I will therefore not <b>place it upon myself,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to cover himself with wool fleece,</b> which is not considered a garment, and it is prohibited for him to wear only a woolen fabric. For one who said: <b>Flax is <i>konam</i></b> for me and I will therefore not <b>place it upon myself,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to cover himself with</b> uncombed <b>flax in bundles,</b> and it is prohibited for him to wear only a flaxen fabric.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Everything is</b> determined <b>according to the one who vows.</b> If <b>one was bearing</b> a burden of wool and linen, <b>and was sweating, and its smell was unpleasant</b> for him, and in reaction, <b>he said: Wool and linen are <i>konam</i></b> for me and I will therefore not <b>place them upon myself,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to cover himself</b> with wool and linen garments, <b>but</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to sling</b> them over his shoulder <b>behind him</b> as a burden. The circumstances of his vow make it clear that he intends to forswear carrying wool and linen as a burden rather than the wearing of them as a garment.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: For <b>one who vows</b> that a <b>garment</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is permitted to</b> wear <b>sackcloth, and to</b> wear <b>a sheet and to</b> wear <b>a coarse curtain, and</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to</b> wear <b>a money belt [<i>punda</i>], or to</b> wear <b>a sash [<i>pesakiyya</i>], or to</b> wear <b>a <i>sekurtiyya</i>, or to</b> wear <b>a leather spread [<i>katavliyya</i>], or to</b> wear <b>a leather sock [<i>anpilya</i>] or to</b> wear <b>a leather apron [<i>pelinya</i>], and trousers, and a hat.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b><i>iskurtei</i>,</b> mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> as <i>sekurtiyya</i>? <b>Rabba bar Ḥana said:</b> It means <b>a tanner’s apron.</b>

### Part 8
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may go out</b> into the public domain on Shabbat covered <b>in thick sackcloth or in a coarse</b> woolen <b>blanket [<i>sagos</i>], or in a sheet or in a coarse curtain</b> as protection <b>from the rain.</b> They are considered garments, not burdens. <b>However,</b> he may <b>neither</b> go out covered <b>in a box, nor in a basket, nor in a mat</b> as protection <b>from the rain,</b> as they are considered burdens, not garments. <b>Shepherds may go out</b> on Shabbat covered <b>in sackcloth,</b> as they typically go out in sackcloth garments. <b>And</b> the Sages <b>did not say</b> this <b>only</b> with regard to <b>shepherds; rather,</b> they said that <b>all people</b> may go out wearing sackcloth; <b>however, the Sages spoke in the present,</b> addressing situations that were prevalent.

### Part 9
§ We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Everything is</b> determined <b>according to the one who vows. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How,</b> i.e., in what circumstances, did <b>Rabbi Yehuda say: Everything is according to the one who vows?</b> If <b>one was wearing</b> a <b>woolen</b> garment <b>and it caused him discomfort, and</b> in reaction <b>he said: Wool is <i>konam</i></b> for me, and I will therefore not <b>place it upon myself,</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to wear</b> woolen garments, <b>but</b> it <b>is permitted to place</b> a burden of woolen garments upon him. If <b>one was burdened with flax and was sweating, and said: Flax is <i>konam</i></b> for me, and I will therefore not <b>place it upon myself,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to wear</b> flaxen garments <b>and</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him <b>to place</b> a burden of flaxen garments upon him.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC