
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna proceeds to list other tasks that one may perform for someone who is prohibited by vow from benefiting from him. <b>And he separates his <i>teruma</i> and his tithes,</b> provided that it is <b>with the knowledge</b> and consent of the owner of the produce. <b>And he sacrifices for him the bird nests,</b> i.e., pairs of birds, pigeons and turtledoves, <b>of <i>zavin</i></b> (see Leviticus 15:13–15); <b>the bird nests of <i>zavot</i></b> (see Leviticus 15:28–30); <b>the bird nests of women after childbirth</b> (see Leviticus 12:6–8); <b>sin-offerings; and guilt-offerings. And he teaches him midrash, <i>halakhot</i>, and <i>aggadot</i>, but he may not teach him Bible. However, he may teach his sons and daughters Bible.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>Are these priests our agents or agents of Heaven</b> when they perform the Temple service? The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the practical difference</b> whether they are our agents or God’s agents? The Gemara answers: The difference is with regard to <b>one prohibited by vow from deriving benefit</b> from another. <b>If you say that</b> the priests <b>are our agents, don’t</b> the priests provide <b>benefit</b> for the one for whom benefit is forbidden by vow, <b>and</b> therefore, sacrificing that person’s offering is <b>prohibited? And if you say that they are agents of Heaven,</b> it is <b>permitted. What</b> is the status of priests?

### Part 3
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof to resolve the dilemma, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And he sacrifices for him the bird nests of <i>zavin</i>, etc.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>If you say</b> that the priests are <b>our agents,</b> the priests would thereby provide <b>benefit</b> to one for whom benefit from them is forbidden. Based on the ruling in the mishna, apparently, priests are agents of Heaven.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> that the mishna holds that priests are agents of Heaven, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> in general: <b>He sacrifices for him offerings.</b> Why did the mishna list these particular offerings? <b>Rather,</b> perforce, offerings brought by <b>those lacking atonement are different</b> from other offerings, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Everyone</b> who brings an offering <b>requires knowledge</b> and intent in order to bring the offering, <b>except for those lacking atonement,</b> who bring the offering in order to complete their purification. This can be proven from the fact <b>that a person brings</b> a purification <b>offering for his minor sons and daughters,</b> although they lack halakhic intelligence, <b>as it is stated: “This is the law of the <i>zav</i>”</b> (Leviticus 15:32). This apparently superfluous verse comes to teach that the <i>halakhot</i> of the <i>zav</i> apply to <b>both an adult and a minor.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>However, if that is so</b> according <b>to Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> with regard to that which is written: <b>“This is the law of a woman after childbirth”</b> (Leviticus 12:7), would he interpret that the <i>halakhot</i> of a woman after childbirth apply to <b>both an adult and a minor? Is a minor capable of</b> giving <b>birth? But didn’t Rav Beivai teach</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Naḥman:</b> It is permitted for <b>three women</b> to <b>engage in intercourse with</b> a contraceptive <b>resorbent: A minor, and a pregnant</b> woman, <b>and a nursing</b> woman; <b>a minor</b> may do so <b>lest she conceive and die.</b> Apparently, a minor is incapable of giving birth, as she would die first.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>That</b> verse: <b>“This is the law of a woman after childbirth,”</b> does not come to include a minor. Rather, it comes to teach that the <i>halakhot</i> of a woman after childbirth apply to <b>both a halakhically competent woman and a woman</b> who is <b>an imbecile, as a man brings an offering for his wife who is an imbecile.</b>

### Part 7
This <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: A man brings the offering of a wealthy person for his wife, as well as all offerings that she is obligated</b> to bring. A wealthy woman after childbirth brings a lamb as a burnt-offering and a dove or turtledove as a sin-offering. A poor woman brings two turtledoves or two pigeons, one as a burnt-offering and one as a sin-offering. Even if the woman is poor, and based on her usufruct property, she would bring the offering of the poor; if her husband is wealthy, he brings the offering of a wealthy person on her behalf. And he must bring on her behalf all the offerings <b>for which she is obligated.</b>

### Part 8
The fact that he is obligated to bring a wealthy person’s offering on her behalf is due to the fact <b>that this</b> is what <b>he writes</b> in <b>her</b> marriage contract: <b>And responsibility</b> to pay any financial obligations <b>that you have</b> incurred <b>before this</b> moment <b>is</b> incumbent <b>upon me.</b> Offerings that she is obligated to bring are included in those obligations, irrespective of her degree of halakhic competence. The offering of a woman after childbirth is one of the offerings brought by those lacking atonement. Therefore, even if priests are our agents, they may sacrifice the offering on behalf of the woman; since they may do so without her knowledge and intent, no agency is required. Therefore, there is no proof from the mishna that priests are agents of Heaven.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC