
### Part 1
<b>Benefiting from you is <i>konam</i> for me if you do not take</b> from me <b>for your son a <i>kor</i> of wheat and two barrels of wine</b> as a gift, <b>this</b> other individual <b>can dissolve his vow without</b> the involvement of <b>a halakhic authority.</b> This is <b>because</b> he <b>can say to</b> the one who vowed: Did <b>you say</b> your vow for <b>any</b> reason <b>other than due to my honor,</b> in order to convince me to accept a gift for my son? <b>This is my honor,</b> that I refrain from accepting the gift.

### Part 2
The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that he may dissolve the vow without a halakhic authority is <b>because</b> the potential recipient <b>said: This is my honor. But</b> if he did <b>not</b> say <b>so,</b> then <b>it is a vow.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Whose</b> opinion does this follow? <b>If</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> then <b>it is</b> included in the category of <b>vows of exhortation</b> and is not considered a vow, since the intention was solely to encourage the other individual to accept the gift. <b>Rather, conclude from</b> this mishna that the <b>Rabbis disagree with him</b> and hold that vows of exhortation are also vows.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>Actually, it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, but Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov concedes in this</b> case <b>that it is a vow</b> and not just a means of encouragement <b>because</b> the one who took the vow <b>said to him: I am not a dog, that I benefit from you and you do not benefit from me.</b> Therefore, one truly wants the vow to be valid so that the other will accept the gift, and it was not intended merely as a means of encouragement.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests another proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the continuation of that mishna: So too, in the case of <b>one who says to another: Benefiting from me is <i>konam</i> for you if you do not give my son a <i>kor</i> of wheat and two barrels of wine, Rabbi Meir says:</b> The vow is valid, and he may not benefit from the one who took the vow <b>until he gives</b> the gift. <b>And the Rabbis say: Even this</b> individual who took the vow <b>can dissolve his</b> own <b>vow without</b> the involvement of <b>a halakhic authority, as he can say: I hereby</b> consider it <b>as though I received</b> the gift from you.

### Part 5
The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> is <b>because he said: I hereby</b> consider it <b>as though I received it</b> from you. <b>But</b> if he did <b>not</b> say <b>so, it would be a vow.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Whose</b> opinion does this statement reflect? <b>If</b> it reflects the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> then <b>it is</b> included in the category of <b>vows of exhortation. Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> this demonstrates that the Rabbis <b>disagree</b> with him with regard to vows of exhortation?

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: <b>No, actually</b> it is possible that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov. And Rabbi Eliezer</b> ben Ya’akov <b>concedes in this</b> case <b>that it is</b> considered <b>a vow because</b> the one that took the vow <b>says to him: I am not a king that I</b> provide <b>benefit to you and you do not</b> provide <b>benefit to me.</b> Consequently, the intent is not simply to encourage him but rather, to actually take a vow.

### Part 7
<b>Mar Kashisha, son of Rav Ḥisda, said to Rav Ashi: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a mishna (27a): What are examples of <b>vows</b> impeded by <b>circumstances beyond</b> one’s <b>control,</b> which do not require dissolution? If <b>one’s friend took a vow with regard to him that he should eat with him, and</b> then <b>he became sick, or his son became sick, or a river</b> that he was unable to cross <b>barred him</b> from coming, these are vows impeded by circumstances beyond one’s control. The Gemara infers: Such a vow does not require dissolution in cases like these, but <b>if not</b> for <b>this</b> unavoidable element, <b>it would be a vow.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Whose</b> opinion does this follow? <b>If</b> it follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> then <b>they are</b> vows of <b>exhortation</b> that he did not intend to be treated as vows at all. <b>Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> it is therefore clear that the Rabbis <b>disagree</b> with him?

### Part 8
Rav Ashi responds: <b>Actually,</b> this follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov. But do you hold that</b> in the case here <b>the host took a vow with regard to the</b> potential <b>guest? No,</b> the case here is <b>where the</b> potential <b>guest caused a vow</b> to be taken <b>by the host</b> and <b>said to him: Do you invite me to your meal?</b> The inviter <b>said to him: Yes.</b> The invitee then asked him: <b>Is this vow upon you,</b> i.e., do you vow to do so? The inviter agreed <b>and he vowed, and</b> then <b>he became sick, or his son became sick, or a river barred him</b> from coming; <b>these are vows</b> impeded by <b>circumstances beyond</b> one’s <b>control.</b> Because the vow was initiated by the potential guest rather than the host, it cannot qualify as a vow of exhortation. Consequently, dissolution is not allowed except when unavoidable situations like these occur.

### Part 9
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof: <b>Further</b> to the point of the mishna, <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov said:</b> In the case of <b>one who says to his friend: Benefiting from you is <i>konam</i> for me if you do not lodge with me, and eat hot bread with me, and drink a cup</b> of <b>hot</b> water <b>with me, and the other becomes irritated at him</b> because he was forcing him to do so, <b>these are also vows of exhortation. But the Rabbis did not concede to him</b> on this issue, because the friend’s opposition implies that the vow must be a valid vow and not a vow of exhortation. The Gemara clarifies: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>The Rabbis did not concede to him? Does it not</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC