
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who takes a vow</b> that deriving benefit <b>from</b> those <b>who rest on Shabbat</b> is forbidden to him is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from a Jew, and</b> he is also <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from Samaritans [<i>Kutim</i>]</b> because they are also Shabbat observers. One who takes a vow that deriving benefit <b>from those who eat garlic</b> on Shabbat night is forbidden to him is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from a Jew, and</b> he is also <b>prohibited</b> from benefiting <b>from Samaritans.</b> However, if one takes a vow that deriving benefit <b>from those who ascend</b> to <b>Jerusalem</b> is forbidden to him, he is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from a Jew, but</b> he is <b>permitted</b> to benefit <b>from Samaritans</b> because they do not ascend to Jerusalem, but rather, to Mount Gerizim.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the expression in the mishna: <b>Those who rest on Shabbat? If we say</b> that the one who took the vow intended to render forbidden deriving benefit <b>from those who uphold Shabbat,</b> i.e., who actually observe it, <b>why</b> mention <b>specifically</b> that he is prohibited <b>from</b> deriving benefit from <b>Samaritans; even</b> benefit from other <b>gentiles</b> who are Shabbat observers should <b>also</b> be prohibited? <b>Rather,</b> the intention of the <i>tanna</i> was to refer to a case where one took a vow that deriving benefit <b>from</b> those <b>who are commanded about</b> observing <b>Shabbat</b> is forbidden, and this <i>tanna</i> holds that the Samaritans are considered true converts, commanded to observe Shabbat.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so, say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If he takes a vow that deriving benefit <b>from those who ascend to Jerusalem</b> is forbidden to him, he is <b>prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from a Jew but permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from Samaritans. Why? But aren’t</b> Samaritans <b>commanded</b> to ascend just like other Jews?

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said:</b> It <b>is teaching</b> about those who are <b>commanded and</b> actually <b>perform</b> a mitzva, and the mishna is to be understood as follows: <b>In the first two clauses</b> of the mishna, which concern Shabbat observance and eating garlic, both <b>Jews and Samaritans</b> are included because they are <b>commanded and</b> actually <b>perform</b> the mitzva. However, with regard to <b>gentiles, those who perform</b> these mitzvot have the status of those who <b>perform</b> the mitzva <b>but are not commanded</b> to do so. Therefore, the one who took the vow is permitted to derive benefit from them. Concerning the case <b>of those who ascend to Jerusalem, a Jew is commanded</b> to keep this mitzva <b>and performs</b> it, while <b>Samaritans</b> are <b>commanded but do not perform</b> it, so he is permitted to derive benefit from them.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: The property <b>of</b> the <b>descendants of Noah is <i>konam</i></b> for me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I will not benefit</b> from it, he is <b>permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from a Jew but prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from the nations of the world.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>And is a Jew excluded from the category</b> of the <b>descendants of Noah?</b> They are also descendants of Noah. The Gemara answers: <b>Since Abraham was sanctified</b> and designated to possess a unique role in the world, all his descendants <b>are called by his name</b> and are no longer termed the descendants of Noah.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: The property <b>of the offspring of Abraham</b> is forbidden to me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I will not benefit</b> from it, <b>he is prohibited</b> from deriving benefit <b>from a Jew but permitted</b> to derive benefit <b>from the nations of the world.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Concerning the mishna’s ruling that the one who takes such a vow is permitted to derive benefit from the nations of the world, the Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there Ishmael</b> and his descendants, who are also Abraham’s offspring? Why isn’t deriving benefit from them forbidden as well? The Gemara answers: <b>It is written</b> with regard to Abraham: <b>“For in Isaac shall seed be called to you”</b> (Genesis 21:12), which demonstrates that the descendants of Ishmael are not termed the offspring of Abraham. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there Esau</b> and his descendants; they are also offspring of Abraham, since they are descendants of Isaac? The Gemara answers that the words <b>“in Isaac”</b> mean that some of Isaac’s descendants, i.e., the children of Jacob, are included in the offspring of Abraham, <b>but not all</b> the descendants of <b>Isaac.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one says: The property of <b>a Jew is</b> forbidden to me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I will not benefit</b> from it, <b>he may purchase</b> items from a Jew <b>for more</b> than the market price <b>and may sell</b> items to a Jew <b>for less</b> than the market price, so that he does not derive benefit from the transactions. If one says: <b>Benefit from me is</b> forbidden <b>to a Jew, he may purchase</b> items from a Jew <b>for less</b> than the market price <b>and may sell</b> items to a Jew <b>for more</b> than the market price, so that he does not derive benefit from the transactions. <b>But</b> although this would be permitted, <b>they do not listen to him,</b> i.e., people will generally not agree to deal with him in a manner that causes them a loss in every transaction. If one says: The property of a Jew is forbidden to me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I will not benefit from them, and</b> my property is forbidden to a Jew and <b>they</b> will not benefit <b>from me,</b> in this case <b>he may benefit from the nations of the world</b> but not from a Jew, and a Jew may not benefit from him.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Shmuel said:</b> In the case of <b>one who takes a vessel from a craftsman to examine it, and an accident occurs</b> to it while it is <b>in his hand,</b> e.g. it broke, the one who examined it is <b>liable</b> to pay for the damages. Since the one examining the item could have completed the sale at any time, he is treated like a borrower while he examines it, as all the benefit is his. The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently,</b> Shmuel <b>holds</b> that in every sale <b>the</b> primary <b>benefit</b> belongs to <b>the buyer.</b> The buyer benefits much more than the seller, and therefore he must pay for accidents.

### Part 11
The Gemara raises a difficulty with Shmuel’s statement: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna that if one says: The property of <b>a Jew is</b> forbidden to me, and for <b>that</b> reason <b>I will not benefit</b> from it, <b>he may sell</b> items to a Jew <b>for less</b> than the market price. The Gemara infers: He may sell at a lesser price, <b>but</b> selling the items at a price <b>equal</b> to the market price is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>But if the</b> primary <b>benefit</b> of the sale is to the <b>buyer,</b> then <b>even</b> selling the items at a price <b>equal</b> to the market price should be permitted. The Gemara answers: <b>The mishna</b> is referring <b>to a sale that lies in his face,</b> i.e., an item that arouse no interest among potential buyers. In that case, the seller benefits from the sale even the item is sold at market value, and this is prohibited.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, say the first clause</b> of that <i>halakha</i>: <b>He may purchase</b> items from a Jew <b>for more</b> than the market price. If the mishna deals with a case where the seller is glad to sell, why does the buyer need to pay more? He should be permitted to pay the market value. <b>Furthermore, say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If one says: <b>Benefit from me is</b> forbidden <b>to a Jew, he may purchase</b> items from a Jew <b>for less</b> than the market price <b>and may sell</b> items to a Jew <b>for more</b> than the market price. <b>But if</b> it is referring <b>to a sale that lies in his face,</b> then <b>even</b> if he sells <b>at the</b> price <b>equal</b> to the purchase price he has more benefit than the buyer, and it should be permitted.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>The latter clause</b> is referring <b>to</b> the opposite case, in <b>a keen [<i>ḥarifa</i>] sale,</b> i.e., one in which the merchandise arouses keen interest among potential buyers. Therefore, the buyer benefits if he pays the market price. The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> that the latter clause is referring to such a case, why should the one who took the vow <b>purchase</b> it <b>for less</b> than the market price? <b>Even at the</b> price <b>equal</b> to the purchase price it should be permitted, since the merchandise is selling well and the seller derives no benefit from it. <b>Rather,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC