
### Part 1
<b>And Rava said:</b> It means: <b>If so, there are no requests</b> for the dissolution <b>of vows to a halakhic authority.</b> Since this type of extenuation applies to all vows, people will therefore assume that their vows are automatically dissolved, and will not take the required steps to dissolve them.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the dispute between Abaye and Rava: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And the Rabbis concede to Rabbi Eliezer with regard to</b> a vow concerning <b>a matter that is between him and his father and mother, that</b> they <b>may broach</b> dissolution <b>with him by</b> raising the issue of <b>the honor of his father and mother. Granted, according to Abaye, who said: If so, vows are not dissolved</b> properly, <b>here, since he was impudent toward him</b> by stating a vow that subjects his parent to a prohibition, <b>he was impudent toward him</b> and has demonstrated that he is not concerned for their honor. In such a case, there is no concern that he would pretend to regret his vow due to his parents’ honor. This is why the Rabbis concede to Rabbi Eliezer.

### Part 3
<b>But according to Rava, who said: If so, there are no requests</b> for dissolution made <b>to a halakhic authority, here,</b> in the case of one whose vow involves his parents, <b>why</b> may they <b>broach</b> dissolution in this way? Why is there not a concern that people will assume that this dissolves all vows automatically? The Gemara answers: The Sages <b>say</b> in response: <b>Since it is not sufficient</b> and applicable <b>for all vows not</b> to request dissolution from <b>a halakhic authority,</b> because the Rabbis maintain that in general, the honor of one’s parents cannot be used to broach dissolution, <b>here too,</b> they <b>may broach</b> dissolution by invoking the honor of a parent. There is no concern that this may lead one to think that vows are dissolved automatically, as this extenuation applies only to this particular vow.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And Rabbi Eliezer further said:</b> They <b>may broach</b> dissolution <b>by</b> asking about <b>a new situation,</b> but the Rabbis prohibit it. The Gemara inquires: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Eliezer? Rav Ḥisda said: For the verse states</b> that God told Moses he could return to Egypt from Midian, despite having vowed to Yitro that he would not do so: <b>“For all the men are dead</b> that sought your life” (Exodus 4:19), and he took the vow only because it would be dangerous for him to return to Egypt. The Gemara explains the proof: <b>But death is a new circumstance,</b> and Moses’ vow was dissolved based on the men dying. Therefore, it can be understood <b>from here that</b> they <b>may broach</b> dissolution <b>by</b> asking about <b>a new situation.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the Rabbis, what is their reason</b> for not accepting this proof? The Gemara answers: <b>They hold: These</b> people who were seeking Moses’ life, <b>had they</b> indeed <b>died? But Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Wherever it is stated</b> in the Torah the term <b>striving</b> (Exodus 2:13), in reference to the men who slandered Moses, <b>or standing</b> (Exodus 5:20), in reference to those who complained against Moses and Aaron, <b>they are none other than Dathan and Abiram.</b> Dathan and Abiram were alive during the rebellion of Korah, which occurred years later, so they could not have been dead when God instructed Moses to return to Egypt. <b>Rather, Reish Lakish said:</b> They did not literally die, but the verse means <b>that they lost their property</b> and their status in the community, which meant their opinions were no longer granted credibility, and consequently, Moses could safely return to Egypt. Such a turn of events is not considered to be a new circumstance.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Any person who does not have children is considered like a dead</b> person. The source is <b>as is stated</b> in the words Rachel said to Jacob: <b>“Give me children, or else I am dead”</b> (Genesis 30:1). <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Four are considered as</b> if they were <b>dead: A pauper, and a leper, and a blind</b> person, <b>and one who has no children. A pauper, as it is written: “For all the men are dead”</b> (Exodus 4:19). As explained above, they were not actually dead but had descended into poverty, and yet they were considered dead. <b>A leper, as it is written</b> that Aaron said to Moses with regard to Miriam’s leprosy: <b>“Let her not, I pray, be as one dead”</b> (Numbers 12:12). <b>And a blind</b> person, <b>as it is written: “He has made me to dwell in dark places, as those that have been long dead”</b> (Lamentations 3:6). <b>And one who has no children, as it is written: “Give me children, or else I am dead”</b> (Genesis 30:1).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC