
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Abba raised an objection</b> from a later mishna (66a): If a one said: <b>I will not marry ugly so-and-so</b> as <b>that is <i>konam</i></b> for me, <b>and she is</b> in fact <b>beautiful,</b> or if he called her <b>black, and she is</b> in fact <b>white,</b> or if he called her <b>short, and she is</b> in fact <b>tall, he is permitted to her. Not because she</b> was <b>ugly and became beautiful, black and became white,</b> or <b>short and became tall,</b> but <b>rather,</b> because <b>the vow was mistaken</b> from the outset. <b>Granted, according to Rav Huna, who said that he is considered like one who makes his vow dependent on a matter,</b> the mishna here <b>taught</b> the case of one who <b>makes his vow dependent on a matter, and it taught</b> there the case of <b>a mistaken vow. But according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, who said</b> that the mishna here is referring to a situation where the dog had <b>already died, or</b> the father had <b>already repented, why do I</b> need the mishna <b>to teach</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a mistaken vow twice?</b> The Gemara comments: This is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And Rabbi Meir further said:</b> The halakhic authorities <b>may broach</b> dissolution <b>with him from that which is written in the Torah, and</b> they <b>may say to him: Had you known that</b> through your vow <b>you are transgressing</b> the prohibition <b>“you shall not take vengeance”</b> (Leviticus 19:18) <b>and</b> the prohibition <b>“nor bear any grudge”</b> (Leviticus 19:18), <b>and</b> the prohibition <b>“you shall not hate your brother in your heart”</b> (Leviticus 19:17), and <b>“you shall love your neighbor as yourself”</b> (Leviticus 19:18), as well as <b>“and your brother</b> should <b>live with you”</b> (Leviticus 25:36), <b>as he,</b> the one prohibited by the vow, <b>is poor and</b> now <b>you are not able to provide him</b> with a livelihood due to your vow, would you have vowed in that case? If <b>he said</b> in reply: <b>Had I known that it is so,</b> that my vow involved all these prohibitions, <b>I would not have vowed; it is dissolved.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Huna bar Rav Ketina said to the Sages:</b> But <b>let</b> the one who stated the vow <b>say</b> with regard to the last claim: <b>All who become poor do not fall upon me;</b> it is not my responsibility to provide for this specific poor person. <b>What is placed upon me to provide for him together with everyone else, I will provide</b> to <b>him</b> when I give money to those collecting for the communal charity fund. <b>They said to him: I say</b> that <b>anyone who falls</b> into poverty and requires assistance <b>does not fall into the hands of the</b> charity <b>collector first.</b> Rather, his descent begins when he encounters hard times, and it is at this stage that he may require individual, direct support to prevent him from plunging into a state of absolute poverty.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The halakhic authorities <b>may broach</b> dissolution <b>with a man by</b> raising the issue of <b>his wife’s marriage contract.</b> If one takes a vow that would require him to divorce his wife, e.g., he prohibits her from deriving benefit from him, his vow may be dissolved by asking him whether he had considered how difficult it would be to pay her marriage contract.

### Part 5
The mishna relates: <b>And an incident</b> occurred <b>with regard to one who vowed</b> against <b>his wife</b> deriving <b>benefit from</b> him, <b>and her marriage contract was</b> worth <b>four hundred dinars. And he came before Rabbi Akiva, and he obligated him to give her</b> the payment of <b>her marriage contract. He said to</b> Rabbi Akiva: <b>My teacher,</b> my <b>father left eight hundred dinars</b> as our inheritance, of which <b>my brother took four hundred and I</b> took <b>four hundred. Isn’t it enough for</b> my wife <b>to take two hundred and I</b> will have <b>two hundred? Rabbi Akiva said to him:</b> Your claim is not accepted, as <b>even if you sell the hair on your head, you must give her</b> the full payment of <b>her marriage contract. He said to him: Had I known that it was so,</b> that I would have to give her all my property, <b>I would not have vowed. And Rabbi Akiva permitted her</b> to derive benefit from him.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara questions the comment made by Rabbi Akiva, that even if the man were to sell the hair on his head, he must pay her the full sum of her marriage contract: <b>Is movable property mortgaged for</b> the payment of <b>a marriage contract?</b> The Rabbis maintain that only land owned by the husband is mortgaged for the payment of a marriage contract, so why should he have to sell the hair on his head? <b>Abaye said:</b> He said that the father had left <b>land worth eight hundred dinars,</b> and he received four hundred dinars’ worth of land, so all of his land is equal in value to his wife’s marriage contract. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that he must pay even from: <b>The hair on his head, and the hair on his head is movable property.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This is what he said:</b> You must pay the marriage contract from the land <b>even</b> if <b>you</b> will need to <b>sell</b> the <b>hair on your head and</b> use the proceeds from the sale in order to <b>eat,</b> as you will have no other source of income.

### Part 7
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Should you conclude from</b> the mishna that <b>arrangements are not made with a creditor,</b> but instead, the entire sum is collected immediately, without reaching an agreement with the husband’s creditors to leave him some money to support himself? The Gemara refutes this suggestion: <b>Rav Naḥman, son of Rabbi Yitzḥak, said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC