
### Part 1
<b>and a rug,</b> as an exile needs those items and they are portable. The Sages interpreted the following verse describing the exile experience: “Therefore shall you serve your enemy whom the Lord shall send against you, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and <b>in want of all things;</b> and he shall put a yoke of iron upon your neck, until he has destroyed you” (Deuteronomy 28:48). <b>Rabbi Ami said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> “In want of all things” means <b>without a lamp and without a table</b> to eat upon. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Without a wife. Rav Sheshet said: Without an attendant</b> to aid him. <b>Rav Naḥman said: Without intelligence.</b> One of the Sages <b>teaches</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Without salt and without fat [<i>revav</i>]</b> in which to dip his bread.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said</b> that <b>we have a tradition: A poor person is only</b> one lacking <b>in intelligence,</b> in agreement with the opinion of Rav Naḥman. <b>In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say:</b> One <b>who</b> has <b>this</b> attribute, intelligence, <b>in him</b> has <b>everything in him.</b> One <b>who does not</b> have <b>this</b> attribute <b>in him, what is in him?</b> If <b>he acquired this, what</b> else <b>is lacking?</b> If <b>he has not acquired this, what has he acquired?</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>Rabbi Alexandri said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: The sick person recovers from his illness only when</b> the heavenly court <b>forgives him for all his sins, as it is stated: “Who forgives all your iniquity; Who heals all your diseases”</b> (Psalms 103:3). <b>Rav Hamnuna said:</b> When he recovers, <b>he returns to the days of his youth, as it is stated</b> in a verse with regard to one recovering from illness: <b>“His flesh is tenderer than a child’s; he returns to the days of his youth”</b> (Job 33:25). Interpreting the verse: “The Lord will support him upon the bed of suffering; <b>You overturned all his lying down in his illness”</b> (Psalms 41:4), <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> That is <b>to say that</b> the sick person <b>forgets his studies,</b> as everything that is organized is overturned.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yosef</b> himself <b>fell ill</b> and <b>his studies were forgotten. Abaye restored</b> his studies by reviewing what he had learned from Rav Yosef <b>before him. This is</b> the background for that <b>which we say everywhere</b> throughout the Talmud, that <b>Rav Yosef said: I did not learn this <i>halakha</i>,</b> and <b>Abaye said to him</b> in response: <b>You said this to us and</b> it was <b>from this <i>baraita</i></b> that <b>you said it to us.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>would learn thirteen aspects of a <i>halakha</i></b> on a certain issue, <b>he taught Rabbi Ḥiyya seven of them. Ultimately, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>fell ill</b> and forgot all thirteen aspects. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya restored those seven aspects that</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught him</b> by reviewing them before Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi. However, <b>six were gone</b> and forgotten, as Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi had not taught them to anyone. There <b>was a certain launderer</b> who <b>would hear Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>when he was studying</b> those <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya went and learned</b> those <i>halakhot</i> <b>from the launderer and he came and restored them</b> by reviewing them <b>before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>When Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>saw that launderer, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: You made me and Ḥiyya,</b> as we were able to learn these <i>halakhot</i> that otherwise would have been forgotten. <b>Some say</b> that <b>this is what he said to</b> the launderer: <b>You made Ḥiyya, and Ḥiyya made me.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Alexandri said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Greater is the miracle performed for the sick person than the miracle that was performed for Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,</b> who were rescued from the fiery furnace (see Daniel, chapter 3), as in the miracle of <b>Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,</b> they were rescued from <b>the fire of a layman, and anyone is capable of extinguishing it. And that</b> fire afflicting <b>a sick person</b> with a fever is the fire <b>of Heaven, and who can extinguish it?</b>

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Alexandri said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said, and some say Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Once the end</b> of the time allotted for the life of <b>a person arrived, everything has dominion over him, as it is stated</b> that Cain said: <b>“Whosoever finds me will slay me”</b> (Genesis 4:14). Cain feared that since God sentenced him to death he would be susceptible to all threats and vulnerable to anyone seeking to murder him. <b>Rav said</b> that it is derived <b>from this verse: “They stand this day according to Your judgments; for all are Your servants”</b> (Psalms 119:91). When the decree emerges from Heaven that the time has arrived for a person to die, everyone is a servant of God, an agent to kill him.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates that people <b>said to Rabba bar Sheila: A man died.</b> This person <b>was tall</b> and was <b>riding on a small mule [<i>giredona</i>]. When he reached a bridge [<i>tittora</i>],</b> the mule <b>was frightened [<i>istavveit</i>]</b> and <b>cast off</b> the rider, <b>and</b> although the rider was tall and the mule was short and the rider did not fall far, <b>he died.</b> Rabba bar Sheila <b>read</b> the verse and applied it <b>to</b> the rider: <b>“They stand this day according to Your judgments.”</b>

### Part 9
<b>Shmuel saw a certain frog [<i>kerokita</i>],</b> and also noticed <b>that a scorpion was sitting upon the frog and</b> the frog <b>crossed the river.</b> The scorpion <b>stung a man</b> on the other side of the river <b>and</b> the man <b>died.</b> Shmuel <b>read</b> and applied the verse <b>to</b> the dead man: <b>“They stand this day according to Your judgments.”</b> Even the frog and scorpion are servants and agents of God. The only way the scorpion could reach the man and kill him was by means of the frog taking it across the river.

### Part 10
§ <b>Shmuel said: One visits a sick person only if</b> that person <b>is one whom fever overcame.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> illnesses <b>does</b> this statement come to <b>exclude?</b> The Gemara answers: It comes <b>to exclude that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei ben Perata says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: One visits neither those with intestinal illness, nor those with eye illness, nor</b> those suffering from <b>headaches.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> one does not visit <b>those with intestinal sickness, due to</b> the sick person’s <b>embarrassment,</b> as he would need to frequently relieve himself and it would be awkward for him in the presence of the visitor. <b>However, what is the reason</b> that one does not visit <b>those with eye illnesses and headaches?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>It is due to</b> that <b>which Rav Yehuda said, as Rav Yehuda said: Speech is injurious for the eye and beneficial for</b> curing <b>a fever.</b> Therefore, if one suffers from pain in his eye or his head it is better for him not to talk. If he has visitors, he will need to speak to them, which will cause him harm. <b>Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>this fever [<i>ishta</i>], were it not the agent [<i>parvanka</i>] of the Angel of Death,</b> i.e., the cause of serious, potentially deadly illnesses, it could be deemed <b>beneficial,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC