
### Part 1
<b>One who weeds <i>ḥasayot</i> with a Samaritan may eat a casual meal from them</b> without tithing, as any untithed produce may be eaten in the framework of a casual meal. <b>And</b> when he completes the labor on the <i>ḥasayot</i>, places them into a pile, and they require tithing, <b>he tithes them</b> as produce that is <b>definitely</b> obligated in tithing, not as doubtfully tithed produce, as the assumption is that the Samaritan did not tithe the <i>ḥasayot</i>.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: If</b> the <i>ḥasayot</i> belong to <b>a Jew</b> who is <b>suspect</b> about observance of <b>the Sabbatical Year, at the conclusion of the Sabbatical Year</b> it <b>is permitted</b> to weed with him, as there is no concern that there might be Sabbatical-Year sanctity. The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say</b> that <b>the permitted growths</b> of the eighth year <b>neutralize the prohibition,</b> and that is why there is no concern about Sabbatical-Year sanctity? The Gemara rejects that inference: <b>And perhaps</b> the <i>tanna</i> is speaking <b>with regard to an item whose seeds cease</b> after it is sown, whose growths neutralize the original prohibition? The Gemara rejects that possibility: <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>These are <i>ḥasayot</i>, for example, arum, garlic, and onions,</b> whose seeds do not cease?

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps</b> the <i>tanna</i> is speaking <b>with regard to</b> plants that were <b>crushed</b> before they sprouted growths? The Gemara answers: It is the case of one who is <b>suspect about</b> observance of <b>the Sabbatical Year,</b> that <b>is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, and one who is suspect would not bother to eliminate the prohibition by crushing it. The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps</b> the <i>tanna</i> is speaking <b>with regard to a mixture</b> of forbidden <i>ḥasayot</i> and permitted ones, and the reason that it is permitted is that the prohibition was neutralized by the majority of permitted <i>ḥasayot</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>One who weeds, is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, indicating that he is eating the leaves as he weeds them, leaving no opportunity for the <i>ḥasayot</i> to be mixed with others.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that this is a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinions <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yonatan,</b> who stated regarding <i>orla</i> and food crops in a vineyard that their permitted growth does not neutralize the prohibition of the original fruit or food crops respectively. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> The <b>Sabbatical-Year</b> produce <b>is different. Since its prohibition</b> is engendered <b>by means of the ground, its nullification is</b> effected <b>by means of the ground as well.</b> The prohibition can be neutralized by means of the growth that results from replanting the forbidden plant in a permitted manner.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: Isn’t there the case of <b>tithe, whose prohibition is</b> engendered <b>by means of the ground, but its nullification is not</b> effected <b>by means of the ground? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a <i>litra</i> of untithed</b> first <b>tithe</b> from which the <i>teruma</i> of the tithe was not taken, <b>which one sowed in the ground, and it grew and it is</b> now <b>approximately ten <i>litra</i>,</b> that additional growth <b>is obligated</b> to have <b>tithe</b> taken <b>and</b> is subject to the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of Sabbatical-Year</b> produce. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>that</b> original <b><i>litra</i></b> of untithed first tithe that he sowed, one <b>tithes for it from</b> produce in <b>a different place,</b> and not from the <i>litra</i> itself, <b>based on a calculation</b> of how much <i>teruma</i> of the tithe needed to be taken from that litra. Apparently, the growth that results from sowing the first tithe in the ground does not neutralize its prohibition.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC