
### Part 1
The Gemara comments: <b>But</b> is it not so that <b>with regard to</b> the <b>tears</b> in one’s clothing that are made for the dead, <b>as it is written “for,” “for,”</b> and <b>about which is written:</b> “And David took hold of his garments and rent them, and likewise all the men that were with him, and they wailed, and wept, and fasted until the evening, <b>for Saul, and for Jonathan his son,</b> and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword” (II Samuel 1:11–12). The use of the word “for” with regard to each of them indicates that one must make a separate tear in his garment for each person who died.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> yet it <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>they said to him</b> that <b>his father had died and he rent</b> his garment over his death, <b>and afterward it was discovered</b> that it was not his father who died, but <b>his son, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment. This shows that even if a person mistakenly tore his garment for the wrong person he has nevertheless fulfilled the obligation. Here too, if a man nullified the vow of his wife, thinking that it was the vow of his daughter, his nullification should be effective.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: The apparent contradiction <b>is not difficult</b>. <b>That</b> baraita refers to a case where he received a <b>non-specific</b> report, i.e., he was told that an unspecified relative died. In such a case his obligation to rend his garment has been discharged. And <b>this</b> mishna refers to a case where the bearer of the news mistakenly <b>specified</b> that his daughter had taken the vow, when in reality his wife had. In such a case, his nullification is ineffective.

### Part 4
<b>And it is taught</b> similarly in the following <i>baraita</i>: If <b>they said to him</b> that <b>his father had died and he rent</b> his garment over his death, <b>and afterward it was discovered</b> that it was not his father who died, but <b>his son, he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment. If, however, <b>they said to him</b> that a relative <b>of his had died, and he thought it was his father and he rent</b> his garment over his death, <b>and afterward it was discovered</b> that it was not his father who died, but <b>his son, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment. This proves that a distinction is made between one who rends his garment relying on a specific report and one who does so following a non-specific report.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi says</b> that the discrepancy between the <i>baraitot</i> with regard to the rending of garments can be reconciled in a different manner: <b>Here,</b> the person who rent his garment for the wrong relative realized his error <b>within the time required for speaking</b> the short phrase: Greetings to you, my teacher. Until that time has passed his action is seen as incomplete and can therefore still be modified. <b>There,</b> the mistake was noted only <b>after the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase.

### Part 6
<b>This</b> case, <b>where you said</b> that <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment even though he had initially been told explicitly that his father died, deals with a situation <b>where it was discovered within the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase, i.e., immediately after he rent his garment, that the deceased was <b>his son.</b> However, <b>that</b> case, <b>where you said</b> that <b>he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment, deals with a situation where he became aware of his mistake <b>after the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase, i.e., a short while later.

### Part 7
<b>And it is taught</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who has an ill</b> relative <b>in his house, and</b> the latter <b>fainted</b> and lost consciousness, <b>and it seemed</b> to him <b>that</b> the ill person had <b>died and</b> therefore <b>he rent</b> his garment over his assumed death, if it turned out that he had not yet actually died at that point <b>and</b> it was only <b>afterward</b> that <b>he died,</b> the relative <b>has not fulfilled</b> his obligation of <b>rending</b> his garment. And with regard to this <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said in the name of Bar Kappara: They taught</b> that he has not fulfilled his obligation of rending <b>only if</b> the ill person <b>died after the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase. <b>But</b> if he passed away <b>within the time required for speaking</b> a short phrase, <b>it is</b> all considered <b>like</b> continuous <b>speech,</b> and his relative has fulfilled his obligation. That is to say, his act of rending is not viewed as complete until the time required for saying a short phrase has elapsed, and until that time has passed the act can still be modified.

### Part 8
The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is: The legal status of a pause or retraction <b>within</b> the time required <b>for speaking</b> a short phrase <b>is like</b> that of <b>continuous speech,</b> and so a person can retract what he first said if he issues the retraction within this period of time after he finished speaking. This principle holds true in almost every area of <i>halakha</i>, <b>except for</b> the case of one who <b>blasphemes</b> God; <b>or</b> in the case of <b>an idol worshipper,</b> who verbally accepts an idol as his god; <b>or</b> one who <b>betroths</b> a woman; <b>or</b> one who <b>divorces</b> his wife. In these four cases, a person cannot undo his action, even if he immediately retracts what he said within the time required for saying a short phrase.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a woman <b>said: Tasting these figs and grapes is <i>konam</i> for me,</b> and her husband <b>upheld</b> her vow <b>with regard to figs, the entire</b> vow <b>is upheld,</b> but if <b>he nullified</b> it <b>with regard to figs it is not nullified until he also nullifies</b> the vow <b>with regard to grapes.</b> If <b>she said: Tasting a fig and tasting a grape are <i>konam</i> for me, these are</b> viewed as <b>two</b> separate <b>vows;</b> if the husband upholds one of the vows it has no effect on the other one.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> The Gemara answers: It follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse concerning vows that states: <b>“Her husband may uphold it, or her husband may nullify it”</b> (Numbers 30:14), may be expounded as follows. If a woman <b>said: Tasting these figs and grapes is <i>konam</i> for me,</b> and her husband <b>upheld</b> her vow <b>with regard to figs, the entire</b> vow <b>is upheld.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC