
### Part 1
It was <b>taught: She had a false tooth [<i>shen totevet</i>],</b> which disfigured her, <b>and Rabbi Yishmael made her a gold tooth from his own</b> money, thereby beautifying her. <b>When Rabbi Yishmael died, a certain eulogizer began</b> his eulogy <b>about him like this: Daughters of Israel, weep for Rabbi Yishmael, who clothed you.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to his wife: Benefiting from me is <i>konam</i></b> for <b>you until you have given Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon your cooked food to taste,</b> so they can see for themselves what a bad cook you are. She brought the food to them, and <b>Rabbi Yehuda tasted</b> it, without concern for his honor. <b>He said:</b> This is an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And what</b> can be seen, <b>that</b> in order <b>to make peace between a man and his wife, the Torah said: My name, that is written in sanctity, shall be blotted out in the waters that curse,</b> as the words written on a scroll, including the name of God, were blotted out during the ceremony of preparing the water that a <i>sota</i> would drink. And this is so even <b>in</b> a case of where it is <b>uncertain</b> if this will bring peace between them, as she may or not be guilty of adultery. <b>I, all the more so,</b> should waive my honor in order to bring peace to this couple.

### Part 3
Conversely, <b>Rabbi Shimon did not taste. He said: Let all the children of the widow die, and Shimon will not budge from his place.</b> In other words, the husband can die and leave his wife a widow and his children orphans, and let them die too, rather than have people belittle the dignity of Torah scholars by taking such vows. <b>And furthermore,</b> there is another reason for my refusal: <b>So that they should not become used to taking vows.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to his wife: Benefiting from me is <i>konam</i></b> for <b>you until you have spat on Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. She came</b> to Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>and spat on his clothing. Rav Aḥa of Difti said to Ravina: But this</b> man <b>intended the humiliation</b> of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, which is not achieved by spitting on his clothing. Ravina <b>said to him: Spittle on the clothing of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel is a great humiliation</b> for him, and she has thereby fulfilled the vow.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to his wife: Benefiting from me is <i>konam</i></b> for <b>you until you show some beautiful [<i>yafeh</i>] part of you to Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei.</b> Rabbi Yishmael attempted to find something beautiful about the woman.

### Part 6
<b>He said to</b> his students: <b>Perhaps her head is beautiful? They said to him:</b> It is <b>round [<i>segalgal</i>]. Perhaps her hair is beautiful?</b> They replied: Her hair <b>resembles stalks of flax. Perhaps her eyes are beautiful? They are narrow [<i>terutot</i>]. Perhaps her ears are beautiful? They are double</b> in size. <b>Perhaps her nose is beautiful? It is stubby. Perhaps her lips are beautiful? They are thick. Perhaps her neck is beautiful? It is low</b> and short. <b>Perhaps her stomach is beautiful? It is swollen. Perhaps her legs are beautiful?</b> They are <b>as wide as a goose’s. Perhaps her name is beautiful? Her name is Likhlukhit. He said to them: It is fitting [<i>yafeh</i>]</b> that <b>she is called</b> by the name <b>Likhlukhit, as she is dirty [<i>melukhlekhet</i>] with blemishes, and he permitted her</b> to benefit from her husband, because she did have one beautiful feature, her fitting name.

### Part 7
The Gemara cites another incident: There was <b>a certain Babylonian who went up to Eretz Yisrael</b> and <b>married a woman</b> there. <b>He said to her: Cook two lentils,</b> i.e., some lentils, <b>for me. She cooked</b> exactly <b>two lentils for him. He grew angry with her. On the following day,</b> so that she would not repeat what she had done, <b>he said to her: Cook a <i>se’a</i> [<i>geriva</i>] for me,</b> intending: A large amount. <b>She cooked an</b> actual <b><i>se’a</i> for him,</b> far more than what one person could eat. <b>He said to her: Go and bring me two <i>butzinei</i>,</b> intending small gourds, as <i>butzinei</i> are small gourds in the Aramaic dialect spoken in Babylonia. <b>She went and brought him two lamps [<i>sheraggei</i>],</b> called <i>butzinei</i> in the Aramaic dialect spoken in Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 8
In anger, <b>he said to her: Go and break them on the head of the <i>bava</i>,</b> intending the gate, as <i>bava</i> means a gate in the Aramaic dialect spoken in Babylonia. She did not recognize this word. At that time, the Sage <b>Bava ben Buta was sitting as a judge at the gate. She went and broke them on his head,</b> as his name was Bava. <b>He said to her: What is this you have done? She said to him: This is what my husband commanded me</b> to do. <b>He said: You fulfilled your husband’s desire, may the Omnipresent bring forth from you two sons,</b> corresponding to the two candles, <b>like Bava ben Buta.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC