
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>You</b> have adequately <b>answered</b> the expression: <b>If I bathe,</b> but as for the vow: <b>If I do not bathe, what are the circumstances? If we say that she said: The benefit of bathing shall be forbidden to me forever if I do not bathe today, why does she</b> need <b>nullification</b> at all? <b>Let her bathe</b> today and nothing will be forbidden. <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> The mishna is referring to a case <b>where she said: The benefit of bathing is</b> forbidden <b>to me forever if I do not bathe in</b> foul <b>water</b> in which flax was <b>soaked.</b> The husband can nullify this vow, as it will make her repulsive, which is a form of disfigurement.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises an objection: In that case, you must <b>similarly</b> explain <b>that which</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches: If I do not adorn myself,</b> to mean: The benefit of adorning myself is forbidden to me forever if I do not do something repulsive, e.g., <b>if I do not adorn myself with naphtha [<i>neft</i>].</b> But this cannot be, as such a substance <b>is filthy</b> and the term adornment cannot be applied to it at all.

### Part 3
Rather, <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that the mishna is referring to a case <b>where she said: The benefit of bathing</b> is forbidden <b>to me forever if I bathe today, and</b> I take <b>an oath that I will not bathe</b> today. Through a combination of her vow and her oath she has rendered it prohibited for her to bathe forever. The situation is similar if she said: <b>The benefit of adornment</b> is forbidden <b>to me forever if I adorn myself today, and</b> I take <b>an oath that I will not adorn myself</b> today.

### Part 4
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi:</b> According to this explanation, <b>this</b> <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>should have taught: These are the vows and oaths</b> that he can nullify. Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Teach</b> so in the mishna: <b>These are the vows and oaths. And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>oaths are also</b> included in the category of <b>vows. As we learned</b> in a mishna (9a): If one said: <b>Like the vows of the wicked,</b> he has <b>vowed with respect to</b> becoming <b>a nazirite, and with regard to</b> bringing <b>an offering, and with regard to</b> taking <b>an oath.</b> This shows that an oath can also be called a vow.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> do <b>the Rabbis,</b> i.e., the first <i>tanna</i>, mean to <b>say</b> with regard to <b>bathing</b> that <b>when she does not bathe it involves affliction?</b> The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i> that states: <b>Although one is prohibited from</b> performing <b>any</b> of the five activities associated with affliction on Yom Kippur, i.e., eating or drinking, bathing, anointing, engaging in sexual intercourse, and wearing leather shoes, <b>one is punished</b> with <b><i>karet</i> only when one eats or drinks or performs</b> prohibited <b>labor alone. And if you say</b> that <b>when</b> a woman <b>does not bathe there is affliction,</b> and for this reason a husband may nullify such a vow taken by his wife, then <b>if one bathes on Yom Kippur, he should be liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i>,</b> in accordance with the verse “For whatever person shall not be afflicted on that same day, he shall be cut off [<i>venikhreta</i>] from his people” (Leviticus 23:29), as he has failed to observe this form of affliction.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said:</b> The meaning of the affliction in each case may be learned <b>from the context of the verse. With regard to Yom Kippur, where it is written:</b> “On the tenth of the month <b>you shall afflict your souls”</b> (Leviticus 16:29), the reference is to <b>a matter for which one knows</b> and feels <b>the affliction</b> right <b>now,</b> on Yom Kippur itself, i.e., abstention from food and drink, which is felt within a short period of time. One who abstains from <b>bathing,</b> however, <b>does not know</b> and feel <b>the affliction now,</b> but only later. By contrast, <b>with regard to vows, where it is written: “Every vow and every binding oath to afflict the soul,</b> her husband may uphold it, or her husband may nullify it” (Numbers 30:14), the reference is to <b>a matter that leads to affliction, and if she does not bathe</b> for an extended period of time, <b>it</b> eventually <b>leads to affliction.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> between this statement <b>of Rabbi Yosei and</b> another statement <b>of Rabbi Yosei.</b> It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a spring belonging to the residents of a city,</b> if the water was needed for <b>their</b> own <b>lives,</b> i.e., the city’s residents required the spring for drinking water, <b>and</b> it was also needed for <b>the lives of others, their</b> own <b>lives take precedence over the lives of others.</b> Likewise, if the water was needed for <b>their</b> own <b>animals and</b> also for <b>the animals of others, their</b> own <b>animals take precedence over the animals of others.</b> And if the water was needed for <b>their</b> own <b>laundry and</b> also for <b>the laundry of others, their</b> own <b>laundry takes precedence over the laundry of others.</b> However, if the spring water was needed for <b>the lives of others and their</b> own <b>laundry, the lives of others take precedence over their</b> own <b>laundry.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yosei</b> disagrees and <b>says:</b> Even <b>their</b> own <b>laundry takes precedence over the lives of others,</b> as the wearing of unlaundered clothes can eventually cause suffering and pose a danger. The Gemara clarifies the difficulty presented by this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Now,</b> if with regard to <b>laundry, Rabbi Yosei said</b> that refraining from laundering one’s clothes <b>involves pain</b> and affliction,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC