
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>grain [<i>dagan</i>]</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it <b>is prohibited to</b> eat <b>the dry cowpea,</b> because, like grain, its final stage of production involves being placed in a pile; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> It <b>is prohibited</b> for him to partake <b>of only the five species</b> of grain: Wheat, barley, oats, spelt, and rye, as that is the connotation of the term <i>dagan</i> in the Torah. <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> For <b>one who vows</b> that grain is forbidden to him, and therefore he will refrain <b>from</b> eating <b>grain [<i>tevua</i>],</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to eat <b>from</b> only <b>the five species</b> of grain. <b>However,</b> for <b>one who vows</b> that grain is forbidden to him, and therefore he will refrain <b>from</b> eating <b>grain [<i>dagan</i>],</b> it <b>is prohibited to</b> eat <b>all</b> produce whose final stage of production involves being placed in a pile, e.g., dry cowpea, <b>and</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for him <b>to</b> eat <b>fruits of the tree and vegetables.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that</b> according to Rabbi Meir, the term <b><i>dagan</i> means any</b> produce <b>that is</b> harvested at one time and <b>placed in a pile [<i>midgan</i>]? Rav Yosef raised an objection:</b> After King Hezekiah called upon the people to give <i>teruma</i> and tithes properly, the verse states: <b>“And as soon as the matter was publicized, the children of Israel gave in abundance the first fruits of <i>dagan</i>, wine, and oil,</b> and honey, <b>and of all the <i>tevua</i> of the field;</b> and the tithe of all that they brought <b>in abundance”</b> (II Chronicles 31:5). <b>And if you say</b> that <b><i>dagan</i> means any</b> produce <b>that is placed in a pile, what is</b> the meaning of the words <b>“As soon as the matter was publicized,</b> the children of Israel <b>gave in abundance</b> the first fruits of <i>dagan</i>…and of all the <i>tevua</i> of the field”? There is no need to list both <i>dagan</i> and all <i>tevua</i> of the field. <b>Abaye said:</b> <i>Tevua</i> comes <b>to include fruits of the tree and vegetables,</b> which they tithed although they are not included in <i>dagan</i>, as they are not harvested at one time and placed in a pile.

### Part 3
§ We learned in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> For <b>one who vows</b> that <b>grain</b> [<b><i>tevua</i>]</b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him, it is prohibited for him to eat from only the five species of grain. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Everyone concedes with regard to one who vows</b> that <b><i>tevua</i></b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>that</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to eat <b>from only the five species</b> of grain. The Rabbis do not disagree with Rabbi Meir in that regard. <b>That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And they agree with regard to one who vows</b> that <b><i>tevua</i></b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>that</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to eat <b>from only the five species</b> of grain. The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> that <b>obvious,</b> as it is only those species that are called <i>tevua</i>. The Gemara answers: It is necessary; <b>lest you say</b> that <b><i>tevua</i> means all items</b> that grow from the ground, therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us that</b> this expression <b>does not mean all items</b> that grow from the ground.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef raised an objection:</b> With regard to the verse <b>“And as soon as the matter was publicized, the children of Israel</b> gave <b>in abundance…</b>and of all the <i>tevua</i> of the field,” the phrase “and of all the <i>tevua</i> of the field” comes to include all crops that grow in the field. <b>Rava said: <i>Tevua</i> is discrete</b> and refers to only the five species of grain, <b>and <i>tevua</i> of the field is discrete</b> and refers to all crops that grow in the field.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara relates: <b>The son of Master Shmuel commanded</b> his workers <b>that they give thirteen thousand dinars to Rava from the crop [<i>alalta</i>]</b> produced in his fields on the banks <b>of the Panya River. Rava sent</b> this question <b>before Rav Yosef: What is called <i>alalta</i>;</b> what crops are included in the category of <i>alalta</i>? <b>Rav Yosef said: It is</b> as it is taught in the <b><i>baraita</i></b> cited above: <b>And they agree with regard to one who vows</b> that <b><i>tevua</i></b> is forbidden <b>to</b> him <b>that</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to eat <b>from only the five species</b> of grain; just as <i>tevua</i> includes only the five species, so too <i>alalta</i> includes only the five species. <b>Abaye said to</b> him: <b>Are</b> the two cases <b>comparable?</b> Although <b><i>tevua</i> means</b> grain and includes <b>only the five species, <i>alalta</i> means</b> crop and includes <b>all items</b> that grow.

### Part 6
The messengers <b>returned</b> with the answer to his question and came <b>before Rava. He said: That was not a dilemma for me,</b> i.e., the fact <b>that <i>alalta</i> means all items</b> that grow. <b>This is</b> the matter <b>that is a dilemma for me: What is</b> the legal status of profits from the <b>rent of houses and the rent of boats? Do we say: Since they depreciate,</b> their legal status is <b>not</b> comparable to <b>that</b> of <b>a crop?</b> Only items that are consistently profitable are similar to crops. House boats deteriorate with use, and their depreciation diminishes the profits. <b>Or perhaps, since their depreciation is not conspicuous,</b> their legal status <b>is</b> comparable to that of <b>a crop. The Rabbis stated</b> Rava’s reaction <b>before Rav Yosef.</b> Rav Yosef <b>said: And since he does not need us,</b> and he believes that he knows the answer himself, <b>why did he send us</b> the question? <b>Rav Yosef became angry</b> with Rava.

### Part 7
<b>Rava heard</b> that Rav Yosef was angry <b>and came before him on Yom Kippur eve</b> to appease him. <b>He found the attendant of Rav Yosef, who was diluting a cup of wine</b> with water <b>before him.</b> Rava <b>said to</b> the attendant: <b>Give me</b> the cup so <b>that I will dilute</b> the wine <b>for him.</b> The attendant <b>gave</b> it <b>to him and</b> Rava <b>diluted the cup of wine. While</b> Rav Yosef, who was blind, <b>was drinking</b> the wine, <b>he said: This dilution is similar to the dilution of Rava, son of Rav Yosef bar Ḥama,</b> who would dilute wine with more than the standard amount of water. Rava <b>said to him:</b> Correct, <b>it is he.</b>

### Part 8
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>Do not sit on your feet until you tell me the explanation of this matter: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And from the wilderness Mattana and from Mattana Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel Bamot”</b> (Numbers 21:18–19)?

### Part 9
Rava <b>said to him</b> that it means: <b>Once a person renders himself like a wilderness, deserted before all, the Torah is given to him as a gift [<i>mattana</i>], as it is stated: “And from the wilderness Mattana.” And once it is given to him as a gift, God bequeaths [<i>naḥalo</i>]</b> it to <b>him, as it is stated: “And from Mattana Nahaliel.” And once God bequeaths</b> it to <b>him, he rises to greatness, as it is stated: And from Nahaliel, Bamot,</b> which are elevated places. <b>And if he elevates himself</b> and is arrogant about his Torah, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, degrades him, as it is stated: “And from Bamot the valley”</b> (Numbers 21:20). <b>And not only</b> is he degraded, <b>but one lowers him into the ground, as it is stated: “And looking over [<i>nishkafa</i>] the face of the wasteland”</b> (Numbers 21:20), like a threshold [<i>iskopa</i>] that is sunken into the ground. <b>And if he reverses his</b> arrogance and becomes humble, <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, elevates him,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC