
### Part 1
<b>this is</b> the meal-offering of <b>a tenth of an ephah</b> of flour, which every priest would bring on the day he began serving in the Temple. But as long as he is ritually impure, whether because he had come into contact with a corpse or due to leprosy, he may not send his offerings to the Temple; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The verse states: “And on the day that <b>he goes into</b> the Sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the Sanctuary <b>he shall sacrifice</b> his sin offering.” This teaches that <b>when he is fit to enter</b> the Sanctuary, <b>he is fit to sacrifice</b> an offering. But <b>when he is not fit to go into</b> the Sanctuary, i.e., when he is ritually impure, <b>he is not fit to sacrifice</b> an offering. This implies that a leper may not send his offerings to the Temple to be sacrificed on the altar, as he himself is not fit to enter the Temple.

### Part 3
§ Having discussed some of the restrictions applying to a person who was ostracized, the Gemara explains some of the basic principles relating to ostracism: <b>Rava said: From where do we</b> derive <b>that a court agent is sent to summon</b> the defendant <b>to</b> appear before the <b>court</b> before he is ostracized? <b>As it is written: “And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab”</b> (Numbers 16:12). <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that we summon</b> the defendant, that he himself must appear before the <b>court? As it is written: “And Moses said to Korah: Be you and all your congregation</b> before the Lord, you and they, and Aaron, tomorrow” (Numbers 16:16).

### Part 4
From where is it derived that the defendant must be told that he is being summoned to appear <b>before a great man? As it is written:</b> “And Moses said to Korah: Be you and all your congregation <b>before the Lord”</b> (Numbers 16:16). From where is it derived that the summons must mention the names of both parties: <b>You and so-and-so,</b> the plaintiff? <b>As it is written: “You, and they, and Aaron”</b> (Numbers 16:16). From where is it derived <b>that we set a date</b> for the court proceedings? <b>As it is written: “Tomorrow”</b> (Numbers 16:16). From where is it derived that a second <b>date</b> must be set <b>after</b> the first <b>date,</b> if the defendant did not heed the first summons? <b>As it is written: “They did cry there, Pharaoh, king of Egypt is but a noise; he has passed the time appointed…</b>Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shall he come” (Jeremiah 46:17). Although a time had been appointed and it had passed, it was not canceled entirely but pushed off to a later date.

### Part 5
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that if</b> the summoned person <b>behaves disrespectfully toward the agent of the court, and</b> the agent <b>comes</b> back <b>and reports</b> his conduct, that <b>this is not considered slander? As it is written: “Will you put out the eyes of these men?”</b> (Numbers 16:14). Dathan and Abiram spoke these words to the messenger that Moses had sent to them, and the messenger reported them back to Moses.

### Part 6
<b>From do we</b> derive <b>that we ostracize</b> one who does not obey a court summons? <b>As it is written: “Curse Meroz”</b> (Judges 5:23), who was ostracized for not coming to battle after having been summoned. From where is it derived that the ostracized person must be told <b>that it</b> was <b>the decision of a great man</b> to ostracized him? <b>As it is written:</b> “Curse Meroz, <b>said the messenger of the Lord”</b> (Judges 5:23). <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that,</b> if he fails to mend his ways, <b>we excommunicate</b> such a person more harshly, putting him under the most severe form of excommunication? <b>As it is written:</b> “Curse Meroz…<b>curse bitterly</b> its inhabitants” (Judges 5:23), implying that one curse is followed by another, i.e., lesser ostracism is followed by harsh excommunication.

### Part 7
From where is it derived <b>that</b> the curse applies to anyone who <b>eats or drinks with, or stands within, four cubits of</b> the ostracized person? <b>As it is written:</b> “Curse bitterly <b>its inhabitants”</b> (Judges 5:23), in reference to all those sitting together with Meroz. <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that we detail his sin in public? As it is written:</b> “Curse bitterly its inhabitants, <b>because they did not come to the help of the Lord”</b> (Judges 5:23).

### Part 8
<b>And Ulla said: Barak ostracized Meroz with</b> the blowing of <b>four hundred <i>shofarot</i></b> due to his failure to come. As for the identification of Meroz, <b>some say</b> that <b>he was a great man</b> and that he was ostracized because he did not join in the war effort. <b>And others say</b> that the reference is to <b>a star</b> and not a human being, and that it did not aid the Jewish people in their battle, <b>as it is stated: “The stars fought from heaven;</b> in their courses they fought against Sisera,” (Judges 5:20). This star, which did not help the Jewish people, was cursed.

### Part 9
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> the court <b>may declare the property of</b> one who does not obey its orders <b>as ownerless? As it is written: “And that whoever would not come within three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the Elders, all his substance shall be forfeited [<i>yaḥoram</i>] and himself separated from the congregation of the exiles”</b> (Ezra 10:8). “Shall be forfeited” is referring to excommunication.

### Part 10
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that we may contend with</b> such a person, <b>and curse</b> him, <b>and beat</b> him, <b>and pull out</b> his <b>hair, and make</b> him <b>take an oath</b> in order to prevent him from sinning? <b>As it is written: “And I contended with them, and cursed them, and beat some of them, and pulled out their hair, and made them take oath</b> by God” (Nehemiah 13:25).

### Part 11
<b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that we may shackle</b> his hands and feet, <b>chain</b> him, <b>and apply pressure? As it is written: “Whether it be for death, or for banishment [<i>lishroshi</i>], or for confiscation of goods, or for imprisonment”</b> (Ezra 7:26). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the word <b>“<i>lishroshi</i>,”</b> translated here as banishment? <b>Adda Mari said</b> that <b>Neḥemya bar Baruch said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> This is <b>pressure.</b> Since this expression is also unclear, the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>pressure? Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, said in the name of Rav</b> that this term refers to the following series of actions: <b>They ostracize</b> him <b>immediately, and</b> then once <b>again after thirty</b> days, and if he still does not repent, <b>they excommunicate him after sixty</b> days.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Huna bar Ḥinnana said to him: Rav Ḥisda said as follows:</b> Before excommunicating a person, the court <b>warns him</b> three times, on <b>Monday, Thursday, and</b> the following <b>Monday.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>This applies</b> in a case where one ignores <b>a monetary judgment</b> that was issued against him. He is warned three times that he must repay his debt. <b>But</b> in a case where one <b>behaves disrespectfully</b> toward a Torah scholar, he is <b>immediately</b> ostracized.

### Part 13
§ The Gemara relates that <b>a certain butcher behaved disrespectfully toward Rav Tuvi bar Mattana. Abaye and Rava were appointed</b> to the case <b>and ostracized him. In the end</b> the butcher <b>went and appeased his disputant,</b> Rav Tuvi. <b>Abaye said: What should we do</b> in this case? Shall <b>he be released</b> from his decree of ostracism? <b>His</b> decree of <b>ostracism has not</b> yet <b>been in effect for</b> the usual <b>thirty days.</b> On the other hand, <b>shall he not be released</b> from ostracism? But <b>the Sages wish to enter</b> his shop and purchase meat, and they are presently unable to do so. What, then, is the most appropriate course of action?

### Part 14
<b>He said to Rav Idi bar Avin:</b> Have <b>you heard anything with regard to such</b> a case? Rav Idi bar Avin <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Rav Taḥlifa bar Avimi said</b> that <b>Shmuel said as follows:</b> A <i>shofar</i> <b>blast</b> at the time of the ostracism <b>makes</b> it <b>binding, and</b> a <i>shofar</i> <b>blast releases</b> it. In other words, the <i>shofar</i> should be sounded now, as it had been sounded when the decree of ostracism was pronounced, and it should be canceled, although thirty days have not passed. Abaye <b>said to him: This applies</b> in a case where one ignores <b>a monetary judgment</b> that was issued against him; <b>but</b> in a case where one <b>behaves disrespectfully,</b> there must be no release <b>until the</b> decree of <b>ostracism has been in effect for thirty days.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently, Abaye maintains</b> that if <b>three</b> people <b>ostracized</b> one, <b>three others may not come and release him.</b> This is derived from the fact that Abaye was concerned about releasing the butcher from ostracism and did not delegate the task to someone else.

### Part 16
<b>As a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If <b>three</b> people <b>ostracized</b> someone, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>three others coming and releasing him</b> from his decree of ostracism? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who was ostracized by the teacher</b> of Torah for having acted disrespectfully toward him <b>is</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to the student,</b> and the latter must keep his distance from him. However, <b>one who was ostracized by the student is not</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to the teacher.</b>

### Part 17
<b>One who was ostracized by his</b> own <b>city is</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to another city.</b> However, <b>one who was ostracized by another city is not</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to his</b> own <b>city. One who was ostracized by the <i>Nasi</i></b> of the Sanhedrin <b>is</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to all the Jewish people;</b> but <b>one who was ostracized by all the Jewish people is not</b> considered <b>ostracized with regard to the <i>Nasi</i></b> of the Sanhedrin. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> If <b>one of the students</b> sitting as a judge on the court <b>had ostracized</b> someone, <b>and he died</b> before releasing him from the decree of ostracism, <b>his portion</b> of the decree of ostracism <b>is not nullified.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara says: <b>Learn three</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>from this</b> <i>baraita</i>. <b>Learn from this</b> that in the case of <b>a student who ostracizes</b> someone <b>due to</b> an insult to <b>his dignity</b> and not because the ostracized person was guilty of some transgression, <b>his</b> decree of <b>ostracism is valid.</b> Were the case one where one was ostracized due to sin, everyone is required to respect the decree of ostracism, even the student’s teacher. <b>And learn from this</b> that <b>each and every one</b> who participated in the decree of ostracism <b>nullifies his</b> own <b>portion</b> of the decree of ostracism, as the <i>baraita</i> speaks of: His portion. <b>And learn from this</b> that if <b>three</b> people <b>ostracized</b> another person, <b>three other</b> people <b>may not come and nullify</b> the decree of ostracism. Were this not the case, it wouldn’t matter if a certain person’s portion was not nullified. His portion could be nullified by someone else.

### Part 19
<b>Ameimar said: The <i>halakha</i> is</b> that if <b>three</b> people <b>ostracize</b> another person, <b>three others may come and nullify</b> the decree of ostracism. <b>Rav Ashi said to Ameimar: But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> If <b>one of the students had ostracized</b> another person, <b>and he died</b> before releasing him from the decree of ostracism, <b>his portion is not nullified? What, is it not</b> that <b>it is not nullified at all,</b> i.e., it cannot be nullified by another person? The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>No,</b> this means that the decree of ostracism remains in force <b>until three other people come and nullify</b> it.

### Part 20
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ostracism does not</b> apply <b>for less than</b> a period of <b>thirty days, and admonition,</b> which is less severe than ostracism, <b>does not</b> apply <b>for less than</b> a period of <b>seven days. And although there is no proof with regard to the matter,</b> i.e., the standard duration of admonition, there is <b>an allusion to the matter, as it is stated: “If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed for seven days?”</b> (Numbers 12:14). This implies that admonition lasts for seven days.

### Part 21
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: Our</b> decree of <b>ostracism</b> in Babylonia has the power <b>of their admonition</b> in Eretz Yisrael. Since the authorities in Eretz Yisrael are ordained with the title Rabbi, their admonition carries more weight than a decree of ostracism issued in Babylonia. The Gemara asks: Is <b>their admonition</b> in Eretz Yisrael only <b>seven</b> days <b>and no more? But isn’t</b> it related that <b>Rabbi Shimon, son of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and bar Kappara were sitting and studying,</b> and they posed <b>a difficulty with</b> a certain <b><i>halakha</i>. Rabbi Shimon said to bar Kappara: This issue requires</b> my father, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, to explain it. <b>Bar Kappara said to Rabbi Shimon,</b> somewhat mockingly: <b>And what can</b> your father, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>say about this</b> issue? What can he add and teach us about it?

### Part 22
Rabbi Shimon <b>went and told his father,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, what bar Kappara had said, and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>became angry</b> with him. When <b>bar Kappara came</b> at some later point <b>to visit,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: Bar Kappara, I do not know you at all.</b> Bar Kappara <b>understood that</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>had taken</b> his <b>statement to heart,</b> i.e., was insulted. He subsequently <b>behaved</b> as if he had been <b>admonished,</b> as a self-imposed punishment, <b>for thirty days.</b>

### Part 23
<b>Once again, on another occasion, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>decreed that students not be taught in the marketplace</b> but only in a study hall. <b>What</b> verse did he <b>expound</b> to serve as the basis for this decree? The verse states: <b>“Your rounded thighs are like jewels,</b> the work of the hands of an artist” (Song of Songs 7:2). <b>Just</b> as <b>a thigh is</b> ordinarily <b>hidden</b> and kept covered with clothes,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC