
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna discusses <b>one who had</b> already <b>turned over his olives</b> as part of the process of preparing them for pressing, <b>and mourning</b> for a close relative <b>befell him</b> and as a result he was prohibited from engaging in work, <b>or</b> some other <b>unavoidable accident</b> occurred, <b>or</b> his <b>workers misled him,</b> promising to come but failing to do so, so that he could not press his olives before the Festival. Under these circumstances, during the intermediate days of the Festival, <b>he may</b> place the olives in the press and <b>load the beam</b> with weights for the <b>initial</b> pressing of the olives and <b>leave it</b> this way <b>until after the Festival;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: He may press</b> the olives <b>and complete</b> the process <b>and</b> then <b>plug</b> each barrel of oil <b>in its</b> usual <b>manner.</b> Since delay can entail financial loss, the Sages did not require him to alter the normal process of extracting the oil.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: The <i>tanna</i> <b>opens</b> the mishna <b>with</b> a case of <b>mourning and ends</b> it <b>with</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of the intermediate days of <b>the Festival,</b> leaving the connection between them unclear. <b>Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, said: That is to say: Actions that are permitted on</b> the intermediate days of <b>a Festival are prohibited during the days of one’s mourning.</b> Therefore, if a mourning period befell one before the Festival, and he could not prepare properly for the Festival due to the prohibition against performance of labor by a mourner, he is permitted to perform labor during the intermediate days of the Festival to avoid financial loss.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the didactic style of: <b>It is not necessary,</b> and he is teaching two separate <i>halakhot</i>, one about mourning and the other about the Festival: <b>It is not necessary</b> to state that <b>during the days of his mourning, when</b> the prohibition against labor <b>is rabbinic, it is permitted</b> to perform labor that, if delayed, could cause serious loss; <b>but even on the</b> intermediate days of the <b>Festival, when the prohibition against</b> performing <b>labor is by Torah law,</b> performing such labor is permitted because <b>in a case of a loss the Sages permitted</b> it.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi: These are actions that</b> others <b>perform for the mourner during the days of his mourning:</b> If <b>his olives have</b> already <b>been turned over, they may load</b> them <b>for him</b> into the olive press, <b>and</b> likewise if <b>his cask</b> needs <b>to be plugged, or</b> if <b>his flax</b> needs <b>to be lifted out of the soaking pool</b> where it will rot if not removed in time, <b>or</b> if <b>his wool</b> needs <b>to be lifted from the cauldron</b> into which it was placed for dyeing, they perform all these actions for him. <b>They</b> also <b>irrigate his field when his turn for water arrives,</b> as in many places, each field would receive water in turn according to a prearranged schedule. If one does not utilize the water when his turn arrives, he loses that water. This supports Rav Sheisha’s opinion that the prohibition against performing labor is waived in cases of loss only on the Festival. Under such circumstances, labor is prohibited to a mourner and in cases of loss may only be performed for him by others.

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: They also sow for him a plowed field or a field set aside for flax,</b> where the time of sowing is critical. If the field is sown later, it will cause a loss. The Sages <b>said to him: If</b> that field <b>is not sown in the early</b> season, <b>it can be sown in the later</b> season; and similarly, <b>if it is not sown with flax, it can be sown with another species.</b> Therefore, this is not considered a great loss, and the Sages did not permit it.

### Part 7
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> If <b>his olives have</b> already <b>been turned over and there is no skilled worker</b> available who knows how to press them properly <b>but him,</b> or <b>his cask</b> needs <b>to be plugged and there is no skilled worker</b> available <b>but him,</b> or <b>his flax</b> needs <b>to be lifted out of the soaking pool, or his wool</b> needs <b>to be lifted from the cauldron, and there is no skilled worker</b> available <b>but him, he may perform</b> all of these actions himself <b>in private.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said further: If</b> this mourner <b>was a craftsman</b> who serves <b>the public,</b> providing a necessary service, <b>or a barber or a bath attendant for the public, and the time of the Festival arrived,</b> i.e., it was the eve of a Festival, <b>and there is no</b> other <b>skilled worker</b> available <b>but him,</b> then <b>he may perform</b> the labor even in public, as the needs of the public takes precedence over the mourning of an individual.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Tenant farmers,</b> who farm others’ land in exchange for a certain percentage of the crop, <b>and leasers,</b> who work the land in exchange for a fixed amount of the crop, <b>and contractors,</b> who work the land in exchange for a set amount of money, are included amongst <b>those for whom others may perform</b> their labor when they are in mourning. In contrast, <b>donkey drivers, camel drivers, and sailors</b> are <b>those</b> for whom others <b>may not perform</b> their work during their mourning periods. <b>However, if they</b> or their animals <b>were leased or hired out to others, then they may perform</b> work, because they were hired personally and cannot be replaced without loss. <b>A day laborer, even</b> if he is <b>in a different city</b> where his mourning status is not public knowledge, <b>may not perform</b> his work. If <b>a commission for others was his responsibility, even if it was by contract</b> and he was paid not by the day but upon its completion, <b>he may not perform</b> that labor.

### Part 10
The statement in the <i>baraita</i> that one may not perform a task for others <b>even if it was by contract</b> implies that <b>it is not necessary</b> to state that if it was <b>not by contract</b> the work is prohibited to a mourner. The Gemara asks: <b>On the contrary,</b> when he works <b>by contract it is considered as</b> though it were <b>his</b> own work, since he simply receives payment for the completed task. Non-contracted labor, where he is paid for the time he works, is not viewed as his own and it is conceivable that it would be permitted during his mourning period. The Gemara concludes: <b>Rather,</b> emend the text and <b>say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should read: If a commission for others was his responsibility, <b>whether by contract or not by contract, he may not perform</b> it.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If <b>he commissioned others</b> to perform <b>his work,</b> then if it was <b>in his house they may not perform</b> the work, but if it was <b>in another house they may perform</b> it.

### Part 12
The Gemara relates that <b>Maryon, son of Ravin, and Mar, son of Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, held a team of</b> two <b>oxen</b> in partnership <b>between them,</b> one ox apiece. <b>An event,</b> i.e., a death in the family, <b>befell Mar, son of Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, and he detached his</b> ox <b>from the team,</b> preventing any work from being performed by the team, because he did not want work performed with his animal during his days of mourning. <b>Rav Ashi said: A distinguished man like Mar, son of Rav Aḥa, is behaving this</b> way? <b>Granted, he is not concerned about his own loss,</b> but <b>is he not concerned about the loss of others,</b> i.e., his partner? <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>If they</b> or their animals <b>were hired out or leased to others, then they may perform</b> their work? In that case, why not allow the partner to work with the animal of Mar, son of Rav Aḥa?

### Part 13
The Gemara explains: <b>But</b> Mar, son of Rav Aḥa, <b>maintains: An important person is different.</b> Even if strictly speaking something is permitted, an important person must be more rigorous with himself, so that people learn not to take the <i>halakha</i> lightly.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC