
### Part 1
<b>And Rav holds:</b> Even in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, no <i>a fortiori</i> inference may be drawn, as <b>ultimately, does</b> the field <b>return to the owner</b> during the Jubilee Year? It does not, but rather it <b>leaves</b> the possession of the Temple treasury and is given <b>to the priests.</b> Therefore, there is no basis for an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, as a field consecrated before the Jubilee Year does not return to the owner during the Jubilee Year, <b>and the priests receive</b> their portion <b>from the table of the Most High.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rav</b> that consecration of a field during the Jubilee Year is effective and that the field must be redeemed for the full price of fifty <i>sela</i> per <i>beit kor</i>? <b>As the verse states: “If</b> he sanctifies his field <b>from the Jubilee Year,</b> according to your valuation it shall stand” (Leviticus 27:17). The verse indicates that a field is redeemed according to the valuation mentioned in the preceding verse, i.e., fifty <i>sela</i> per <i>beit kor</i>, <b>and the Jubilee Year</b> itself <b>is included</b> in this <i>halakha</i>, as the verse describes a period that begins “from the Jubilee Year,” which can be understood as including the Jubilee Year itself.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Shmuel</b> refute this claim? The Gemara explains that Shmuel would respond: <b>Is it written</b> in the verse: <b>If</b> he sanctifies his field <b>during the Jubilee Year?</b> No, instead: <b>“From the Jubilee Year,” is written,</b> indicating that the verse is referring to consecration beginning <b>from the year that is after the Jubilee</b> Year.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to Rav, this is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> in the verse: <b>“If</b> he sanctifies his field <b>from the Jubilee Year,</b> according to your valuation it shall stand. <b>But if</b> he sanctifies his field <b>after the Jubilee,</b> then the priest shall reckon for him the money according to the years that remain until the Jubilee Year, and a deduction shall be made from your valuation” (Leviticus 27:17–18). According to Rav’s interpretation, the second verse is referring to the year immediately following the Jubilee Year. <b>But according to Shmuel,</b> who maintains that the first verse is dealing with the year following the Jubilee Year, to <b>what</b> is the verse referring when it speaks of the year <b>“after the Jubilee”?</b> The Gemara responds: It is referring to the year <b>after</b> the year <b>after</b> the Jubilee Year.

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav from the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may consecrate</b> an ancestral field <b>both before the Jubilee</b> Year <b>and after the Jubilee</b> Year. <b>But during the Jubilee Year itself, one may not consecrate</b> it, <b>and if he</b> nevertheless did <b>consecrate</b> it, that field <b>is not consecrated.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Rav</b> could <b>say to you:</b> The <i>baraita</i> means that <b>it is not consecrated</b> in order to be redeemed <b>with a deduction. But</b> nevertheless it is <b>consecrated, and</b> one <b>gives</b> the full price of <b>fifty</b> <i>sela</i> per <i>beit kor</i> for its redemption.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: One can conclude <b>by inference</b> from this response <b>that</b> according to Rav, when the <i>baraita</i> states that a field may be consecrated <b>before the Jubilee</b> Year, it means that it is <b>consecrated to be redeemed with a deduction. But</b> wasn’t it stated that <b>Rav and Shmuel both say</b> that <b>one may not consecrate</b> an ancestral field <b>to be redeemed with a deduction less than two years</b> before the Jubilee Year, but rather it is redeemed according to the total valuation of the field? If so, Rav could not have responded as suggested above.

### Part 7
Rather, <b>Rav</b> could <b>say to you:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that whenever the verse employs an expression such as: From the first day, the first day itself is not included. Accordingly, when the verse states: “If he sanctifies his field from the Jubilee Year,” the Jubilee Year is not included. <b>But I stated</b> my ruling that a field may be consecrated during the Jubilee Year <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who says:</b> The verse states: “Whoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel” (Exodus 12:15). It states: “From the <b>first</b> day,” <b>and</b> the <b>first</b> day <b>is included,</b> and it continues: “Until the <b>seventh</b> day,” <b>and</b> the <b>seventh</b> day is also <b>included. Here too,</b> the verse states: “If he sanctifies his field <b>from</b> the Jubilee <b>Year,” and the Jubilee Year is included.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna (25a) teaches that when one redeems an ancestral field, he gives a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i>, which is equivalent to one forty-eighth of a <i>sela</i>, per <i>beit kor</i> for each year remaining until the Jubilee Year. This amount is close to one forty-ninth of the total valuation of fifty <i>sela</i>, and there are no tannaitic disputes with regard to this mishna. The Gemara therefore asks: <b>If</b> Rav holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, that one may consecrate an ancestral field during the Jubilee Year, <b>what is the purpose of</b> the additional <b><i>pundeyon</i></b> that one gives for each remaining year until the Jubilee? If the Jubilee Year itself is included in the calculation, the total price of fifty <i>sela</i> should be divided evenly, i.e., one <i>sela</i> should be paid for each remaining year of the fifty years.

### Part 9
<b>And if you would say</b> that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>does not</b> require the addition of a <i>pundeyon</i> for each remaining year, that is difficult: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>consecrated</b> the field <b>two or three years before the Jubilee</b> Year, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: I say</b> that <b>he gives a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i></b> per year? The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that the <b>fiftieth year is counted</b> both <b>for this</b> cycle <b>and for that</b> one, i.e., he maintains that the Jubilee Year is also considered the first year of the next cycle. Accordingly, there are actually only forty-nine years in a Jubilee cycle, and the total valuation of a field is therefore divided into forty-nine parts, which comes out to a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i> for each year.

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>According to Shmuel,</b> who maintains that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi concedes that an ancestral field may not be consecrated during the Jubilee Year, <b>let him say</b> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Yehuda and hold that the fiftieth year is not counted as the first year of the following cycle. <b>Because if</b> he holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> then he <b>should require</b> one to pay <b>a <i>sela</i> and two <i>pundeyon</i>,</b> i.e., one forty-eighth of the total valuation of a field, per year, as there are only forty-eight years during which one may consecrate a field. The Gemara explains: This is indeed the case. <b>Perforce, according to Shmuel, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof for the opinion of Shmuel from the mishna: <b>Nor may one redeem</b> an ancestral field that was consecrated <b>less than one year after the Jubilee</b> Year. <b>Granted, according to Shmuel,</b> who says that one may not consecrate an ancestral field during the Jubilee Year itself, and therefore if a field was consecrated during the Jubilee Year it requires no redemption at all, the mishna is teaching that <b>one may not redeem</b> a field <b>less than one year after</b> the <b>Jubilee,</b> i.e., until the year after the Jubilee, as it cannot be consecrated until then. <b>But according to Rav,</b> who maintains that a field may be consecrated and redeemed during the Jubilee Year itself, <b>what</b> does the mishna mean when it states that one may not redeem a field less than one <b>year after</b> the <b>Jubilee?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: <b>Do you maintain</b> that the mishna is referring to the <b>actual</b> year <b>after</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> Year? This is not the case; rather, to <b>what</b> is the phrase: <b>After</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> Year, actually referring?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC