
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who sells his field during a period</b> when <b>the Jubilee</b> Year is in effect <b>is not permitted to redeem it less than two years</b> after the sale, <b>as it is stated: “According to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:15). The plural form “years” indicates a minimum of two years.

### Part 2
If one of those years <b>was a year of blight or mildew, or</b> if it was the <b>Sabbatical Year,</b> when the buyer is unable to derive benefit from the field, that year <b>does not count</b> as part <b>of the tally,</b> and the owner must wait an additional year before redeeming the field. If the buyer <b>plowed</b> the field but did not sow it, <b>or</b> if <b>he left it fallow,</b> that year <b>counts</b> as part <b>of his tally,</b> as it was fit to produce a crop. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If the owner of the field <b>sold it to</b> the buyer <b>before Rosh HaShana and</b> the field <b>was full of produce,</b> and the owner redeems the field after two years, <b>that</b> buyer <b>consumes from</b> the field’s produce <b>three crops in two years.</b> Although he received the field with its crop, he is not required to return it in the same state.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna states that <b>one who sells his field during a period</b> when <b>the Jubilee</b> Year is in effect is not permitted to redeem it less than two years after the sale. The Gemara notes: The mishna <b>does not teach</b> that <b>one cannot redeem</b> his field before two years have elapsed; <b>rather,</b> the mishna teaches that <b>one is not permitted to redeem</b> it. <b>Evidently,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>holds</b> that <b>there is also a prohibition</b> involved in the matter, such <b>that</b> it is <b>prohibited even</b> to <b>rattle dinars</b> before the buyer in order to persuade him to sell back the field.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues: <b>And it is not necessary</b> to state this with regard to the <b>seller, as he stands in</b> violation of <b>a positive mitzva, as it is written: “According to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:15), and the plural form “years” indicates a minimum of two years. <b>Rather, even</b> the <b>buyer stands in</b> violation of <b>a positive mitzva, as we require</b> the fulfillment of another mitzva from the same verse: “According to the number of <b>years</b> after the Jubilee Year <b>you shall buy</b> from your neighbor,” <b>and</b> if the buyer returns the field before the two years elapse, the mitzva <b>is not</b> fulfilled.

### Part 5
§ <b>It was stated:</b> With regard to <b>one who sells his field during the Jubilee Year itself, Rav says:</b> The field <b>is sold</b> in principle, but <b>it leaves</b> the buyer’s possession immediately, and his money is not refunded. <b>And Shmuel says: It is not sold at all.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the reasoning of Shmuel?</b> Shmuel derives his opinion via <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>And what,</b> if a field that was <b>already sold</b> before the Jubilee Year <b>leaves</b> the possession of the buyer in the Jubilee Year, <b>is it not logical that</b> a field <b>that was not</b> yet <b>sold is not sold</b> at all during the Jubilee Year?

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rav, do we not say</b> that one may derive <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>in this way? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a person may sell his daughter</b> as a maidservant <b>when she is a young woman. You</b> can <b>say</b> the following <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference to reject such a possibility: <b>And what,</b> if a daughter who was <b>already sold, now leaves</b> her master upon becoming a young woman, <b>is it not logical that</b> a daughter <b>who was not sold is not</b> capable of being <b>sold</b> once she becomes a young woman? Evidently, one may derive this type of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference. Why, then, does Rav disagree with Shmuel?

### Part 7
The Gemara answers that the cases are not comparable. <b>There,</b> with regard to a maidservant, once she becomes a young woman <b>she is not</b> ever <b>sold again. Here,</b> the field that is returned to the seller in the Jubilee Year <b>may</b> later <b>be sold again.</b> Rav therefore maintains that one may not derive the aforementioned <i>a fortiori</i> inference.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to Rav’s opinion from a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “According to the number of <b>years after the Jubilee you shall buy</b> from your neighbor” (Leviticus 25:15). The term: After the Jubilee, <b>teaches that</b> a field <b>may be sold</b> in the year <b>adjacent to the Jubilee</b> Year. <b>From where</b> is it derived that a field may be sold in a year that is <b>separated from the Jubilee</b> Year? <b>The verse states: “According to the multitude of the years</b> you shall increase the price thereof, <b>and according to the fewness of the years</b> you shall diminish the price of it” (Leviticus 25:16). The verse teaches that one may sell a field even after several years have elapsed since the last Jubilee Year.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And in the Jubilee Year itself one may not sell</b> his field, <b>and if one sold</b> it, <b>it is not sold.</b> This <i>baraita</i> clearly seems to contradict the opinion of Rav. The Gemara responds: <b>Rav</b> could <b>say to you:</b> The <i>baraita</i> means that the field <b>is not sold for the number of years of the crops,</b> i.e., it does not remain in the buyer’s possession for a minimum of two years, <b>rather it is sold</b> in principle, <b>and</b> then immediately <b>leaves</b> the buyer’s possession.

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>But if</b> the field <b>is indeed sold, let it stand in</b> the buyer’s <b>possession until after</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> Year, <b>and after</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> Year <b>let him consume</b> the field’s produce for two <b>years of crops, and</b> only then <b>return</b> the field. <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If the buyer <b>consumed</b> the field’s produce for <b>one year before the Jubilee</b> Year, <b>he completes another year after the Jubilee</b> Year? The Gemara explains: The cases are not comparable. <b>There,</b> the buyer already <b>entered</b> the field in order <b>to consume</b> the produce, and therefore he completes the minimum of two years. <b>Here,</b> the buyer <b>did not enter</b> the field <b>to consume</b> the produce at all, as ownership of the field immediately reverts to the seller.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rav Anan says: I learned two</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>from Master Shmuel. One</b> was <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that if one sells his field during the Jubilee Year the sale is ineffective. <b>And the other</b> <i>halakha</i> concerned <b>one who sells his</b> Canaanite <b>slave to gentiles, or to</b> a Jew who resides <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, that the slave <b>is emancipated.</b> A Canaanite slave is partially obligated in the fulfillment of mitzvot. By selling him to a gentile, one prevents him from fulfilling the mitzvot, and by selling him to one who dwells outside of Eretz Yisrael, one prevents him from fulfilling the mitzva of dwelling in Eretz Yisrael. The Sages therefore decreed that the Jewish master must write the slave a bill of manumission after the sale, so that if he runs away from his gentile master, he would not reenter servitude under the Jewish master.

### Part 12
Rav Anan continues: With regard to <b>one</b> of these <i>halakhot</i>, Shmuel said that <b>the sale is retracted</b> and the money is refunded, <b>and</b> with regard to <b>one</b> of them, he said that <b>the sale is not retracted</b> and the buyer loses his money. <b>But I do not know</b> in <b>which of</b> the cases the sale is retracted and in which case it is not.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yosef said: Let us see</b> if it is possible to resolve Rav Anan’s dilemma. It may be resolved <b>from that which is taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> In the case of <b>one who sells his slave to</b> a Jew <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, the slave <b>is emancipated but</b> nevertheless <b>requires a bill of manumission from his second master. Conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> as follows: <b>Since</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>calls the second</b> owner the slave’s <b>master,</b> and requires him to emancipate the slave, <b>evidently the sale is not retracted,</b> and the buyer loses his money. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>when Shmuel says here</b> that the field <b>is not sold</b> during the Jubilee Year, he means that the sale does not take effect <b>and the money is returned</b> to the buyer.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC