
### Part 1
It is referring to any year <b>in the middle of</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> cycle. The mishna’s statement should be read as follows: After the Jubilee Year, one may not redeem a field for less than the price of a year, meaning <b>that as long as a year has not been completed, he does not deduct it</b> from the price of redemption. For example, if there are five and a half years remaining until the Jubilee Year, he must give six <i>sela</i> and six <i>pundeyon</i> for its redemption, not five and a half of each of a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaching us?</b> Is he saying <b>that one does not count months</b> in order to lower the price to be paid <b>to the Temple</b> treasury? Such an interpretation is untenable, as <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught explicitly</b> in the following line of the mishna: <b>One does not count months</b> in order to lower the price to be paid <b>to the Temple</b> treasury. The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> is not attempting to teach a separate <i>halakha</i> here. Rather, he <b>employs</b> the style known as: <b>What is the reason,</b> and the mishna is to be read as follows: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>one may not redeem</b> a field <b>after</b> the <b>Jubilee</b> Year with <b>less than</b> the price of a complete <b>year?</b> It is <b>because one does not count months</b> in order to lower the price to be paid <b>to the Temple</b> treasury.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>One does not count months</b> in order to lower the price to be paid to the Temple treasury, but the Temple treasury may count months in order to raise the price of redemption. With regard to this statement, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that one does not count months</b> in order to lower the price to be paid <b>to the Temple</b> treasury? <b>The verse states: “Then the priest shall reckon for him the money according to the years that remain</b> until the Jubilee Year, and a deduction shall be made from your valuation” (Leviticus 27:18). This teaches that <b>you</b> are to <b>calculate years, but you</b> are <b>not</b> to <b>count months.</b>

### Part 4
Furthermore, <b>from where</b> is it derived <b>that if you,</b> i.e., the priest representing the Temple treasury, <b>want to consider months as a year</b> so that it will be considered as though a complete year has passed, you may <b>do</b> so? And <b>what are the circumstances</b> in which the priest would want to do this? <b>For example,</b> in a case <b>where one consecrated</b> the field <b>in the middle of</b> the <b>forty-eighth</b> year and wishes to redeem it. In such a case, if the months that have passed are calculated as a complete year, then the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the redemption of a field in the year preceding the Jubilee Year is in effect, and the field must be redeemed according to its full valuation of fifty <i>sela</i> per <i>beit kor</i>, rather than the redemption price of two <i>sela</i> and two <i>pundeyon</i> per <i>beit kor</i> that would apply if the calculation were based on two years remaining until the Jubilee.

### Part 5
From where is this <i>halakha</i> derived? <b>The verse states: “Then the priest shall reckon for him,”</b> which indicates that the priest reckons for him <b>in any case,</b> i.e., the calculation is to be performed according to his discretion.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who consecrates</b> his ancestral <b>field during a period</b> when <b>the Jubilee</b> Year is observed and wishes to redeem it, <b>he gives</b> the Temple treasury <b>fifty</b> <i>sela</i>, a talmudic measure referred to in the Bible as <b>silver shekels, for</b> an area required for <b>sowing a <i>ḥomer</i>,</b> a measure known in talmudic terminology as one <i>kor</i>, of <b>barley seed</b> (see Leviticus 27:16). If <b>there were crevices [<i>neka’im</i>] ten handbreadths deep</b> in the field, <b>or</b> if there were <b>boulders ten handbreadths high,</b> then when calculating the redemption price those areas <b>are not measured with</b> the rest of the field. But if the depth of the crevices, or the height of the boulders, was <b>less than that</b> amount, <b>they are measured with</b> the rest of the field.

### Part 7
If <b>he consecrated</b> the field <b>two or three years before the Jubilee</b> Year and wishes to redeem it, <b>he gives</b> the Temple treasury <b>a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i>,</b> a pundeyon being one forty-eighth of a <i>sela</i>, <b>per year</b> remaining until the Jubilee Year. <b>And if he said: I will give</b> the payment <b>for each year during</b> that <b>year, one does not listen to him; rather, he</b> must <b>give</b> the <b>entire</b> sum <b>in one</b> payment. This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>both</b> with regard to a case where <b>the owner</b> redeems the field <b>and</b> a case where <b>any</b> other <b>person</b> redeems the field. <b>What</b> then <b>is</b> the difference <b>between</b> redemption by <b>the owner and</b> redemption by <b>any</b> other <b>person?</b> It is <b>only that the owner gives</b> an extra <b>one-fifth</b> in addition to the payment, <b>and any</b> other <b>person</b> who redeems the field <b>does not give</b> the additional <b>one-fifth.</b>

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The phrase: “The sowing of a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver” (Leviticus 27:16), is referring to an area required for sowing one <b><i>kor</i>,</b> thirty <i>se’a</i>, of barley <b>seed, and not</b> an area that yields one <b><i>kor</i></b> of barley <b>crop,</b> which is significantly smaller. This area is measured according to a field <b>sowed by hand and not sowed by oxen.</b> Since oxen sow the field by pulling a planter, which spreads the seeds at a higher density, the area containing one <i>kor</i> sown by oxen is smaller than the area of one <i>kor</i> sown by hand. <b>Levi taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The area is <b>not</b> measured according to the sowing of a particularly <b>dense</b> layer of seeds, <b>nor</b> a <b>sparse</b> layer, <b>but</b> rather in accordance with <b>an average</b> amount of seeds.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that if <b>there were crevices</b> ten handbreadths <b>deep</b> in the field, they are not measured with the rest of the field. The Gemara suggests: <b>And let them be consecrated by themselves,</b> as they are fit for sowing, and therefore they should require redemption at the same rate as the rest of the field. Accordingly, one could simply measure the field together with the crevices, and the measurement will be equal to the sum total of the sizes of the field and any crevices.

### Part 10
<b>And if you would say</b> that the mishna is referring to crevices that together take up only a small area, and <b>since they do not</b> measure <b>a <i>beit kor</i> they are not consecrated,</b> that cannot be correct: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And if a man shall sanctify for the Lord part of his ancestral field” (Leviticus 27:16). <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state: “Field”? Since it is stated</b> in the same verse: “Your valuation shall be according to its sowing; <b>the sowing of a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley shall be valued at fifty shekels of silver,”</b> one might say: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only that</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> when <b>he consecrated</b> a field <b>like this,</b> i.e., one measuring at least a <i>beit kor</i>. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>to include</b> fields that are fit for sowing only <b>a half<i>-kor</i>  or half of a half-<i>kor</i>, a <i>se’a</i> or a half-<i>se’a</i> [<i>vetarkav</i>], or</b> even <b>half of a half-<i>se’a</i>? The verse states: “Field,”</b> indicating that one may consecrate a field <b>in any case,</b> regardless of size.

### Part 11
<b>Mar Ukva bar Ḥama said: Here,</b> the mishna is referring <b>to crevices</b> that are <b>full</b> of <b>water, which are not fit for sowing.</b> Accordingly, they are not measured with the field, as the verse states that the valuation is in accordance with the areas fit for sowing barley seeds. The language <b>is also precise, as</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to crevices <b>similar</b> to the way he teaches that <b>of boulders,</b> which are also not fit for sowing, as it states: If there were crevices ten handbreadths deep or boulders ten handbreadths high. <b>Conclude from</b> this that the mishna is referring to crevices unfit for sowing.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then when the difference in height between the field and the crevices or boulders is <b>less than</b> ten handbreadths, they should <b>also</b> not be measured with the field. Why does the mishna indicate that they are measured with the field in this case? The Gemara responds: <b>These</b> crevices less than ten handbreadths deep <b>are called cracks of the ground,</b> and these boulders less than ten handbreadths tall <b>are called spines of the ground.</b> As there is no great disparity in surface level between them and the field itself, they are deemed part of the field and are therefore measured with it, despite the fact that they are unfit for sowing.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches that if <b>he consecrated</b> the field <b>two or three years</b> before the Jubilee Year and wishes to redeem it, he gives the Temple treasury a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i> per year. In this regard, <b>the Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> that deals with the verse: “But if he sanctifies his field after the Jubilee, then the priest shall reckon for him the money according to the years that remain until the Jubilee Year, and a deduction shall be made from your valuation” (Leviticus 27:18).

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> states that the apparently superfluous phrase <b>“And a deduction shall be made from your valuation”</b> teaches that <b>even</b> the years that passed <b>from the consecration</b> of the field are deducted, and not only the years that passed before it was consecrated. <b>That</b> is, <b>if the Temple</b> treasury <b>benefited</b> from the field’s produce for <b>a year or two, or</b> if the Temple treasury <b>did not benefit</b> from it <b>but</b> the field nevertheless <b>remained before it,</b> i.e., in the possession of the Temple treasury, <b>he gives a <i>sela</i> and a <i>pundeyon</i> for</b> each remaining <b>year</b> until the Jubilee Year.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And if he said: I will give</b> the payment for each year during that year, one does not listen to him; rather, he must give the entire sum in one payment. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that if the owner said: I will give</b> the payment <b>for each year during</b> that <b>year, that one does not listen to him? The verse states: “Then the priest shall reckon for him the money”</b> (Leviticus 27:18). The term “the money” indicates that the priest does not reckon the price for him <b>unless all of</b> the <b>money will be</b> paid together <b>as one</b> sum. This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>both the owner and any</b> other <b>person. What</b> then <b>is</b> the difference <b>between</b> redemption by <b>the owner and</b> redemption by <b>any</b> other <b>person?</b> It is <b>that the owner gives</b> an extra <b>one-fifth</b> in addition to the payment, <b>and any</b> other <b>person does not give</b> the additional <b>one-fifth.</b>

### Part 16
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one consecrated</b> his ancestral field <b>and</b> then <b>redeemed it</b> himself, <b>it is not removed from his possession</b> to be divided among the priests <b>during the Jubilee</b> Year. If <b>his son redeemed it,</b> the field <b>is removed</b> from the son’s possession and returns <b>to his father during the Jubilee</b> Year. But if <b>another</b> person <b>or one of his</b> other <b>relatives redeemed</b> the field <b>and</b> the owner subsequently <b>redeemed it from his possession,</b> the field is <b>removed</b> from the owner’s possession and given <b>to the priests during the Jubilee</b> Year.

### Part 17
If <b>one of the priests redeemed</b> the field <b>and</b> when the Jubilee arrived <b>it</b> was <b>in his possession, he may not say: Since it is removed</b> from the possession of the one who redeemed it and given <b>to the priests during the Jubilee</b> Year, <b>and</b> since <b>it is</b> already <b>in my possession, it is mine. Rather,</b> the field <b>is removed from his possession and is divided among all his brethren, the priests.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC