
### Part 1
<b>Abaye said: This</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: Until Gamla in the Galilee,</b> i.e., all towns in the Galilee from Gamla southward were surrounded by a wall from the era of Joshua, son of Nun; <b>and</b> likewise, all towns <b>until Gedod in Transjordan,</b> which is the easternmost city, were surrounded by a wall; <b>and Ḥadid and Ono and Jerusalem in Judea</b> were surrounded by a wall from the era of Joshua, son of Nun.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said</b> a different explanation: The <i>baraita</i> is elucidating the mishna, which mentions these cities. The <i>baraita</i> is teaching that the <b>Gamla</b> referred to in the mishna is the one <b>in the Galilee, to the exclusion of</b> any <b>Gamla</b> found <b>in other lands,</b> i.e., Judea and Transjordan. Likewise, <b>Gedod</b> is the one <b>in Transjordan, to the exclusion of Gedod in other lands,</b> Judea and the Galilee. In the same vein, Ḥadid, Ono, and Jerusalem are specifically the cities in Judea known by those names. With regard to <b>those other</b> cities mentioned in the mishna, e.g., Yodfat, <b>since there are no</b> cities in other lands <b>with similar</b> names, <b>it was not necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> to state them.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is ownership of a house in <b>Jerusalem</b> transferred in <b>perpetuity</b> to the buyer after one year, in the manner of houses of walled cities? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ten matters were stated with regard to Jerusalem,</b> one of which is that ownership of <b>a house</b> situated in Jerusalem is <b>not</b> transferred in <b>perpetuity</b> one year after its sale?

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> means that ownership of a house may be transferred in perpetuity in any city that is <b>like Jerusalem,</b> i.e., <b>which is surrounded by a wall from the era of Joshua, son of Nun, but</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to such a city is <b>not like Jerusalem</b> itself, <b>since while</b> with regard to <b>Jerusalem,</b> ownership of <b>a house</b> inside it is <b>not</b> transferred in <b>perpetuity, here,</b> with regard to cities similar to Jerusalem, <b>a house in them</b> may be transferred in <b>perpetuity</b> to the buyer. <b>Rav Ashi said</b> a different answer: <b>Didn’t Rav Yosef say</b> in resolution of another difficulty: <b>There were two</b> places called <b>Kadesh? Here, too,</b> one can say that <b>there were two</b> places called <b>Jerusalem</b> in Judea, and the mishna is referring to the one where ownership of houses transfers in perpetuity.

### Part 5
§ With regard to the cities listed in the mishna, <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei,</b> says: <b>Why did the Sages count</b> specifically <b>these</b> cities as those walled since the days of Joshua, son of Nun? They counted them <b>because when the exiles ascended</b> to Eretz Yisrael from Babylonia, <b>they discovered these</b> cities <b>and sanctified them; but</b> the sanctity of the <b>first</b> walled cities <b>was nullified when the sanctity of the land was nullified</b> and the Jewish people were exiled. The Gemara notes: Apparently, Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, <b>holds</b> that the <b>initial consecration</b> of Eretz Yisrael in the days of Joshua <b>consecrated</b> it <b>for its time,</b> until the exile, <b>but did not consecrate</b> Eretz Yisrael <b>forever.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But raise a contradiction</b> from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said: And were these</b> cities enumerated in the mishna the <b>only</b> walled cities from the days of Joshua? <b>But isn’t it already stated:</b> “There was not a city that we took not from them; <b>sixty cities, all the region of Argob…all these cities were fortified with high walls,</b> gates, and bars” (Deuteronomy 3:4–5)? <b>Rather, why did the Sages</b> specifically <b>count these</b> cities? They counted them <b>because when the exiles ascended</b> from Babylonia <b>they discovered these and sanctified them.</b> The Gemara interjects: Can the <i>baraita</i> really mean that they <b>sanctified them? But we say</b> later in the same <i>baraita</i> that <b>it is not necessary to sanctify</b> them. <b>Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> means that <b>they</b> found these cities and <b>counted them</b> in the mishna.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And not only these; rather,</b> with regard to <b>any</b> city for <b>which you receive a tradition from your ancestors that it is surrounded by a wall from the days of Joshua, son of Nun, all these mitzvot</b> of walled cities <b>are observed in it, due to</b> the fact that the <b>initial consecration</b> of Eretz Yisrael <b>consecrated</b> it <b>for its time and consecrated</b> it <b>forever.</b> Evidently, Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, holds that the initial consecration of Eretz Yisrael is eternal.

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: <b>If you wish, say</b> that this is a dispute between <b>two <i>tanna’im</i>, and</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yishmael,</b> son of Rabbi Yosei. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>one</b> of the <i>baraitot</i>, specifically the second one, was actually <b>said</b> by <b>Rabbi Elazar bar Yosei. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar bar Yosei says:</b> Since the verse states: <b>“Which has [<i>lo</i>] a wall,”</b> with <i>lo</i> written with an <i>alef</i>, according to which the verse may also be taken to mean: Which does not have a wall, this indicates that <b>even if</b> a city <b>does not have</b> a wall <b>now, but it had</b> a wall <b>before,</b> in the era of Joshua, son of Nun, it retains its status as a walled city.

### Part 9
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the one who says</b> that the <b>initial consecration</b> of Eretz Yisrael <b>consecrated</b> it <b>for its time, but did not consecrate</b> it <b>forever? As</b> it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>It is written</b> with regard to the return from Babylonia: <b>“And all the congregation of those that were coming back out of the captivity made <i>sukkot</i>, and dwelt in <i>sukkot</i>, for since the days of Joshua, son of Nun,</b> unto that day <b>the children of Israel had not done so. And there was very great joy”</b> (Nehemiah 8:17). Now, is it <b>possible</b> that King <b>David came and</b> the Jews in his time and all subsequent generations <b>did not make <i>sukkot</i>, until Ezra came?</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> when the verse states: “For since the days of Joshua,” it means to <b>compare their arrival</b> in Eretz Yisrael <b>in the days of Ezra to their arrival in the days of Joshua: Just as</b> with regard to <b>their arrival in the days of Joshua, they counted Sabbatical</b> Years <b>and Jubilee</b> Years <b>and they sanctified walled cities, so too,</b> with regard to <b>their arrival in the days of Ezra, they counted Sabbatical</b> Years <b>and Jubilee</b> Years <b>and they sanctified walled cities.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And</b> so it <b>says</b> with regard to the return of the Jews from exile: <b>“And the Lord your God will bring you into the land that your fathers possessed, and you shall possess it”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:5). The verse <b>compares your possession to the possession of your fathers: Just as the possession of your fathers</b> came <b>with the renewal of all these matters,</b> i.e., the Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee Year, and <i>terumot</i> and tithes, <b>so too your possession</b> comes <b>with the renewal of all these matters,</b> as the initial consecration was nullified.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> who maintains <b>the other</b> opinion, that the initial consecration of Eretz Yisrael is eternal, how does he interpret the verse in Nehemiah? The Gemara answers that when the verse states: “For since the days of Joshua,” this is not referring to actual <i>sukkot</i>; rather, the verse means <b>that</b> Ezra <b>prayed for mercy with regard to</b> the evil <b>inclination of idol worship and nullified it, and the merit</b> of his prayer <b>protected them like a <i>sukka</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara adds: <b>And this is</b> the reason <b>that the verse criticizes Joshua</b> for not praying for the removal of this inclination himself. How is this criticism indicated in the verse? <b>As in every</b> other <b>place</b> in the Bible, his name <b>is written</b> as: <b>Yehoshua, and here it is written: Yeshua.</b> The Gemara explains why the verse singles out Joshua for criticism: <b>Granted, Moses,</b> the first leader of the Jewish people, <b>did not pray for mercy</b> that this inclination should be removed, <b>as</b> at the time <b>there was no merit of Eretz Yisrael; but Joshua, who had the merit of Eretz Yisrael, why didn’t he pray for mercy</b> that this inclination should be nullified?

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to the opinion that the initial consecration was not nullified, <b>isn’t it written: “Which your fathers possessed and you shall possess it”?</b> This verse apparently indicates that it was necessary to sanctify Eretz Yisrael a second time. The Gemara answers: According to this opinion, <b>this</b> is what the verse <b>is saying: Since your fathers possessed</b> the land, <b>you</b> too <b>possess</b> it, and there is no need to sanctify it again.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> cited earlier teaches that the Jews began counting the Jubilee Year upon their return from exile. The Gemara asks: <b>But did they count Sabbatical</b> Years <b>and Jubilee</b> Years in the days of Ezra? <b>Now,</b> if <b>from</b> the time <b>that the tribe of Reuben and the tribe of Gad and half the tribe of Manasseh were exiled</b> (see I Chronicles 5:26) the counting of <b>Jubilee</b> Years was <b>nullified,</b> despite the fact that a majority of Jews lived in Eretz Yisrael, then in the time of <b>Ezra,</b> about <b>which it is written: “The whole congregation together was 42,360”</b> (Ezra 2:64), <b>would</b> they have <b>counted</b> Jubilee Years?

### Part 16
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From</b> the time <b>that the tribe of Reuben and the tribe of Gad and half the tribe of Manasseh were exiled,</b> the counting of <b>Jubilee</b> Years was <b>nullified, as it is stated: “And you shall proclaim liberty throughout the land to all its inhabitants;</b> it shall be a Jubilee for you” (Leviticus 25:10), indicating that the <i>halakhot</i> of the Jubilee Year apply only <b>when all its inhabitants are in</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>and not when some of them have been exiled.</b>

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that if all the Jews <b>were</b> living <b>in</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>but they are intermingled,</b> e.g., <b>the tribe of Benjamin</b> is living <b>in</b> the portion of the tribe of <b>Judah, and the tribe of Judah in</b> the portion of the tribe of <b>Benjamin,</b> that the <b>Jubilee</b> Year <b>should be in effect.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “To all its inhabitants,”</b> which teaches that the Jubilee Year applies only <b>when its inhabitants</b> are living <b>according to their</b> proper <b>arrangment, and not when they are intermingled.</b> How, then, could those who returned from exile have counted the Jubilee Years?

### Part 18
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: They counted Jubilee</b> Years in order <b>to sanctify Sabbatical</b> Years. That is, at the end of every seven cycles of the Sabbatical Year they would count the fiftieth year as a Jubilee Year, so that the next Sabbatical cycle would begin in its proper time, in the fifty-first year. Nevertheless, the <i>halakhot</i> of the Jubilee Year were not in effect.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC