
### Part 1
The Gemara explains: <b>And Rav Anan</b> did not resolve his dilemma from the <i>baraita</i>, as <b>he did not learn</b> this <b><i>baraita</i>. And</b> he could not resolve it from the statement <b>of Shmuel</b> itself, that the sale of a field during the Jubilee Year is ineffective, as the meaning of Shmuel’s statement is unclear. <b>From where</b> can one infer <b>that</b> Shmuel means that the field <b>is not sold and</b> the <b>money is returned? Perhaps</b> he means that the field <b>is not sold and</b> the <b>money is</b> considered <b>a gift, just as it is</b> considered a gift in his opinion <b>in</b> the case of <b>one who betroths his sister. As it was stated:</b> With regard to <b>one who betroths his sister,</b> a betrothal that is invalid, <b>Rav says</b> that <b>the money</b> with which the brother betrothed his sister <b>is returned,</b> as he knew that the betrothal was invalid and merely intended to deposit the money with her for safekeeping. <b>And Shmuel says</b> that it is assumed that he wished to give her the <b>money</b> as <b>a gift.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara earlier (29a) cited a <i>baraita</i> that teaches that if one sells his slave to a Jew outside of Eretz Yisrael, the buyer must free the slave. Nevertheless, his money is not refunded. With regard to this, <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: What did you see</b> to say, <b>that we penalize the buyer</b> and he loses his money? <b>Let us penalize the seller</b> and require him to refund the money he received, so that he loses both the money and the slave.

### Part 3
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: It is <b>not the mouse</b> that <b>steals; rather,</b> it is <b>the hole</b> that <b>steals,</b> as a mouse cannot steal any item unless he has a hole in which to hide it. In other words, the seller could not have sold his slave outside of Eretz Yisrael had the buyer been unwilling to purchase the slave. Abaye replied: The opposite is also true, namely that <b>if not</b> for <b>the mouse, from where</b> would <b>the hole</b> obtain the stolen item? Had the seller refused to sell his slave, the buyer could not have purchased him and taken him out of Eretz Yisrael. Rav Yosef replied to Abaye: Although both parties are at fault, <b>it stands to reason</b> that <b>we apply the penalty wherever the</b> subject of <b>the prohibition is</b> currently located. Since the buyer is now in possession of the slave, he is the one who is penalized.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: If one of the two years after the sale <b>was a year of blight,</b> the buyer is entitled to an additional year’s crops. If the buyer plowed the field but did not sow it, or if he left it fallow, that year counts as part of his tally, as it was fit to produce a crop. The Gemara asks: <b>Now</b> that it was taught that if the buyer <b>left</b> his field <b>fallow</b> that year <b>counts</b> as part of <b>his</b> tally, even though he did not cultivate the field at all, <b>is it necessary</b> for the mishna to teach that the year counts as part of his tally if <b>he plowed</b> the field but did not sow it?

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary</b> to teach the case of a buyer who <b>plowed</b> the field but did not sow it, as it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>we say to</b> the seller: <b>Give the monetary</b> value <b>of</b> the enhancement of the field <b>to</b> the buyer, <b>and</b> then <b>he will leave</b> the field. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the seller does not have to pay him that amount.

### Part 6
§ The mishna states that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If the owner of the field <b>sold it to</b> the buyer before Rosh HaShana and the field was full of produce, and the owner redeems the field after two years, the buyer consumes three crops of the field’s produce in two years. With regard to this <i>halakha</i> <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that if</b> the owner of the field <b>sold it to</b> the buyer <b>before Rosh HaShana full of produce, that</b> the seller <b>should not say to</b> the buyer when he redeems the field after two years: <b>Leave</b> the field <b>for me</b> full of produce <b>in the manner that I left</b> it <b>for you? The verse states: “According to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:15), indicating that the payment is calculated according to the number of years, not according to the number of crops. Consequently, <b>sometimes a person consumes three crops in two years.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> When the Jubilee Year is in effect, one may sell a field only until the Jubilee Year, at which point the field returns to its original owner. If the owner redeems the field before the Jubilee Year, the payment per annum is calculated by dividing the sale price by the number of years from the sale until the Jubilee Year. The owner returns the per annum payment multiplied by the number of years remaining until the Jubilee Year. If the owner of a field <b>sold it to the first</b> buyer <b>for one hundred</b> dinars <b>and the first</b> buyer then <b>sold</b> it <b>to the second</b> buyer <b>for two hundred</b> dinars, when the original owner redeems the field <b>he calculates</b> the payment <b>only</b> according to the price that he set <b>with the first</b> buyer, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And he calculates the years of its sale, and he returns the remainder to the man <b>to whom he sold it”</b> (Leviticus 25:27).

### Part 8
If the owner of a field <b>sold it to the first</b> buyer <b>for two hundred</b> dinars <b>and the first</b> buyer then <b>sold</b> it <b>to the second</b> buyer <b>for one hundred</b> dinars, when the original owner redeems the field, <b>he calculates</b> the payment <b>only</b> according to the price that was paid <b>by the last</b> buyer, <b>as it is stated: “And he calculates the years of its sale, and he returns the remainder to the man to whom he sold it.”</b> The superfluous term “to the man” indicates that the verse is referring <b>to the man who is</b> currently <b>in</b> possession of the field.

### Part 9
One <b>may not sell</b> his ancestral field that is located <b>in a distant</b> area <b>and redeem</b> with the proceeds a field that he sold <b>in a nearby</b> area. Likewise, he may not sell <b>a low-quality</b> field <b>and redeem with</b> the proceeds <b>a high-quality</b> field. <b>And he may not borrow</b> money <b>and redeem</b> the field, <b>nor may he redeem</b> the field incrementally, <b>half</b> now and half at a later date. <b>But with regard to</b> redeeming a field from <b>the Temple</b> treasury, it is <b>permitted</b> to redeem the field <b>in any of these</b> ways. <b>This is</b> a <i>halakha</i> where greater <b>stringency</b> applies <b>with regard to</b> redeeming a field from <b>an ordinary</b> individual <b>than with regard to</b> redeeming it from <b>the Temple</b> treasury.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> Consider the case where the owner of a field <b>sold it to the first</b> buyer <b>for one hundred</b> dinars <b>and the first</b> buyer then <b>sold it to the second</b> buyer <b>for two hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> when the original owner redeems the field, <b>he calculates</b> the payment <b>only</b> according to the price that he set <b>with the first</b> buyer? <b>The verse states:</b> “And he calculates the years of its sale, and he returns the remainder to the man <b>to whom he sold it”</b> (Leviticus 25:27).

### Part 11
Now consider the case where the owner of a field <b>sold it to the first</b> buyer <b>for two hundred</b> dinars <b>and the first</b> buyer then <b>sold</b> it <b>to the second</b> buyer <b>for one hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> when the original owner redeems the field, the payment <b>is calculated only</b> according to the price that was paid <b>by the second</b> buyer? <b>The verse states:</b> “And he returns the remainder <b>to the man</b> to whom he sold it.” The superfluous term <b>“to the man”</b> indicates that the verse is referring to the man <b>who is</b> currently <b>in</b> possession of the field. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda says</b> that the verse should be interpreted differently: Consider the case where the owner of a field <b>sold it to</b> the buyer <b>for one hundred</b> dinars, <b>and</b> the field <b>appreciated</b> in value while in the buyer’s possession <b>and</b> its value <b>stood at two hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> when the seller redeems the field <b>he calculates</b> the payment <b>only</b> according <b>to</b> the <b>one hundred</b> dinars he originally received for the field?<b>As it is stated: “And he returns the remainder</b> to the man to whom he sold it,” that is, the seller returns only <b>the remainder</b> of the original payment <b>that is in his possession.</b>

### Part 13
Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda continues: Consider the case where the owner of a field <b>sold it to</b> the buyer <b>for two hundred</b> dinars, <b>and</b> the field <b>depreciated</b> in value while in the buyer’s possession <b>and</b> its value <b>stood at one hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> when the seller redeems the field, the payment <b>is calculated only</b> according <b>to</b> the <b>one hundred</b> dinars the field is currently worth? <b>As it is stated: “And he returns the remainder</b> to the man to whom he sold it,” i.e., he returns <b>that which</b> now <b>remains of the</b> value of the <b>land.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda? The Gemara responds: The practical difference between them is in a case <b>where</b> the field’s value <b>was high</b> at the time of the first sale, e.g., it was worth two hundred dinars, <b>and</b> when the field was sold a second time it had <b>depreciated</b> in value and was worth only one hundred dinars. <b>And</b> when the original owner came to redeem it, it again <b>appreciated</b> in value until it was worth two hundred dinars. According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the redemption payment is calculated according to the one hundred dinars paid by the second buyer for the field. According to Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda, it is calculated either according to the remainder of the original payment or according to that which now remains of the value of the land. Either way, it is calculated according to the remainder of two hundred dinars.

### Part 15
The aforementioned practical difference aside, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Dostai ben Yehuda agree that the verses are interpreted in a manner that benefits the original owner. The Gemara asks: <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the verses should be interpreted <b>as a leniency</b> for the seller? <b>Perhaps</b> they should be interpreted <b>as a stringency</b> for the seller.

### Part 16
The Gemara responds: Such a possibility should <b>not enter your mind, as it is learned</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the term <b>“redemption”</b> written in this context and <b>“redemption” from</b> the passage discussing <b>a Hebrew slave</b> that the Torah is lenient with regard to the redeemer. The verse states with regard to the redemption of a field: “And he prospers and finds sufficient means to redeem it” (Leviticus 25:26), and with regard to the redemption of a slave who was sold to a gentile, the verse states: “After he is sold he shall attain redemption” (Leviticus 25:48). Accordingly, just as the Torah is lenient with regard to the redemption of a Hebrew slave, so too the Torah is lenient with regard to redeeming a field.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And there,</b> in the case of a Hebrew slave, <b>from where do we</b> derive that the Torah is lenient with regard to his redemption? The Gemara responds: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Consider the case of a Hebrew slave who <b>was sold for one hundred</b> dinars, <b>and he appreciated</b> in value during his term of servitude <b>and</b> his value <b>stood at two hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> if he redeems himself, the sum he pays for the remaining years of his service <b>is calculated only</b> according <b>to</b> the <b>one hundred</b> dinars for which he was originally sold? <b>As it is stated:</b> “If there are yet many years, according to them he shall return the price of his redemption <b>from the money of his purchase”</b> (Leviticus 25:51).

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Consider the case of a Hebrew slave who <b>was sold for two hundred</b> dinars, <b>and he depreciated</b> in value during his term <b>and</b> his value <b>stood at one hundred</b> dinars. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> if he redeems himself, the sum he pays for the remaining years of his service <b>is calculated only</b> according <b>to</b> the <b>one hundred</b> dinars he is currently worth? <b>As it is stated: “According to his years</b> he shall return the price of his redemption” (Leviticus 25:52). The verse indicates that the sum is calculated according to the value of his remaining years of service.

### Part 19
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> with regard to <b>a Hebrew slave who was sold to a gentile, that he is redeemed and</b> that <b>he has the advantage,</b> as the price of his redemption is always calculated according to the lesser value. <b>From where</b> is it derived that this <i>halakha</i> also applies in the case of a Hebrew slave who was <b>sold to a Jew? The verse states: “Hired worker,” “hired worker,”</b> in order <b>to</b> derive <b>a verbal analogy,</b> indicating that this <i>halakha</i> applies both to a slave sold to a gentile and to one sold to a Jew. The verse states with regard to a slave sold to a gentile: “According to the time of a hired worker shall he be with him” (Leviticus 25:50), and with regard to a slave sold to a Jew, the verse states: “For double the hire of a hired worker he served you six years” (Deuteronomy 15:18).

### Part 20
The Gemara relates that <b>Abaye said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC