
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But Rabbi Yannai,</b> who was a charity collector, <b>borrowed</b> money belonging to charity <b>and repaid.</b> The Gemara answers: The case of <b>Rabbi Yannai is different;</b> it is <b>beneficial to the poor</b> that he be allowed to borrow and repay, <b>as the longer he leaves</b> the charity fund empty, the more he <b>impels</b> people to give charity, <b>and</b> he thereby <b>brings</b> more money <b>to</b> the poor.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> that deals with a similar matter: In the case of <b>a Jew who donated a candelabrum or a lamp to the synagogue,</b> it is <b>prohibited to change it</b> and use it for another purpose. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba thought to say</b> that there <b>is no difference</b> whether he wishes to change <b>for a voluntary matter or for a matter</b> involving <b>a mitzva,</b> as in both cases it is prohibited. <b>Rav Ami said to</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba: <b>This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> When the Sages taught the <i>baraita</i>, they <b>taught only</b> that it is prohibited when he changes it <b>for a voluntary matter, but</b> it is <b>permitted to change it for a matter</b> involving <b>a mitzva.</b>

### Part 3
This <i>halakha</i> is derived <b>from</b> the fact <b>that Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to <b>a gentile who donated a candelabrum or a lamp to the synagogue, if</b> it is <b>before its owner’s name</b> has been <b>forgotten,</b> i.e., people still remember that he donated the item, it is <b>prohibited to change it</b> and use it for another purpose. <b>Once its owner’s name</b> has been <b>forgotten,</b> it is <b>permitted to change it.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara clarifies: <b>With regard to what</b> purpose is it stated that one may not change it before the owner’s name was forgotten? <b>If we say</b> that it is prohibited to change it <b>for a voluntary matter, why</b> does the <i>baraita</i> <b>specifically</b> mention <b>a gentile?</b> It is prohibited to change it in this manner <b>even</b> if it was donated by <b>a Jew.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>baraita</i> must be dealing with a change <b>for a matter</b> involving <b>a mitzva,</b> and therefore it is prohibited only if the donor is a gentile and his name has not yet been forgotten. <b>And the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i> is <b>that it is</b> specifically <b>a gentile who</b> would protest and <b>scream:</b> Where is the candelabrum that I donated? <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a Jew, who</b> would <b>not</b> protest and <b>scream</b> if they used his donation for a different mitzva, one may <b>well</b> change it.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>Sha’azrak, an Arab [<i>tayya’a</i>]</b> merchant, <b>donated a candelabrum to Rav Yehuda’s synagogue. Raḥava changed its</b> purpose before Sha’azrak’s name was forgotten as the donor, and <b>Rava became angry</b> at Raḥava for not waiting. <b>Some say</b> the opposite: <b>Rava changed its</b> purpose, and <b>Raḥava became angry</b> at Rava. <b>And some say</b> that the <b>attendants of Pumbedita,</b> the charity collectors, <b>changed</b> its purpose, and <b>Raḥava became angry</b> at them, <b>and Rabba became angry</b> at them as well.

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: The <b>one who changed</b> its purpose <b>holds that</b> it was permitted to change it, <b>as</b> it was <b>not common</b> for Sha’azrak to be in the city and it was unlikely that he would protest the change. <b>And</b> the <b>one who became angry holds</b> that even so, they should not have changed it, as <b>sometimes he happens to come</b> there.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who is moribund and one who is taken to be executed</b> after being sentenced by the court <b>is neither</b> the object of <b>a vow nor valuated. Rabbi Ḥanina ben Akavya says:</b> He is not the object of a vow, because he has no market value; but <b>he is valuated, due to</b> the fact <b>that one’s value is fixed</b> by the Torah based on age and sex. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> One with that status <b>vows</b> to donate the assessment of another person to the Temple treasury, <b>and takes</b> vows of <b>valuation, and consecrates</b> his property; <b>and if he damages</b> the property of others, he is <b>liable</b> to pay compensation.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> it makes sense that <b>one who is moribund is not</b> the object of <b>a vow, as he has no monetary</b> value. <b>And</b> it also stands to reason that he <b>is not valuated,</b> as <b>he is not subject to setting,</b> i.e., standing, <b>and</b> therefore is not subject to <b>valuation.</b> The verse states: “Then he shall be set before the priest, and the priest shall value him” (Leviticus 27:8). This teaches that anyone who cannot stand, such as one who is dying, is not included in the <i>halakha</i> of valuation. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>one who is taken to be executed, granted,</b> he <b>is not</b> the object of <b>a vow, as he has no monetary</b> value, since no one would purchase him. <b>But</b> with regard to the mishna’s statement that he is <b>not valuated, why not?</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara answers that the reason is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived that in the case of <b>one who</b> is being <b>taken to be executed and</b> who <b>said: My valuation is upon me</b> to donate to the Temple, <b>that he did not say anything,</b> and the valuation is not collected from his estate? <b>The verse states: “Anything dedicated [<i>ḥerem</i>],</b> that may be dedicated of men, <b>shall not be redeemed”</b> (Leviticus 27:29). This teaches that with regard to one who is worthy of excommunication [<i>ḥerem</i>], i.e., condemned to death, one cannot redeem him, i.e., pay his valuation. One <b>might</b> have thought that this applies <b>even before his verdict is issued,</b> i.e., that this <i>halakha</i> applies even if one issued this statement before being sentenced to death. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Of men,” and not all men,</b> i.e., only some men destined to be executed have no valuation, and not all of them.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And with regard to Rabbi Ḥanina ben Akavya, who says</b> in the mishna that even a person taken to be executed <b>is valuated, due to</b> the fact <b>that one’s value is fixed, what does he do</b> with the phrase <b>“anything dedicated”?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers that he requires it <b>for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says: Since we found with regard to those executed at the hand of Heaven that they give money and their</b> sins <b>are atoned, as it is stated</b> in the case of the owner of a forewarned ox that killed a person: “The ox shall be stoned, and its owner shall also be put to death. <b>If there be laid upon him a ransom,</b> then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatsoever is laid upon him” (Exodus 21:29–30), one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> with regard to those liable to receive the death penalty <b>at the hands of man</b> it is <b>so,</b> that one can pay in lieu of execution. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Anything dedicated</b> that may be dedicated of men, <b>shall not be redeemed”</b> (Leviticus 27:29).

### Part 13
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that one cannot give payment in lieu of execution with regard to <b>severe</b> prohibitions punishable by the <b>death</b> penalty, e.g., blasphemy or cursing one’s father, <b>for which no atonement is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for their unwitting</b> violation. <b>From where</b> is it derived that the same applies to <b>less severe</b> prohibitions punishable by the <b>death</b> penalty, e.g., violating Shabbat or killing, <b>for which atonement</b> of an offering or exile <b>is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for their unwitting</b> violation? <b>The verse states: “Anything dedicated,”</b> to include all prohibitions punishable by court-administered execution.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches, with regard to one who is taken to be executed, that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Such a person <b>vows</b> to donate the assessment of another person to the Temple treasury, <b>and takes</b> vows of <b>valuation,</b> and consecrates his property; and if he damages the property of others, he is liable to pay compensation. The Gemara asks: <b>And does the first <i>tanna</i> say</b> that such a person does <b>not</b> vow to donate the assessment of another person to the Temple treasury and take vows of valuation, such that Rabbi Yosei could be understood as disputing his opinion? The first <i>tanna</i> merely said that such an individual is not subject to vows and valuations. What is the difference between their opinions?

### Part 15
<b>Rather, with regard to</b> whether or not one who is taken to be executed can <b>vow</b> to donate the assessment of another person to the Temple treasury, <b>and take</b> vows of <b>valuation, and consecrate</b> his property, <b>everyone,</b> including the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>agrees</b> that he can. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>in</b> a case <b>where</b> he <b>causes damage. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>if</b> he <b>causes damage</b> he is <b>not liable for payment, and Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that <b>if</b> he <b>causes damage</b> he is <b>liable to pay</b> compensation.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do</b> these <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree,</b> as it is an accepted principle that one who causes damage must pay? <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> They <b>disagree</b> as to whether the payment can be collected from his estate. This depends on the question of whether or not one who is owed money from <b>a loan by oral</b> agreement, i.e., a loan given without a document that places a lien on the land, can <b>collect from the heirs. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that one who is owed money from <b>a loan by oral</b> agreement <b>cannot collect from the heirs, and Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that one who is owed money from <b>a loan by oral</b> agreement can <b>collect from the heirs.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rava says:</b> In fact, <b>everyone</b> agrees that one who is owed money from <b>a loan by oral</b> agreement <b>cannot collect from the heirs; and here</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree with regard to</b> the status of <b>a loan that is written in the Torah,</b> i.e., a financial obligation decreed by Torah law, such as paying damages. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>a loan that is written in the Torah is not</b> considered <b>as though it is written in a document,</b> and may not be collected from the heirs. <b>Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that such a loan <b>is</b> considered <b>as though it is written in a document,</b> and therefore it may be collected from the heirs.

### Part 18
<b>And there are those who teach</b> the dispute between Rava and Rav Yosef <b>with regard to this</b> <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who is taken to be executed</b> after being sentenced by the court, if <b>he injured another</b> he is <b>liable</b> for payment. But if <b>others injured him</b> they are <b>exempt,</b> as they would be if they injured a dead person. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: Even if</b> it was <b>he</b> who <b>injured others,</b> he is <b>exempt, as</b> he <b>cannot be brought back to stand</b> before <b>the court</b> for judgment, since he must be executed without delay.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC