
### Part 1
<b>The verse states</b> with regard to a purchased field: “And <b>if</b> he sanctifies to the Lord <b>a field that he has bought, which is not of his ancestral field”</b> (Leviticus 27:22). The verse is referring specifically to <b>a field that is not an ancestral field</b> at the time of its consecration. This requirement <b>excludes this</b> field, <b>as</b> currently, after the death of the father, <b>it is an ancestral field.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. That is the opinion of Rabbi Meir, <b>whereas</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda and according to Rabbi Shimon it is</b> considered <b>an ancestral field even if he consecrated</b> the field <b>and afterward his father dies. What is the reason</b> for this opinion? <b>If</b> you suggest it is <b>due to the verse,</b> that cannot be, as <b>the verse comes</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> that was stated <b>in accordance</b> with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> i.e., it is referring to a case where the father died before he consecrated the field, as Rabbi Meir explained.

### Part 3
<b>Rather, is it not due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> he <b>follows</b> the status of the field at the time of the <b>redemption?</b> Since the father died before the son redeemed the field it is considered an ancestral field in the possession of the Temple treasury. Similarly, if one first consecrates the trees and afterward the field, he should redeem them both together, since at the time of the redemption they are both consecrated. Since this ruling is not in accordance with the <i>baraita</i> that states that the trees and field are redeemed separately, evidently the <i>baraita</i> cannot be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that this source does not contradict Rav Huna’s claim that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon. The reason is that <b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon</b> do not, in fact, maintain that one follows the status of the field at the time of the redemption. Rather, they <b>found a verse and expounded it.</b>

### Part 5
Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak explains Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon’s reasoning: <b>If so,</b> that when one consecrated the field and his father died afterward, it is not considered an ancestral field, <b>let the Merciful One write</b> in the Torah: And <b>if</b> he sanctifies to the Lord <b>a field that he has bought, which is not his ancestral,</b> i.e., the verse could have omitted the repetition of the phrase “of his field.” <b>What</b> does the Torah mean by stressing <b>“of his field”?</b> This teaches that only <b>a field that is not fit to be an ancestral field</b> at the time he consecrated it is redeemed for its value. But if he consecrated a field that he would inherit in the future, it is redeemed in the manner of an ancestral field.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> If one <b>consecrated</b> fields that are <b>rocky [<i>terashin</i>]</b> and unsuitable for planting, <b>he redeems them by their value,</b> not as ancestral fields. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states</b> that one redeems <b>an area</b> fit <b>for sowing</b> of a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley seed for fifty silver shekels (see Leviticus 27:16), <b>and these</b> fields <b>are not fit for sowing.</b>

### Part 7
But if <b>he did not redeem</b> these fields before the Jubilee Year, <b>they go</b> to the priests <b>in the Jubilee</b> Year, like ancestral fields. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “And if he will not redeem the <b>field,</b> or if he has sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed anymore. But the field, when it goes out in the Jubilee, shall be holy to the Lord, as a field devoted; it shall belong to the priest” (Leviticus 27:20–21). This indicates that <b>any kind</b> of ancestral field at all, regardless of quality, goes to the priests if it is not redeemed by the Jubilee Year.

### Part 8
Furthermore, Rav Pappa says: If one <b>sold</b> fields that are <b>rocky</b> and unsuitable for planting, <b>they may be redeemed</b> from the purchaser <b>in</b> even <b>less than two years,</b> despite the fact that normally land must be left in the hands of the purchaser for at least two years (see 29b), as derived from the plural term “years of the crops” cited below. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “According to the number of years after the Jubilee you shall buy from your neighbor, and according to <b>the number of years of the crops</b> he shall sell it to you” (Leviticus 25:15), <b>and these</b> rocky fields <b>are not fit for crops.</b> But if <b>he did not redeem them</b> from the purchaser, <b>they return to the owner in the Jubilee</b> Year, like ancestral fields. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “Then let him count the years of its sale, and restore the extra to the man to whom he sold it; <b>and it shall return to its ancestral</b> heritage” (Leviticus 25:27), <b>and this</b> rocky field <b>is also</b> part of his <b>ancestral</b> heritage.

### Part 9
Rav Pappa further says: If one <b>consecrated trees</b> in his ancestral field, <b>he redeems</b> them according <b>to their value. What is the reason? The Merciful One states</b> that one redeems <b>an area</b> fit <b>for sowing</b> of a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley seed for fifty silver shekels. This is referring specifically to land fit for sowing grain, <b>and not trees.</b> Furthermore, if <b>he did not redeem</b> the trees, they <b>do not go to the priests in the Jubilee</b> Year, unlike an ancestral field. The reason is that <b>the Merciful One states: “But the field,</b> when it goes out in the Jubilee, shall be holy to the Lord, as a field devoted; it shall belong to the priest” (Leviticus 27:21). This too is referring specifically to a field, <b>and not trees.</b>

### Part 10
Rav Pappa also says: If one <b>sold trees</b> of his ancestral field, <b>they may not be redeemed</b> from the purchaser if <b>less than two years</b> passed. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “According to the number of years after the Jubilee you shall buy it from your neighbor, and according to the number of <b>years of the crops</b> he shall sell it to you” (Leviticus 25:15), <b>and these</b> trees <b>are fit for crops,</b> as they produce fruit. But if <b>he did not redeem them</b> from the purchaser, the trees <b>do not return to the owner in the Jubilee</b> Year. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “Then let him count the years of its sale, and restore the extra to the man to whom he sold it; <b>and it shall return to its ancestral</b> heritage” (Leviticus 25:27). This includes only land, which remains forever, <b>and not trees,</b> which have a limited lifespan.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>The Master,</b> i.e., Rav Pappa, <b>says</b> that if one <b>consecrated trees</b> in his ancestral field <b>he redeems</b> them according <b>to their value.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> is that so? <b>But let them be consecrated on account of their land and let them be redeemed on account of their land,</b> according to the valuation of fifty silver shekels for each area required for sowing a <i>kor</i> of barley seed.

### Part 12
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>he consecrated the trees</b> and <b>did not consecrate land, but didn’t</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a say:</b> If <b>one sells</b> a date <b>palm to another,</b> the purchaser <b>acquires it from the bottom</b> of the palm <b>until the depths</b> of the earth, i.e., including its land. The Gemara answers: <b>Wasn’t it stated with regard to this</b> ruling that it is referring only to a case <b>where</b> the purchaser <b>comes due to</b> a specific <b>claim</b> that he purchased the land under the date palm. But if he does not claim to have explicitly purchased the land, the seller or the one who consecrates does not intend to include land with the date palm.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches: And with regard to <b>a purchased field</b> that one consecrates, <b>he gives its value</b> as redemption, a sum that can be more or less than fifty silver shekels for an area required for the sowing of a <i>kor</i> of barley seed. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “Then the priest shall reckon for him the <b>worth</b> of your valuation until the Jubilee Year; and he shall give your valuation in that day, as a holy thing to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:23). <b>What does this</b> word “worth” <b>come to teach? Since it is stated</b> with regard to an ancestral field: “An area fit for the <b>sowing of a <i>ḥomer</i> of barley seed is redeemed for fifty silver shekels”</b> (Leviticus 27:16), one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a purchased field is also</b> redeemed using <b>this</b> formula. Therefore, <b>the verse states “worth,”</b> which means the market value of the field.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says: It is stated here,</b> with regard to purchased fields: “Then the priest <b>shall reckon</b> for him the worth of your valuation until the Jubilee Year; and he shall give your valuation in that day, as a holy thing to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:23). <b>And it is stated there,</b> with regard to an ancestral field: “But if he sanctifies his field after the Jubilee, then the priest <b>shall reckon</b> for him the money according to the years that remain until the Jubilee Year, and it shall be deducted from your valuation” (Leviticus 27:18). <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of an ancestral field, it is referring to <b>a fixed amount, so too here,</b> with regard to a purchased field, it means <b>a fixed amount.</b>

### Part 15
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the students: Do <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Eliezer, <b>accept</b> that one derives <b>the verbal analogy</b> of “shall reckon,” <b>but they use it to</b> derive that one who redeems a consecrated purchased field must also add <b>one-fifth? Or perhaps they do not accept the verbal analogy</b> at all, <b>and they do not</b> hold that one who redeems a purchased field must add <b>one-fifth?</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rava said: It is reasonable</b> to assume that the Rabbis <b>do not accept the verbal analogy.</b> The reasoning is as follows: <b>From</b> the fact that <b>the Merciful One revealed</b> in the Torah that one must add <b>one-fifth in</b> the case of one who redeems <b>an ancestral field and in</b> the case of one who <b>consecrates his house, these are two verses that come as one,</b> i.e., to teach the same matter. <b>And any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> their common aspect, in this case, adding one-fifth, to apply to other cases. Therefore, it can be assumed that the Rabbis maintain that one who redeems his purchased field does not have to pay an additional fifth.

### Part 17
Rava continues: <b>And</b> even <b>according to the one who says</b> that two verses that come as one <b>do teach</b> their common aspect, <b>from</b> the fact that <b>the Merciful One revealed</b> in the Torah that one must add <b>one-fifth when</b> he redeems his second <b>tithe, and when</b> he redeems his <b>kosher animal</b> that he consecrated and became blemished, <b>and when</b> he redeems his <b>non-kosher animal</b> that he consecrated, <b>these are many</b> verses that come at one, <b>and</b> everyone agrees that multiple verses <b>do not teach</b> their common aspect to other cases.

### Part 18
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the ruling <b>of Rava, but not for his reason. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: “Then the priest shall reckon for him <b>the worth of your valuation</b> until the Jubilee Year; and he shall give your valuation in that day, as a holy thing to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:23). <b>The verse juxtaposes</b> this estimation <b>to</b> fixed <b>valuations. Just as</b> with regard to fixed <b>valuations</b> one does <b>not add one-fifth, so too</b> when redeeming <b>a purchased field</b> one does <b>not add one-fifth.</b>

### Part 19
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There are <i>halakhot</i> <b>with regard to a forewarned ox that killed</b> a Canaanite <b>slave that are lenient and</b> others <b>that are stringent; how so? Both</b> in the case of an ox <b>that killed the</b> most <b>attractive among the slaves,</b> whose value is great, <b>and</b> likewise in the case of one that killed <b>the</b> most <b>unsightly among the slaves,</b> whose value is minimal, its owner <b>gives</b> payment of <b>thirty <i>sela</i>,</b> the fine stated in the Torah (Exodus 21:32), to the owner of the slave. If the ox <b>killed a freeman,</b> its owner <b>gives his price</b> as payment to his heirs. This sum can be more or less than thirty shekels. If the ox <b>injured this</b> slave <b>or that</b> freeman, <b>he gives</b> payment of the <b>full</b> cost of the <b>damage</b> as compensation.

### Part 20
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> As the mishna first specifies that it is speaking of a forewarned ox, this indicates that <b>with regard to a forewarned ox</b> that injured a freeman, <b>yes,</b> one is liable for full payment, but <b>with regard to an innocuous</b> ox that injured a freeman one does <b>not</b> make full restitution, but pays only half the value of the victim. The Gemara asks: <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 33a) that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The owner of <b>an innocuous</b> ox <b>that injured a person also pays the full</b> cost of the <b>damage with regard to the difference</b> between the damage the person inflicted on the ox and the damage the ox inflicted on the person. Evidently, Rabbi Akiva does not distinguish between an innocuous and a forewarned ox in a case where an ox injured a person.

### Part 21
The Gemara answers: <b>You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> and explain it as follows: <b>The same is true that even</b> the owner of <b>an innocuous</b> ox must make full restitution, <b>but since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach</b> in the first part of <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna: An ox that <b>killed a slave</b> and an ox that <b>killed a freeman, which you find in</b> the case of <b>forewarned</b> ox but <b>in</b> the case of <b>an innocuous</b> ox <b>you do not find it,</b> as the penalty for killing a person does not apply to an innocuous ox, it is <b>for this</b> reason that the mishna <b>teaches</b> only the case of <b>a forewarned</b> ox.

### Part 22
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There are <i>halakhot</i> <b>with regard to a rapist and with regard to a seducer that are lenient and</b> others <b>that are stringent; how so? Both</b> one <b>who raped or seduced</b> a young woman <b>who is</b> the most <b>prominent in the priesthood and</b> one who raped or seduced a young woman who is <b>the lowliest among the Israelites gives</b> the payment of <b>fifty <i>sela</i>,</b> the fine stated in the Torah (see Deuteronomy 22:29). <b>And</b> the payments for <b>humiliation and</b> for <b>degradation</b> resulting from being raped or seduced are assessed differentially; it is <b>all based on the one who humiliates and the one who is humiliated.</b>

### Part 23
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> must the rapist or seducer also pay for her humiliation and degradation? One can <b>say</b> that <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the verse: “Then the man that lay with her shall give to the young woman’s father fifty shekels of silver” (Deuteronomy 22:29), that he is to pay a total of <b>fifty <i>sela</i> for all matters</b> associated with this act, i.e., the fine, degradation, humiliation, and pain.

### Part 24
<b>Rav Zeira says:</b> It cannot be that he pays a total of only fifty <i>sela</i>, as people <b>will say:</b> Does it make sense that <b>one who engaged in</b> forced <b>intercourse with,</b> i.e., raped, <b>a daughter of kings</b> pays a sum of <b>fifty</b> <i>sela</i>, when she suffers great humiliation, and <b>one who engaged in forced intercourse with the daughter of ordinary</b> people <b>[<i>hedyotot</i>]</b> also pays <b>fifty</b> <i>sela</i>?

### Part 25
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Zeira: <b>If so,</b> the same claim can be applied <b>with regard to a slave</b> killed by an ox. People <b>will also say:</b> Does it make sense that <b>a slave who pierces pearls [<i>margalit</i>]</b> is worth <b>thirty</b> <i>sela</i>, and <b>a slave who performs needlecraft</b> is also worth <b>thirty</b> <i>sela</i>? Nevertheless, the mishna clearly indicates that there is no distinction between the two slaves, as the Torah states a fixed payment. <b>Rather, Rav Zeira says</b> that there is a different proof:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC