
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: Dedications</b> of property for <b>priests have no redemption, and one gives</b> the property <b>to the priest.</b> With regard to these <b>dedications, as long as they</b> remain <b>in the house of the owner they are</b> considered <b>like consecrated</b> property <b>in every sense, as it is stated: “Every dedicated item is most sacred to the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 27:28). Once the owner <b>has given them to the priest they are in every sense like non-sacred</b> property, <b>as it is stated: “Everything dedicated in Israel shall be yours”</b> (Numbers 18:14), i.e., it shall be like all other regular property belonging to a priest, which is non-sacred.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says dedications</b> donated <b>without specification</b> are designated <b>for Temple maintenance,</b> as it is stated: “Every dedicated item is most sacred to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:28). And the Rabbis say they are designated for priests, as it is stated: “As a field dedicated; its possession shall be to the priest” (Leviticus 27:21), whereas the verse cited by Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira teaches that dedication takes effect on offerings of the most sacred order and offerings of lesser sanctity. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> is clear, <b>as they explain their reason and the reason of Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira,</b> i.e., they interpret the verse he cited as his proof. <b>But</b> as for <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, this</b> verse: <b>“As a field dedicated;</b> its possession shall be to the priest,” <b>what does he do with it,</b> i.e., what does he derive from it?

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: The verse <b>is necessary for him for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that discusses the case of one who consecrated his ancestral field and failed to redeem it. This field becomes the possession of the priests at the Jubilee Year. The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state</b> at its end: <b>“As a field dedicated; its possession shall be to the priest”?</b> The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a priest who consecrated his dedicated field,</b> i.e., a field that was dedicated by an Israelite and was given to him and he then consecrated it, and then the Jubilee Year arrived, <b>that he may not say: Since</b> a field that was consecrated by its owners and was not redeemed <b>goes out</b> of the owner’s possession and passes <b>to</b> the possession of <b>the priests at the Jubilee</b> Year, <b>and</b> this field that I consecrated <b>is</b> already <b>in my possession, it is</b> therefore <b>mine.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And</b> this claim of the priest <b>is</b> based on <b>logical inference:</b> If <b>I acquire</b> the fields <b>of others</b> that were consecrated and not redeemed at the Jubilee Year, then with regard to <b>my own</b> property, <b>all the more so</b> is it <b>not</b> clear that I should acquire it? Therefore, <b>the verse states,</b> with regard to an ancestral field that one consecrated: <b>“As a field dedicated; its possession shall be to the priest,”</b> which teaches that this priest does not acquire the field.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> explains the derivation: <b>But what</b> have <b>we now learned</b> about a consecrated ancestral field <b>from a dedicated field?</b> In other words, the verse, which is dealing with an ancestral field, says an ancestral field is like a dedicated field, but it does not explicitly state the <i>halakha</i> of dedicated fields. Rather, <b>this</b> case of a dedicated field <b>comes to teach</b> a <i>halakha</i> about an ancestral field <b>but is found to derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> from that case, i.e., the verse <b>juxtaposes a dedicated field</b> of a priest <b>to the ancestral field of an Israelite.</b>

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> clarifies how the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the juxtaposition: <b>Just as the ancestral field of an Israelite,</b> which was redeemed by a priest from the Temple treasury, <b>goes out</b> of <b>his possession</b> at the arrival of the Jubilee Year <b>and is divided among</b> all <b>the priests</b> of the watch serving at the beginning of the Jubilee Year (see 25b), <b>so too, the dedicated field</b> of a priest that remained in his possession <b>goes out</b> of <b>his possession and is divided among his brothers, the priests</b> of the watch serving at the beginning of the Jubilee Year.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, from where do they derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara responds: They derive it <b>from</b> a superfluous term in the verse, as it could have stated merely: <b>Dedicated [<i>ḥerem</i>],</b> from which one would have derived that unspecified dedications are designated for the priests. Yet the verse actually states: <b>“<i>Haḥerem</i>,”</b> with the definite article, and therefore both <i>halakhot</i> are derived from this verse. The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, <b>he does not learn</b> anything from the difference between <b><i>ḥerem</i></b> and <b><i>haḥerem</i>.</b> Accordingly, he derives from here only that if a priest consecrated his dedicated field it is removed from his possession.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, from where does he</b> derive <b>that</b> a dedication <b>takes effect on offerings of the most sacred order and offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> which, according to the Rabbis, is learned from the verse: “Every dedicated item is most sacred to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:28)? The Gemara answers: <b>He holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> who derives this <i>halakha</i> from another source, as explained in the mishna below.

### Part 9
§ <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira</b> that unspecified dedications of property are designated for Temple maintenance. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> would <b>Rav leave</b> aside the majority opinion of <b>the Rabbis and act in accordance with</b> the individual opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira?</b> The Gemara answers: This dispute <b>is taught</b> in <b>a <i>baraita</i></b> in the <b>opposite</b> manner, i.e., it is the Rabbis who hold that unspecified dedications are designated for Temple maintenance. The Gemara further asks: Would Rav <b>leave</b> aside <b>a mishna and act in accordance with a <i>baraita</i>?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Rav teaches the mishna as well</b> in the <b>opposite</b> manner, in accordance with the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What did you see that you</b> chose <b>to reverse</b> the opinions in <b>the mishna due to the <i>baraita</i>? Let us reverse</b> the opinions in <b>the <i>baraita</i> due to the mishna.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rav learned by tradition</b> from his teachers that the opinions cited in the mishna should be reversed. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> why does Rav state that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira?</b> He <b>should have</b> said it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> The Gemara explains that <b>this</b> is what Rav <b>is saying: In accordance</b> with the manner in <b>which you reversed</b> the opinions <b>and taught</b> them in the mishna, the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira.</b>

### Part 11
§ The Gemara relates that there was <b>a certain man who dedicated his property in Pumbedita. He came before Rav Yehuda</b> to ask him what to do. Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Take four dinars and desacralize</b> the dedicated property by transferring its sanctity <b>onto them. And</b> then <b>throw</b> the dinars <b>into the river,</b> because one may not derive benefit from them. <b>And</b> then the property <b>will be permitted to you,</b> as it will have been redeemed. The Gemara notes: <b>Evidently,</b> Rav Yehuda <b>holds</b> that <b>unspecified dedications</b> of property are designated <b>for Temple maintenance,</b> which is why the man could redeem his property. Had the property been designated for the priests there could be no redemption, as taught in the mishna.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion does Rav Yehuda hold, when he told the man to desacralize the dedicated property by transferring its sanctity onto money worth less than the dedicated property? The Gemara responds: He holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, who said: Consecrated</b> property <b>worth one hundred</b> dinars <b>that one desacralized onto</b> an item <b>worth one <i>peruta</i> is desacralized.</b> The Gemara asks: One can <b>say that Shmuel said</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> only in a case <b>where</b> one already <b>desacralized</b> the property, i.e., after the fact. <b>Did he say</b> one may do so <b><i>ab initio</i>?</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara responds: <b>This matter,</b> that one must desacralize consecrated property onto an item worth the value of the property <i>ab initio</i>, applies only <b>during a period when the Temple is standing, as there is a loss</b> caused to the Temple treasury by desacralizing its property onto an item worth less than its value. <b>But in the present</b> time, when the Temple is not standing and there is no Temple treasury, one may desacralize with an item worth less than the consecrated property <b>even <i>ab initio</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then one may <b>even</b> desacralize with <b>one <i>peruta</i> as well.</b> Why, then, did Rav Yehuda require the man to use four dinars? The Gemara responds: He required four dinars in order to <b>publicize the matter,</b> so that the community will know the property is permitted for use only because it was redeemed.

### Part 14
<b>Ulla says: If I had been there</b> when this man asked what to do, <b>I would have given all of</b> the property <b>to the priests.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Evidently, Ulla holds</b> that <b>unspecified dedications</b> of property are designated <b>for the priests,</b> and therefore they cannot be redeemed.

### Part 15
It can be inferred from the previous discussion that the <i>halakhot</i> of dedications are in effect even today. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this opinion from a <i>baraita</i>: The sale of <b>a Hebrew slave is practiced only during a period when the Jubilee</b> Year <b>is observed, as it is stated:</b> “And if your brother be waxen poor with you, and sell himself to you…<b>he shall serve with you until the year of Jubilee”</b> (Leviticus 25:39–40).

### Part 16
<b>And</b> likewise the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>a dedicated,</b> i.e., ancestral, <b>field apply only during a period that the Jubilee</b> Year <b>is observed, as it is stated:</b> “Then that which he has sold shall remain in the hand of him that has bought…<b>and in the Jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return to his possession”</b> (Leviticus 25:28). Finally, the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>houses of walled cities apply only during a period when the Jubilee</b> Year <b>is observed, as it is stated:</b> “Then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him that bought it, throughout his generations; <b>it shall not go out in the Jubilee”</b> (Leviticus 25:30).

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says:</b> The <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>a dedicated field apply only during a period when the Jubilee</b> Year <b>is observed, as it is stated: “But the field, when it goes out in the Jubilee, shall be sacred to the Lord, as a field dedicated;</b> its possession shall be to the priest” (Leviticus 27:21). <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> The <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>a gentile who resides in Eretz Yisrael and observes the seven Noahide mitzvot [<i>ger toshav</i>] apply only during a period when the Jubilee</b> Year <b>is observed.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rav Beivai said: What is the reason?</b> It is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy between <b>“well”</b> and <b>“well.”</b> It is <b>written here,</b> with regard to a Hebrew slave, who can be sold only when the Jubilee Year is observed: <b>“Because he fares well with you”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:16). <b>And</b> it is <b>written there,</b> with regard to a <i>ger toshav</i>: <b>“Where it is well for him; you shall not wrong him”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:17). The Gemara’s objection is that it is evident from the <i>baraita</i> that the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to dedicated fields apply only when the Jubilee Year is observed.

### Part 19
The Gemara explains that it is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i> is discussing the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to land,</b> whereas <b>that</b> incident, in Pumbedita, in which a dedication was effected, occurred <b>with movable property.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But that incident</b> that occurred <b>in Pumbedita involved land as well,</b> and Rav Yehuda nevertheless required the man to redeem them. The Gemara responds: <b>Land outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>is considered like movable property in Eretz Yisrael.</b>

### Part 20
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yishmael says: One verse states:</b> “All the firstborn males that are born of your herd and of your flock <b>you shall consecrate</b> to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 15:19), <b>and one verse states:</b> “However, the firstborn among animals that is born first to the Lord, a man <b>shall not consecrate</b> it” (Leviticus 27:26). It is <b>impossible to say: “You shall consecrate,” as it is already stated:</b> “A man <b>shall not consecrate.”</b> It is likewise <b>impossible to say:</b> “A man <b>shall not consecrate,” as it is already stated: “You shall consecrate.”</b>

### Part 21
<b>How,</b> then, can <b>these</b> verses be reconciled? <b>You can consecrate</b> the firstborn animal by <b>a consecration of value,</b> i.e., an individual can donate to the Temple treasury the amount he would be willing to pay for the right to give the firstborn to a specific priest; <b>and you cannot consecrate it</b> by <b>a consecration for the altar,</b> as a firstborn may not be sacrificed for the sake of any other offering.

### Part 22
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara comments: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> who derive the <i>halakha</i> that a dedication takes effect on all offerings of sanctity from the verse: “Every dedicated item is most sacred to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:28), would explain that the verse “A man <b>shall not consecrate” is necessary to</b> teach that there is a Torah <b>prohibition</b> against consecrating a firstborn animal for the sake of another offering. As for the other verse discussed in the mishna: <b>“You shall consecrate,”</b> it <b>is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a firstborn</b> animal that <b>was born in</b> one’s <b>flock that</b> it is <b>a mitzva to consecrate it</b> verbally as a firstborn? <b>As it is stated: “The</b> firstborn <b>males</b> that are born of your herd and of your flock <b>you shall consecrate.”</b>

### Part 23
<b>And Rabbi Yishmael,</b> who maintains there is no such mitzva, would argue: <b>If one does not consecrate it</b> verbally, is the animal <b>not consecrated?</b> It certainly is consecrated, as <b>its sanctity is from the womb. And since when one does not consecrate it</b> the animal is nevertheless <b>sanctified</b> automatically, <b>he does not need to consecrate it</b> verbally.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC