
### Part 1
This is necessary <b>lest you say:</b> Although the one who took the vow stood in judgment before he died and the court obligated him, <b>since</b> the object of his vow <b>was not assessed</b> before he died, <b>the property of</b> the one who vowed <b>is not liened</b> to the debt, and consequently the heirs are not obligated to pay. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that <b>the property of</b> the one who took the vow <b>was liened, since he stood in judgment</b> while he was still alive, and <b>the assessment</b> of the object of the vow <b>is</b> considered to be <b>a mere disclosure of the matter,</b> which can be performed after the death of the one who vowed.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of one who says: <b>This bull</b> is consecrated as <b>a burnt offering, or: This house</b> is consecrated as <b>an offering, and the bull died or the house collapsed,</b> he <b>is exempt from paying</b> his commitment. But in the case of one who says: It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to give <b>this bull as a burnt offering, or:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to give <b>this house</b> as <b>an offering,</b> if <b>the bull died or the house collapsed,</b> he is <b>obligated to pay</b> its value.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rav says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> in the mishna <b>only that</b> one who <b>said:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to give <b>the monetary value of this bull</b> as <b>a burnt offering,</b> is obligated to pay its value if it dies. <b>But</b> if <b>he said:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to give <b>this bull</b> as <b>a burnt offering, since he said: This,</b> thereby referring specifically to that animal, <b>and</b> then the bull <b>died, he does not bear</b> financial <b>responsibility for its</b> loss. And as for his statement: It is incumbent upon me, he did not intend to accept financial responsibility for the loss of the bull. Rather, he meant to <b>say:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me to bring</b> this bull as an offering to the Temple.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 3:11): With regard to one who says: <b>This bull is</b> consecrated as <b>a burnt offering, the bull is consecrated property and</b> one who benefits <b>from it</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. If the bull <b>dies or is stolen, he does not bear</b> financial <b>responsibility for its</b> loss. If one says: It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to give <b>this bull</b> as <b>a burnt offering, the bull is consecrated property, and</b> one who benefits <b>from it</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. If the bull <b>dies or is stolen, he bears</b> financial <b>responsibility for its</b> loss, despite the fact that he did not vow to give the monetary value of the bull.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>stronger than the mishna,</b> with regard to which <b>we established that</b> it is referring to a case where <b>he says: The monetary value of</b> the bull? <b>Here too,</b> in the case of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>he says:</b> It is incumbent upon me to give <b>the monetary value of</b> this bull as a burnt offering.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: <b>But from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where he says: Monetary value of,</b> it may be inferred that <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where he does not say monetary value. As it teaches</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 3:12): With regard to one who said: It is incumbent upon me to give <b>the monetary value of</b> this <b>bull</b> as <b>a burnt offering, the bull is non-sacred</b> property <b>and</b> one who benefits <b>from it</b> is <b>not</b> liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. If the bull <b>dies or is stolen, he does not bear</b> financial <b>responsibility for its</b> loss. <b>But</b> if he sold the bull and received money for the sale, <b>he does bear</b> financial <b>responsibility</b> for that money, since he accepted financial responsibility <b>for the monetary value of</b> the bull in his vow.

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: <b>The first clause and the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> are both referring to one <b>who says: Monetary value of,</b> in his vow. The difference between them is that <b>the first clause</b> is dealing with <b>one who says: Let the bull be consecrated for its monetary value,</b> and therefore the bull is consecrated and he bears financial responsibility for its value. <b>But the latter clause</b> is referring to <b>one who says: When</b> this bull shall be sold, <b>the money received</b> from the sale <b>shall be consecrated</b> for use as a burnt offering.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: Can this possibly be the case of the latter clause of the <i>baraita</i>? <b>But a person cannot consecrate an entity that has not</b> yet <b>come into the world,</b> and therefore one cannot consecrate the money he will receive in the future from the sale of the bull. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> taught in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says: A person can consecrate an entity that has not</b> yet <b>come into the world.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Some say</b> a slightly different version of this discussion, that <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye, and some say Rami bar Ḥama</b> said <b>to Rav Ḥisda: In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this <i>baraita</i>? Is it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who says</b> that <b>a person can consecrate an entity that has not</b> yet <b>come into the world?</b> Abaye <b>said to him: Rather, in accordance with who</b> else’s opinion could this <i>baraita</i> be? Certainly it is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir.

### Part 10
<b>And some teach</b> this discussion <b>with regard to this</b> <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Bava Metzia</i> 8:30): In the case of <b>one who rents a house to another and</b> the house <b>became ritually impure with leprosy, even though a priest confirmed</b> the house as impure, condemning it to be dismantled, as long as the house is still standing its owner may <b>say to</b> the renter: <b>That which is yours is before you,</b> and the owner is not required to compensate the renter. Nevertheless, in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> of a house afflicted with leprosy, once the priest has <b>dismantled</b> the house the owner is <b>obligated to provide</b> a new <b>house for</b> the renter.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC