
### Part 1
By contrast, if <b>he</b> first <b>gave four</b> <i>sela</i> <b>for</b> payment of <b>the first</b> vow <b>and</b> then <b>one</b> <i>sela</i> <b>for</b> payment of <b>the second</b> vow, <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation with regard to the <b>second</b> vow, because all he had at that stage was one <i>sela</i>. But <b>he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation with regard to the <b>first</b> vow, because <b>all</b> five <i>sela</i> in his possession were <b>liened for</b> payment of <b>the first</b> vow, and therefore he did not fulfill his obligation by paying only four.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>one had in his possession five <i>sela</i> and he said:</b> It is hereby <b>incumbent upon me</b> to donate <b>my valuation twice,</b> and consequently both obligations take effect <b>simultaneously, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? One can claim that <b>since he vowed</b> both vows <b>simultaneously, they take effect together,</b> and therefore <b>he gives two and a half</b> <i>sela</i> <b>for this</b> vow <b>and two and a half</b> <i>sela</i> <b>for that</b> vow; <b>or perhaps all of the</b> five <i>sela</i> <b>are fit for this</b> vow <b>and all of them are</b> also <b>fit for that</b> vow, and therefore he must pay five <i>sela</i> for each vow? The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
ยง The mishna teaches at its conclusion that <b>there is no</b> payment <b>of valuations less than a <i>sela</i>; nor</b> is there a payment <b>greater</b> than fifty <i>sela</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I also</b> need <b>this</b> statement, as this <i>halakha</i> was already stated at the beginning of the mishna?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> additional statement <b>teaches us</b> that <b>there is no</b> payment of valuations <b>less than a <i>sela</i>, but,</b> by inference, <b>there is</b> a payment of valuations <b>more than a <i>sela</i>.</b> Similarly, <b>there is no</b> payment of valuations for a sum <b>greater</b> than <b>fifty</b> <i>sela</i>, but <b>there is</b> a payment that is <b>less than fifty</b> <i>sela</i>. <b>And</b> this <b>unattributed</b> statement of the mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that if one cannot pay the full amount of the valuation, he pays however much he can afford, even if it is more than a <i>sela</i>, rather than paying only one <i>sela</i>, as stated by Rabbi Meir.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a woman experienced a discharge of blood and is <b>unsure</b> whether it was during her days of menstruation or during the eleven days that would render her a <i>zava</i>, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty does <b>not</b> occur in <b>fewer than seven</b> clean days, <b>nor</b> in <b>more than seventeen</b> clean days, depending on the number of days that she experiences the discharge.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages</b> elaborated on the principle of the mishna, as <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a woman who had a discharge of blood and is <b>unsure</b> whether it was during her days of menstruation or during the eleven days that would render her a <i>zava</i>, <b>who said: I saw one impure day,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for one day, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after <b>seventeen</b> clean days, i.e., seventeen days without any discharge. If her discharge occurred on the first of her days of menstruation, she has another six days of menstruation followed by eleven days of <i>ziva</i>; if she experiences a discharge after these seventeen clean days, she has certainly returned to her days of menstruation. If the initial discharge had been on any of the other days of the seven-day followed by eleven-day cycle, she would return to her days of menstruation after fewer days, but the definitive alleviation of her uncertainty does not occur until seventeen days.

### Part 7
If she said: <b>I saw two impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for two days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>seventeen</b> clean days. If the two days had been at the beginning of the days of her menstrual cycle, she would begin another menstrual cycle if she experienced her next discharge after sixteen clean days. Yet, there is a possibility that the first day of her discharge was on the last of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, and the second day was on the first of the days of her menstrual cycle. In that case, she would return to the beginning of her menstrual cycle only after the six remaining days of menstruation followed by eleven additional days, for a total of seventeen.

### Part 8
If she said: <b>I saw three impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for three days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>seventeen</b> clean days, as it is possible that the first two days of discharge were on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, and the third day of discharge was on the first of the days of her menstrual cycle.

### Part 9
If she said: <b>I saw four impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for four days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>sixteen</b> clean days. This is because the longest possible interval between these days of discharge and the beginning of her next menstrual cycle would occur if the first two days of discharge were at the end of her days of <i>ziva</i> and the other two were at the beginning of the days of her menstrual cycle. She would then require another five days of menstruation and the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, for a total of sixteen.

### Part 10
If she said: <b>I saw five impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for five days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>fifteen</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> and the other three were on her days of her menstrual cycle. If she said: <b>I saw six impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for six days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>fourteen</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred at the end of her days of <i>ziva</i> and the other four occurred at the beginning of her days of menstruation.

### Part 11
If she said: <b>I saw seven impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for seven days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>thirteen</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> and the other five occurred at the beginning of her menstrual cycle. In that case, she would have another two days to conclude her days of menstruation, followed by the eleven days of <i>ziva</i>, before she would start a new menstrual cycle.

### Part 12
If she said: <b>I saw eight impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for eight days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>twelve</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> and the other six occurred at the beginning of her menstrual cycle.

### Part 13
If she said: <b>I saw nine impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for nine days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>eleven</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred at the end of her days of <i>ziva</i> and the other seven occurred on the days of her menstrual cycle. In that case, she would have only the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> before beginning a new menstrual cycle.

### Part 14
If she said: <b>I saw ten impure days,</b> i.e., I had a discharge of blood for ten days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>ten</b> clean days, to account for the possibility that the first two days of discharge occurred on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> and the other eight occurred on the seven days of her menstrual cycle and one additional day. If she said: I saw <b>eleven</b> impure days, i.e., I had a discharge of blood for eleven days, the <b>alleviation</b> of her state of uncertainty occurs after she experiences <b>nine</b> clean days, to account for the worst-case scenario that the first two days of discharge occurred on the last two of the eleven days of <i>ziva</i> and the other nine occurred on the seven days of her menstrual cycle, followed by two additional days.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC