
### Part 1
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies in a case of <b>a man who valuated</b> another, <b>whether a man or a woman,</b> as the section begins: “When a man shall clearly utter a vow” (Leviticus 27:2). <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> of valuations also applies to <b>a woman who valuated a man,</b> or <b>a woman who valuated a woman?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The</b> same <b>verse states:</b> “Vow of <b>persons</b> to the Lord, according to your valuation,” to include women.

### Part 2
<b>Alternatively,</b> the word <b>“persons”</b> serves <b>to add a repulsive</b> man <b>and one afflicted with boils.</b> If one valuates such a person, he is obligated to give the set amount according to age and sex.

### Part 3
This derivation is necessary <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that since the verse states: <b>“A vow</b> of persons to the Lord, <b>according to your valuation”</b> (Leviticus 27:2), it is juxtaposing a person who is valuated and one who is the object of a vow. Therefore, <b>anyone who is</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>assessments,</b> i.e., one who is obligated to pay his assessment to the Temple if he takes such a vow, <b>is</b> also included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations.</b> If he vows to pay his valuation, he must pay. <b>But anyone who is not</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>assessments is not</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations.</b> Having no market value, these people are not subject to assessment, and are consequently also not subject to valuation. <b>The verse,</b> therefore, <b>states: “Persons [<i>nefashot</i>],”</b> teaching that anyone who has any amount of life [<i>nefesh</i>] is subject to valuation.

### Part 4
A <i>baraita</i> teaches that the apparently superfluous phrase: <b>“Then your valuation shall be”</b> (Leviticus 27:3), serves <b>to include a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>assessments,</b> despite the fact that they are not included in the <i>halakha</i> of valuations. If one assesses a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite, he is obligated to give that assessment. The <i>baraita</i> explains <b>that</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that since the verse states: <b>“A vow</b> of persons to the Lord, <b>according to your valuation,” anyone who is</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations is</b> also included <b>in</b> the category of <b>assessments, but anyone who is not</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations is</b> also <b>not</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>assessments.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Then your valuation shall be,”</b> to include a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite in the <i>halakha</i> of assessment.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: This <i>halakha</i>, that a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite are not included in valuation, is derived from the term: <b>“The male”</b> (Leviticus 27:3). The definite article teaches that this <i>halakha</i> applies specifically to <b>a male, and not</b> to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite <b>should not be</b> valuated <b>by</b> the <b>valuation of a man, but</b> they <b>should be</b> valuated <b>by</b> the <b>valuation of a woman.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Then your valuation shall be for the male…and if it be a female”</b> (Leviticus 27:3–4). This teaches that valuation applies only to <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female, but not</b> to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite,</b> who are categorized as neither male nor female.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Master said</b> above in the beginning of the <i>baraita</i> that the verse: “When a man shall clearly utter a vow of persons to the Lord, <b>according to your valuation”</b> (Leviticus 27:2), serves <b>to include an unspecified valuation.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>an unspecified valuation?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who says:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to donate <b>an unspecified valuation,</b> without specifying any particular person, <b>gives</b> the amount <b>of the smallest of the valuations. And how much is the smallest of the valuations?</b> It is <b>three shekels,</b> which is the valuation of a female who is younger than five years old (Leviticus 27:6).

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>And</b> why not <b>say</b> that one who does not specify a person should give <b>fifty</b> shekels, which is the largest of the valuations, that of a male between the ages of twenty and sixty (Leviticus 27:3)? The <i>baraita</i> answers: This ruling is based on the principle that if <b>you grasped a lot you did not grasp</b> anything, but if <b>you grasped a little, you grasped</b> something. In other words, if one can derive two sums from the verses, one should choose the smaller number, as it is included within the larger number and is therefore considered certain.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>And</b> why not <b>say</b> that smallest of the valuations is one <b>shekel, as it is written: “And all your valuations shall be according to the shekel of the Sanctuary”</b> (Leviticus 27:25)? The <i>baraita</i> answers: <b>That</b> verse <b>is written with regard to affordability.</b> If one vows to donate the valuation of a person to the Temple treasury but does not have sufficient funds to fulfill his vow, he must pay at least a shekel.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> since the payment of three shekels can be derived from the principle of grasping the lesser amount, <b>why do I</b> need <b>the verse</b> “according to your valuation”? <b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says:</b> The verse is required <b>to teach that</b> unlike other valuations, where a person who cannot afford the set amount can fulfill his obligation with one shekel, in the case of an unspecified valuation even a poor person’s obligation <b>is not determined by affordability,</b> and he must give at least three shekels. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? The Gemara answers: It is because it is <b>considered as though</b> he <b>explicitly</b> vowed that he is obligated to pay three shekels. The principle of affordability applies only to the valuations fixed by the Torah.

### Part 11
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says</b> the opposite: The term “according to your valuation” actually teaches that even an unspecified valuation is <b>determined based on affordability,</b> and a poor person fulfills his obligation by giving one shekel. The Gemara asks: Isn’t that <b>obvious?</b> Why would one think that this case differs from any other valuation? The Gemara answers that the verse is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that one who obligates himself in an unspecified valuation is <b>considered as though</b> he <b>articulated</b> that he is obligated to pay three shekels, and may not pay less. Therefore, this verse <b>teaches us</b> that an unspecified valuation is also subject to affordability, like other valuations.

### Part 12
§ It is further stated in the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>Alternatively,</b> the term <b>“according to your valuation”</b> teaches that <b>one gives the valuation of his entire</b> self <b>and does not give the valuation of</b> the <b>value of limbs.</b> If one vows that he will give the valuation of a limb, he is not obligated to give anything. The Gemara asks: <b>But you have</b> already <b>derived</b> from <b>this</b> term: “According to your valuation,” the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an unspecified valuation.</b> How can you then derive another <i>halakha</i> from the same source? The Gemara answers: <b>Read into</b> this term two sources, as it could have merely written: <b>“Valuation,”</b> and instead it wrote: <b>“According to your valuation.”</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> adds: One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I</b> should <b>exclude</b> even the valuation of <b>an item upon which the soul is dependent,</b> without which one will die, e.g., the head. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Persons [<i>nefashot</i>],”</b> which teaches that if one valuated a limb upon which the soul [<i>nefesh</i>] is dependent, he is obligated to give the valuation of his entire self. In addition, we derive from <b>“persons”</b> that one is obligated to pay only the valuation of a live person, <b>and not</b> the valuation of <b>the dead.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But you have</b> already <b>derived</b> from <b>this</b> term: “Persons [<i>nefashot</i>],” that one who valuates a limb upon which the soul [<i>nefesh</i>] is dependent is obligated to give the valuation of his entire self. The Gemara answers: <b>Read into</b> the verse two derivations, as it could have merely written: <b>Person,</b> and instead it wrote: <b>Persons.</b>

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Perhaps <b>I should exclude</b> only <b>the dead</b> from valuation, as they no longer possess life [<i>nefesh</i>], <b>but I should not exclude a moribund</b> person, as he is still alive. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Then he shall be set</b> before the priest, <b>and</b> the priest <b>shall value</b> him” (Leviticus 27:8). This teaches that anyone included in the category of setting, i.e., who can stand, is included in the <i>halakha</i> of valuation. But one who is on his deathbed is not included in the <i>halakha</i> of valuation.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, let me also derive</b> that the <b>dead</b> are not subject to valuation <b>from</b> the same verse: <b>“Then he shall be set</b> before the priest, <b>and</b> the priest <b>shall value</b> him,” as the dead cannot stand. Why do I need to derive this <i>halakha</i> from the fact that the verse wrote: “Persons,” instead of person? The Gemara answers that <b>so too,</b> this is correct, i.e., the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the dead is derived from that same verse. <b>But</b> if that is the case, <b>why do I</b> need the derivation based on the difference between <b>person</b> and <b>“persons”?</b> The Gemara answers that this teaches a different <i>halakha</i>, <b>as we are about to state below,</b> i.e., to add a repulsive man and one afflicted with boils.

### Part 17
The Gemara continues its review of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Alternatively,</b> as the verse states: <b>“Persons,”</b> in the plural, it is expounded as follows. Were the verse to have written only: A person, <b>I</b> would <b>have</b> derived <b>only</b> that this applies to <b>one</b> person who <b>valuated one</b> person. <b>From where</b> is it derived that even if <b>one</b> person <b>valuated a hundred</b> people, this is also an effective evaluation? Thefore, <b>the verse states: “Persons,”</b> in the plural.

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Alternatively,</b> one can expound the plural form of <b>“persons”</b> as follows: Were the verse to have written only: A person, one might have said that <b>I can</b> derive <b>only</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>a man who valuates</b> anyone, <b>whether a man or a woman,</b> as the section begins: “When a man clearly utters a vow” (Leviticus 27:2). <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> of valuations also applies to <b>a woman who valuated a man, or a woman who valuated a woman? The</b> same <b>verse states:</b> “Vow of <b>persons</b> to the Lord, according to your valuation” (Leviticus 27:2), to include women.

### Part 19
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Alternatively,</b> the word <b>“persons”</b> serves <b>to add a repulsive</b> man <b>and one afflicted with boils.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But you have</b> already <b>derived</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>these</b> cases, i.e., one who valuated a hundred men or a woman who valuated, from “persons.” How, then, can you derive the <i>halakha</i> of a repulsive man and one afflicted with boils from this same word?

### Part 20
The Gemara answers: <b>These do not require</b> another <b>verse. What is the reason?</b> Each of these <i>halakhot</i> <b>is equivalent</b> to the others, i.e., each derivation from the word: Person, is equally valid. It teaches that one may valuate a limb that is vital to a person, that both men and women may take a vow of valuation, and that one may vow to give the valuation of multiple people. There is no reason to prefer one of these derivations over the others. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>all of them are derived</b> from the word: Person. <b>When the verse,</b> i.e., the plural term “persons,” <b>is required,</b> it <b>is required</b> only <b>to</b> include <b>a repulsive man and one afflicted with boils.</b>

### Part 21
§ The <i>baraita</i> also teaches that the phrase: <b>“Then your valuation shall be”</b> (Leviticus 27:2), serves <b>to include a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>assessments,</b> despite the fact that they are not included in the <i>halakha</i> of valuations. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>a verse</b> to include them in the <i>halakha</i> of <b>assessments?</b> Even <b>let</b> this <b>be</b> considered <b>only</b> like the <b>assessment of a tree; were</b> one to <b>say: The assessment of</b> that <b>tree</b> is incumbent upon me, <b>is he not</b> obligated to <b>give</b> its assessment?

### Part 22
<b>Rava said:</b> The verse serves <b>to say that</b> a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite are <b>assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that one specified. If one vowed to give a vital part of his body, he is not merely obligated to pay the value of that organ but must give the value of his entire body.

### Part 23
As it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>it is written</b> in the verse: <b>“A vow</b> of persons to the Lord, <b>according to your valuation,”</b> a person who is valuated is juxtaposed to one who is the object of a vow of assessments. Therefore, <b>anyone who is</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations is</b> also included <b>in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of being <b>assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that he specifies. <b>But anyone who is not</b> included <b>in</b> the category of <b>valuations,</b> such as a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite, <b>is not</b> included <b>in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of being <b>assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that he specifies. Therefore, the verse teaches that although a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite are not included in valuations, they are nevertheless included in the <i>halakha</i> of being assessed by the significance of the body part in question.

### Part 24
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rava: <b>And is it true</b> that one who <b>is not</b> included <b>in valuations is</b> nevertheless <b>assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that he specifies? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that if one says: The <b>head of this slave</b> is <b>consecrated property, he and the Temple</b> treasury are <b>partners in</b> the entire slave. Similarly, if one says to another: The <b>head of</b> this <b>slave</b> is <b>sold to you,</b> they <b>appraise</b> the slave and split the value <b>between them.</b> Likewise, if one says: The <b>head of this donkey</b> is <b>consecrated property, he and the Temple</b> treasury are <b>partners in</b> the donkey. And if one says to another: The <b>head of</b> this <b>donkey</b> is <b>sold to you,</b> they <b>appraise</b> the donkey and split the value <b>between them.</b>

### Part 25
But if one says to another: The <b>head of</b> this <b>cow</b> is <b>sold to you,</b> he has <b>sold him only the head of the cow. Moreover, even</b> if he says: The <b>head of</b> this <b>cow</b> is <b>consecrated property, the Temple</b> treasury <b>has</b> ownership <b>only</b> of the cow’s <b>head. And Rav Pappa said:</b> This difference between these cases is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <b>head of an ox is sold</b> independently <b>in the butcher shop.</b>

### Part 26
Abaye explains the difficulty that arises from this <i>baraita</i>: <b>But isn’t</b> it the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a donkey and a cow</b> are <b>not</b> included <b>in valuations, and</b> therefore are <b>not assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that is mentioned? If one consecrated their heads, their entire body is not consecrated. <b>Rava said to</b> Abaye: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of assessment by the significance of the specified body part is contingent on inclusion in valuations, the case of <b>a slave should pose a difficulty for you:</b> A slave <b>is</b> included <b>in</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>valuations,</b> as stated in the mishna, <b>and</b> yet the <i>baraita</i> teaches that he is <b>not assessed by</b> the <b>significance</b> of the body part that is specified.

### Part 27
<b>Rather,</b> this is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that in the case of a slave or donkey the head alone is consecrated, is referring <b>to items consecrated</b> in order to purchase offerings for <b>the altar.</b> On the other hand, <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which rules that in the case of a <i>tumtum</i> one must pay his entire value, is referring <b>to items consecrated for Temple maintenance.</b> In such a case, it is assessed by the significance of the body part that is specified. Here we follow the paradigm of valuation, whose payment is also used for Temple maintenance.

### Part 28
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>In what</b> manner <b>did you interpret</b> the <i>baraita</i> that discusses consecrating the head of a slave? You interpreted it <b>as</b> dealing with a case of <b>items consecrated</b> in order to purchase offerings for <b>the altar.</b> But if so, <b>say the latter clause: Moreover, even</b> if he <b>says:</b> The <b>head of this cow</b> is <b>consecrated property, the Temple</b> treasury <b>has</b> ownership <b>only</b> of the cow’s <b>head.</b> According to this interpretation, that it is referring to items consecrated for the altar, <b>why</b> is the head alone consecrated? <b>Let</b> its <b>sanctity spread throughout the entire</b> cow. <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>one says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC