
### Part 1
The Gemara attempts to determine the correct reason why the court does not attend to the property of minor orphans: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna that one proclaims <b>the appraisal of the</b> property of minor <b>orphans</b> that is being sold for <b>thirty days, and</b> one proclaims <b>the appraisal of consecrated</b> property for <b>sixty days, and one proclaims</b> it <b>in the morning and in the evening.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are we dealing with</b> here? <b>If we say</b> that the mishna is dealing <b>with a gentile creditor</b> who is unwilling to wait until the orphans reach majority, <b>will he comply</b> with the court’s directive that the appraisal of the property be proclaimed for thirty days before it is sold? <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that the mishna is dealing <b>with a Jewish creditor.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara concludes its proof: <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua,</b> who says that the court does not attend to the property of minor orphans due to a concern that their father might have left bundles of coins with the creditor, he can <b>establish</b> the mishna as referring <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> the one <b>obligated</b> to pay, i.e., the father, <b>admits</b> before his death that he has not paid. In such a case, the court does not wait to collect payment until the orphans reach majority. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Pappa,</b> that the court does not attend to the property of minor orphans because they are not obligated in the mitzva to repay a loan, the mishna poses <b>a difficulty.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains that <b>Rav Pappa</b> could <b>say to you: If you wish, say</b> that the mishna is referring to a case where the court sells the property of the orphans in order to collect payment for <b>a marriage contract,</b> which the court does <b>for the sake of favor,</b> i.e., in order that the wife will own property and be desirable for marriage. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the mishna is dealing <b>with a gentile creditor who accepted upon himself to adjudicate</b> in accordance <b>with Jewish law.</b> He therefore agrees to delay collection for thirty days.

### Part 4
The Gemara objects: <b>If he accepted</b> Jewish law <b>upon himself,</b> then <b>let him wait for</b> the orphans <b>until they reach majority</b> before demanding payment of the loan. The Gemara explains: The mishna is referring to a case <b>where he accepted</b> Jewish law <b>upon himself for this</b> matter, to delay collection for thirty days, <b>but he did not accept</b> it <b>upon himself for that</b> matter, to wait until they reach majority.

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: When one proclaims the appraisal of the property of orphans, he announces that the property is being sold <b>in order to give</b> the proceeds <b>to a wife</b> as payment of <b>her marriage contract, or</b> in order <b>to</b> give <b>a creditor</b> payment of <b>his debt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are we dealing with</b> in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If we say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a gentile creditor</b> who is unwilling to wait until the orphans reach majority, <b>will he comply</b> with the court’s directive that the appraisal of the property is proclaimed for thirty days before it is sold? <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that the mishna is referring <b>to a Jewish creditor.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara continues: <b>Granted, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua,</b> he can <b>establish</b> the mishna as referring <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> the one <b>obligated</b> to pay <b>admits</b> before his death that he has not paid. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Pappa, granted,</b> the court collects payment of <b>a marriage contract for the sake of favor; but</b> the fact that they sell the property in order to pay <b>a creditor</b> poses a <b>difficulty.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara responds: <b>Actually,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is dealing <b>with a gentile creditor, and</b> is it referring to a case <b>where he accepted upon himself to adjudicate</b> in accordance <b>with Jewish law.</b> He therefore agrees to delay collection for thirty days. The Gemara objects: <b>If he accepted</b> Jewish law <b>upon himself,</b> then <b>let him wait for</b> the orphans <b>until they reach majority</b> before demanding payment of the loan. The Gemara again explains: The <i>baraita</i> is dealing with a case <b>where he accepted</b> Jewish law <b>upon himself for this</b> matter, to delay collection for thirty days, <b>but he did not accept</b> it <b>upon himself for that</b> matter, to wait until they reach majority.

### Part 8
<b>Rava says:</b> The court does not collect payment from the property of minor orphans <b>due to</b> the concern that there might be <b>a receipt,</b> i.e., perhaps their father repaid the loan and received a receipt attesting to his payment and the orphans are unaware of its existence. <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to Rava: But are we concerned for</b> the existence of <b>a receipt? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 87a): A woman <b>who collects</b> the payment of her marriage contract from the property of her husband <b>when not in his presence,</b> e.g., if her husband is overseas, <b>may collect only by</b> means of <b>an oath</b> that she has not yet received payment.

### Part 9
<b>And Rabbi Aḥa Sar HaBira says: An incident came before Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa in Antioch, and he issued a ruling and said: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i>, that she may collect the payment of her marriage contract in her husband’s absence, <b>only</b> with regard to <b>the wife’s marriage contract, for the sake of favor. But a creditor</b> does <b>not</b> have the right to collect the debt that is owed to him in the debtor’s absence. <b>And Rabba</b> says that <b>Rav Naḥman says: Even a creditor</b> may collect a payment by means of an oath in the debtor’s absence.

### Part 10
Rav Huna explains the difficulty: <b>And if you are concerned for</b> the existence of <b>a receipt,</b> then in that case <b>there as well,</b> where the obligated party is overseas, <b>let us be concerned</b> that he has in fact paid the debt and received a receipt. Rava <b>said to him:</b> In that case <b>there,</b> one is not concerned about the existence of a receipt, in accordance <b>with the reason that we say:</b> It is in order <b>that</b> there should <b>not</b> be a situation where <b>every person will take the money of another and go and reside in a country overseas,</b> to prevent the creditor from collecting the money from his property.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rava says: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that the court <b>does not attend to the property of</b> minor <b>orphans</b> in order to pay the debts owed by their father. <b>But if</b> their father <b>said</b> before his death: <b>Give</b> so-and-so the payment of my debt, the court <b>attends</b> to their property. Specifically, if the father said: Give <b>this field</b> to so-and-so, <b>or:</b> Give <b>this one hundred</b> dinars to so-and-so, then the court <b>attends</b> to their property to collect payment, <b>and</b> the court <b>does not install a steward [<i>apotropos</i>]</b> to negotiate with the creditor on their behalf. If he said: Give <b>a field</b> to so-and-so, i.e., <b>an unspecified</b> field, or: Give <b>one hundred</b> dinars to so-and-so, i.e., <b>unspecified</b> dinars, then the court <b>attends</b> to the property of the orphans <b>and</b> they <b>install a steward</b> to act on their behalf, to ensure that the best fields remain in their possession.

### Part 12
By contrast, the Sages <b>of Neharde’a say: In all of</b> these cases where the father told his children before his death to give an item, the court <b>attends</b> to the property of the orphans <b>and</b> they <b>install a steward</b> to act on their behalf, <b>except for</b> a situation <b>where a field is found</b> in their possession with regard to which witnesses have testified <b>that</b> it <b>is not</b> their father’s, but is in fact stolen. In such a case, the stolen field is seized and returned to its owner without recourse to a steward, <b>as we do not presume</b> that <b>witnesses are liars.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rav Ashi says: Therefore, we do not attend</b> to the property of minor orphans in order to repay a standard loan, <b>as Rava says: The <i>halakha</i></b> is that the court <b>does not attend</b> to their property. <b>And if we attend</b> to their property, e.g., in a case where the father told his children to repay the debt, <b>we install a steward</b> to act on behalf of the orphans, <b>as</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a say: In all of</b> the cases, the court <b>attends</b> to the property of minor orphans <b>and installs a steward, except for</b> a situation <b>where a field is found</b> in their possession <b>that is not</b> the father’s, <b>as we do not presume</b> that <b>witnesses are liars.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC