
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA</strong> <b>And these are the houses of the</b> unwalled <b>courtyards</b> whose <i>halakha</i> was taught in the previous mishna: Any city in which there are <b>two courtyards</b> each containing <b>two houses, although it is surrounded by a wall from the era of Joshua, son of Nun, their</b> halakhic status <b>is like that of the houses of</b> the unwalled <b>courtyards.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA</strong> <b> The Sages taught: By inference from</b> that <b>which is stated: “The houses of the courtyards”</b> (Leviticus 25:31), <b>do I not know that they have no wall</b> around them? If so, <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Which have no wall”?</b> It means that there are certain places that <b>even though they have a wall,</b> they are considered <b>like</b> places <b>that do not have a wall. And how many,</b> i.e., what is considered such a place? The term <b>“houses”</b> indicates a minimum of <b>two,</b> and the term <b>“courtyards”</b> likewise indicates a minimum of <b>two.</b> Therefore, if a city has only <b>two courtyards</b> each containing <b>two houses,</b> its houses are considered like the houses of the unwalled courtyards.

### Part 3
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> you can <b>say</b> that the phrase: Houses of the courtyards, means one <b>house and</b> one <b>courtyard,</b> i.e., one house in each courtyard. Consequently, if each courtyard contains two houses, the city should be considered like a walled city. The Gemara explains: <b>If so, let the Merciful One write: “Courtyards,”</b> without mentioning houses, as a courtyard must contain at least one house. <b>And if you would say: If the Merciful One had written</b> only: <b>“Courtyards,”</b> then one might mistakenly have concluded that the verse <b>indicates a courtyard without a house</b> and that if the courtyard contains a house then the city is considered walled, one could not have arrived at that conclusion, since <b>such</b> an area <b>is called an enclosure [<i>karpef</i> ],</b> not a courtyard.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA</strong> <b>An Israelite who inherited</b> a house in a walled city from <b>his mother’s father</b> who was <b>a Levite does not redeem</b> the house <b>in accordance with this procedure</b> delineated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>; rather, if he sold the inherited house, he may redeem it always, like a Levite. <b>And likewise, a Levite who inherited</b> a house in a walled city from <b>his mother’s father</b> who was <b>an Israelite does not redeem</b> the house <b>in accordance with this procedure</b> delineated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>.

### Part 5
The mishna provides the source for these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>As it is stated:</b> “And if a man purchases from the Levites, the house that was sold in the city of his possession shall go out during the Jubilee Year; <b>as the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession</b> among the children of Israel” (Leviticus 25:33). The verse indicates that the ability to always redeem the house of a Levite does not apply <b>unless</b> the one selling the house <b>will be a Levite and</b> the house is located in <b>the cities of the Levites.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: These matters are stated only</b> with regard to a house <b>in the cities of the Levites,</b> even if the owner was not a Levite.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA</strong> The mishna teaches that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, if an Israelite sold a house in a walled city that he inherited from his mother’s father who was a Levite, he does not redeem it in accordance with the procedure delineated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, like whom</b> does he redeem it? He redeems it <b>like a Levite. But</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>then teaches</b> that the ability to always redeem the house of a Levite does not apply <b>unless</b> the one selling the house <b>will be a Levite and</b> the house is located in <b>the cities of the Levites.</b> If so, an Israelite who inherited a house in a walled city from his mother’s father who is a Levite should redeem it in the manner of an Israelite.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that the mishna means that an Israelite who inherited a house in a walled city from his mother’s father who was a Levite <b>redeems</b> that house <b>only in accordance with this procedure</b> delineated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>, i.e., he has only one year to redeem it, after which the house becomes the possession of the buyer in perpetuity. And this is always the <i>halakha</i> <b>unless</b> the one selling the house <b>will be a Levite and</b> the house is located <b>in the cities of the Levites,</b> in which case he can always redeem it. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> the house must be from <b>the cities of the Levites, as it is written: “As the houses of the cities of the Levites</b> are their possession” (Leviticus 25:33). <b>But from where do we</b> derive that the one selling the house must also be <b>a Levite</b> for these <i>halakhot</i> to apply? The Gemara responds: <b>As it is written</b> in the same verse: <b>“And if a man purchases from the Levites</b>…shall go out during the Jubilee Year.” The verse is referring specifically to a Levite who sells his house.

### Part 9
The Gemara adds that <b>it is</b> likewise <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Given that the verse already states: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption” (Leviticus 25:32), why does the next verse state: <b>“And if a man purchases from the Levites</b>…shall go out during the Jubilee Year”?It is because one <b>might</b> have thought: <b>A Levite may</b> always <b>redeem from an Israelite</b> the house that he sold, <b>as this</b> Levite’s <b>power was enhanced,</b> in that he can redeem always, <b>and that</b> Israelite’s <b>power was diminished,</b> as he may redeem only within one year. <b>But a Levite may not</b> always redeem <b>from</b> another <b>Levite, as this</b> one’s <b>power was enhanced and that</b> one’s <b>power was</b> equally <b>enhanced.</b> Rather, the Levite may redeem only within one year of the sale. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And if a man purchases <b>from the Levites,”</b> which literally means: And if a man redeems from the Levites, which teaches that even a Levite who redeems a house purchased by another Levite can always redeem the house.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: When the verse states: <b>“From the Levites,”</b> this teaches that some Levites may always redeem their houses, <b>but not all the Levites. Excluded is a Levite</b> who is <b>a son born from an incestuous or adulterous relationship [<i>mamzer</i>], or a Gibeonite,</b> i.e., his mother is from the Gibeonites, as these are disqualified from entering the congregation of the Jewish people (see <i>Yevamot</i> 78a). If such a Levite inherited from his father and sold a house from the cities of the Levites, he does not redeem it as a Levite.

### Part 11
The mishna teaches: <b>And the Rabbis say: These matters are stated only</b> with regard to a house <b>in the cities of the Levites,</b> even if the owner was not a Levite. The Gemara explains: <b>But</b> according to the Rabbis, <b>we do not say</b> that the ability to always redeem the house of a Levite does not apply <b>unless</b> the one selling the house <b>will be a Levite.</b> Rather, the Rabbis hold that anyone who inherits a portion in a Levite city may redeem that portion as a Levite, even if he himself is not a Levite.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The Levites received two thousand cubits surrounding their cities, one thousand cubits of empty lots and one thousand cubits for fields and vineyards. <b>One may neither render a field</b> an empty <b>lot nor</b> an empty <b>lot a field.</b> Similarly, one may neither incorporate an empty <b>lot</b> into <b>a city nor</b> render part of <b>a city</b> an empty <b>lot.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It applies <b>in the cities of the Levites. But in the cities of the Israelites one may render a field</b> an empty <b>lot but not</b> an empty <b>lot a field,</b> and one may incorporate an empty <b>lot</b> into <b>a city but not</b> render part of <b>a city</b> an empty <b>lot,</b> in order to ensure <b>that they will not</b> thereby <b>destroy the cities of Israel. The priests and the Levites may sell</b> their fields and houses <b>always and may redeem</b> them <b>always, as it is stated: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption”</b> (Leviticus 25:32). Priests are also members of the tribe of Levi.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Elazar said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is <b>in the cities of the Levites. But in the cities of the Israelites</b> one may render a field an empty lot but not an empty lot a field, and one may incorporate an empty lot into a city but not render part of a city an empty lot, in order to ensure that they will not thereby destroy the cities of Israel. The Gemara asks: <b>In any event, everyone</b> agrees that <b>in</b> the cities <b>of the Levites one may not change</b> a field into an empty lot or an empty lot into a city. <b>From where are these matters</b> derived?

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: As the verse states: “But the fields of the open land about their cities may not be sold”</b> (Leviticus 25:34). <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“may not be sold”? If we say</b> it means that such fields <b>may not be sold at all,</b> that cannot be correct, as <b>from</b> the fact <b>that it is written: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption”</b> (Leviticus 25:32), one learns <b>by inference that</b> their fields <b>may be sold. Rather, what</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“may not be sold”?</b> It means that a field, an empty lot, or a city <b>may not be changed</b> from its current status.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The priests and the Levites may sell</b> their fields and houses <b>always and may redeem</b> them <b>always.</b> With regard to this <i>halakha</i>, <b>the Sages taught: Why</b> must <b>the verse state: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption”</b> (Leviticus 25:32)? <b>Since it is stated</b> with regard to the ancestral field of an Israelite: <b>“According to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to you”</b> (Leviticus 25:15), from which it is derived that one cannot redeem an ancestral field less than two years after its sale, one <b>might</b> have thought that this should <b>also</b> be <b>so</b> with regard to <b>this</b> Levite who sold his field. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption,”</b> which teaches that a Levite may redeem his field immediately.

### Part 17
Furthermore, <b>since it is stated: “But the field, when it goes out in the Jubilee, shall be holy unto the Lord,</b> as a field dedicated; his ancestral field shall be for the priest” (Leviticus 27:21), one <b>might</b> have thought that this should <b>also</b> be <b>so</b> with regard to <b>this</b> Levite who consecrated his field. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption,”</b> which teaches that the field of a Levite is not transferred to the possession of the priests in the Jubilee Year; rather, the Levite may always redeem it from the Temple treasury.

### Part 18
Additionally, <b>since it is stated:</b> “And if it is not redeemed until the passage of a full year for him, <b>then the house that is in the walled city shall stand in possession</b> of the one who bought it <b>in perpetuity”</b> (Leviticus 25:30), one <b>might</b> have thought that this should <b>also</b> be <b>so</b> with regard to <b>this</b> Levite who sold his house in a walled city. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “The Levites shall have a perpetual right of redemption,”</b> indicating that the Levite may always redeem his house.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to <b>these</b> first <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i>, which deal with the field of a Levite, <b>it is well. But</b> with regard to the last <i>halakha</i>, why is it necessary for the verse to exclude the houses of Levites? <b>Do Levites have houses of walled cities? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>these cities</b> given to the Levites, <b>one does not establish them, neither</b> in <b>small villages nor</b> in <b>large cities; rather,</b> they must be <b>intermediate towns,</b> which are not surrounded by walls.

### Part 20
<b>Rav Kahana said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that states that the cities of the Levites were not surrounded by walls is referring to a city <b>that was</b> initially <b>surrounded</b> by a wall <b>and was ultimately settled. There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that states that Levites do have houses of walled cities is referring to an intermediate town <b>that was</b> first <b>settled</b> by the Levites <b>and was ultimately surrounded</b> by a wall in the times of Joshua.

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in <b>a case like this,</b> where the city was first settled and only then surrounded by a wall, <b>is it</b> considered <b>a wall</b> to the extent that the houses inside the city are considered in a walled city? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And if a man sells a dwelling house in a walled city”</b> (Leviticus 25:29). This is referring to a city <b>that was</b> initially <b>surrounded</b> by a wall <b>and was ultimately settled, and not</b> to a city <b>that was</b> first <b>settled and was ultimately surrounded</b> by a wall.

### Part 22
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that it is considered a walled city <b>even</b> if <b>Jews surrounded it</b> with a wall and only then built houses inside it. Therefore, <b>it is stated here:</b> “And if a man sells a dwelling house in <b>a walled</b> city,” <b>and it is stated below,</b> with regard to the conquest of the kingdom of Og, king of Bashan: “All these were fortified cities, with high <b>walls,</b> gates, and bars” (Deuteronomy 3:5). <b>Just as below,</b> the verse is referring to cities whose surrounding walls were constructed by <b>gentiles, so too here,</b> the verse is referring only to cities whose walls were constructed by <b>gentiles.</b>

### Part 23
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> if <b>gentiles surrounded</b> the city with a wall <b>after</b> the conquest of Eretz Yisrael, it should be considered a walled city. Therefore, <b>it is stated below,</b> with regard to the conquest of the kingdom of Og, king of Bashan, <b>“walls,”</b> and <b>it is stated here “walled.” Just as below,</b> the surrounding walls of the cities were constructed by <b>gentiles before</b> the Jews conquered the land, <b>so too here,</b> the verse is referring to cities whose walls were constructed by <b>gentiles before</b> the conquest of Eretz Yisrael. This <i>baraita</i> apparently contradicts the resolution suggested by Rav Kahana, as a city that was first settled and only then surrounded by a wall is not included in the <i>halakhot</i> of houses in walled cities.

### Part 24
<b>Rav Yosef, son of Rav Sala Ḥasida, interpreted</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Pappa:</b> Actually, the first <i>baraita</i> is referring to a city that was initially surrounded by a wall and then settled by Levites. And as for the <i>baraita</i> that teaches that Levite cities may not be surrounded by a wall, it is nevertheless possible that a Levite city was initially surrounded by a wall in a case <b>where,</b> when Eretz Yisrael was divided among the tribes of Israel, walled cities <b>fell</b> by lottery <b>to</b> the Levites,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC