
### Part 1
<b>Be the one who is cursed and not the one who curses,</b> as a curse eventually returns to the one who curses.

### Part 2
The Gemara returns to discuss the incident of Joab: <b>They brought Joab</b> before Solomon, who <b>judged him.</b> Solomon <b>said to</b> Joab: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>you killed Abner?</b> Joab <b>said to him: I was the blood redeemer</b> of the blood <b>of Asahel;</b> when Abner murdered my brother Asahel I killed him, in fulfillment of my duty as his blood redeemer. Solomon said to him: But <b>Asahel was</b> pursuing Abner with the intention of killing him, and therefore he had the status of <b>a pursuer.</b> Since Abner killed Asahel in an act of self-defense, you had no right to kill him as a redeemer of Asahel’s blood. Joab <b>said to</b> Solomon: Abner <b>could have saved himself by</b> wounding Asahel in <b>one of his limbs.</b> Having failed to do so, he was guilty of murder, and I was therefore entitled to kill him.

### Part 3
Solomon <b>said to him:</b> Abner was <b>not able to</b> injure Asahel, because he was running and could not aim with precision. Joab <b>said to</b> Solomon: <b>Now</b> Abner was able to <b>aim</b> and hit <b>him</b> precisely <b>in the fifth rib, as it is written: “And Abner smote him with the butt end of the spear in the <i>ḥomesh</i>”</b> (II Samuel 2:23), <b>and Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that this means that he hit him <b>in the fifth rib, the place where the gallbladder and liver hang.</b> If Abner could aim with precision at the fifth rib, <b>could he not have</b> successfully aimed <b>at one of</b> Asahel’s <b>limbs?</b>

### Part 4
Solomon <b>said to</b> Joab: <b>Set aside Abner,</b> as you have presented a convincing argument that you are not liable for his death. But <b>what is the reason you killed Amasa?</b> Abner <b>said to him:</b> I killed <b>Amasa</b> in punishment for his having <b>rebelled against the king, as it is written: “And the king said to Amasa: Muster to me the men of Judah within three days,</b> and be you here present. <b>And Amasa went to call the men of Judah, but he was later</b> than the set time that he had assigned to him” (II Samuel 20:4–5).

### Part 5
Solomon <b>said to him: Amasa</b> was not guilty of rebelling against the king because he <b>interpreted</b> the words <b><i>akh</i> and <i>rak</i></b> in a restrictive manner, and in that way he limited the king’s authority.

### Part 6
How so? Amasa <b>found</b> the men of Judah <b>starting to</b> study a new <b>tractate. He said</b> to himself: <b>It is written: “Any man who rebels against your commandment, and will not listen to your words in all that you command him, he shall be put to death”</b> (Joshua 1:18), indicating that the king of Israel has unlimited power. Based on these words alone, one <b>might</b> have thought that the king must be obeyed <b>even</b> when that would lead <b>to</b> abstention from the study of <b>the words of Torah.</b> Therefore, that same <b>verse states: “Only [<i>rak</i>] be strong and of a good courage.”</b> The word “<i>rak</i>” is a restrictive term that serves to limit the king’s authority in a situation where obeying his command will minimalize the study of Torah. Consequently, Amasa was justified when he did not muster the men of Judah at the appointed time, and you had no right to kill him.

### Part 7
Solomon continued: <b>Rather,</b> the opposite is true. <b>That man,</b> you, Joab, <b>rebelled against the king, as it is written: “Then tidings came to Joab, for Joab had followed after Adonijah, though he had not followed after Absalom.</b> And Joab fled to the tent of the Lord and caught hold of the horns of the altar” (I Kings 2:28). Joab followed Adonijah, thereby rebelling against Solomon, the lawful king.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the verse mean to teach when it says that Joab <b>did not follow</b> Absalom? <b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> It serves to teach <b>that</b> Joab <b>wanted to follow</b> Absalom, <b>but</b> in practice <b>he did not follow</b> him. The Gemara asks: If he wanted to do so, <b>what is the reason</b> that Joab <b>did not follow</b> Absalom? <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> When Absalom rebelled against his father, <b>David was still in</b> full possession of his <b>vitality,</b> meaning he was still strong, and Joab feared him.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: David’s stars [<i>itztagninei</i>],</b> the planetary influences that determined his fortune, <b>still stood</b> for him. <b>As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: David had four hundred children</b> in his army, and <b>all of them were sons of beautiful women</b> taken captive from their gentile homes during war (see Deuteronomy 21:10–14), <b>and they grew</b> their hair in <b>a gentile hair style, and they would go at the head of the troops, and they were the strong-arm</b> enforcers <b>of</b> the house of <b>David,</b> on whose loyalty David’s monarchy relied. As long as David was supported by this force, Joab was afraid to challenge him.

### Part 10
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> those who view Joab in a negative light <b>disagree</b> with the opinion <b>of Rabbi Abba bar Kahana, as Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: Were it not for David,</b> who studied Torah, <b>Joab would not have</b> been able to <b>wage war</b> successfully, <b>and were it not for</b> the military acumen of <b>Joab, David would not have</b> been able to <b>study Torah. As it is written: “And David executed judgment and justice to all his people, and Joab, son of Zeruiah, was over the army”</b> (II Samuel 8:15–16). <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>David “executed judgment and justice to all his people”?</b> He was able to do so <b>because “Joab,</b> son of Zeruiah, <b>was over the army,”</b> assisting him and fighting his battles. <b>And what is the reason</b> that <b>“Joab,</b> son of Zeruiah, <b>was over the army”?</b> He was able to do so <b>because “David executed judgment and justice to all his people.”</b>

### Part 11
§ The verse states: <b>“And Joab went out from David, and sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from Bor Sirah”</b> (II Samuel 3:26). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the name <b>Bor Sirah? Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: A well [<i>bor</i>] and a thorn [<i>vesira</i>] caused Abner to be killed.</b> Abner became liable to be killed when he failed to take advantage of two opportunities to bring about a reconciliation between King Saul and David. First, when David cut off a corner of Saul’s robe after he entered a cave in order to relieve himself, and second, when David found Saul sleeping and took the jug of water and the spear from next to his head. Rather than tell Saul that David could have killed him and refrained from doing so, Abner suggested to Saul that his robe may have been torn by a thornbush and that his jug of water may have been taken by one of his own men. These two incidents are alluded to by the words <i>bor</i>, well, i.e., jug of water, and <i>sira</i>, thornbush.

### Part 12
The verse states: <b>“And Joab took him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly”</b> (II Samuel 3:27). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Joab <b>judged</b> Abner according to <b>the <i>halakha</i> of the Sanhedrin,</b> which would sit in judgment by the gate of the city. How so? Joab <b>said to</b> Abner: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>you killed Asahel?</b> Abner said to him: <b>Asahel was</b> pursuing me with the intention to kill me, and therefore he had the status of <b>a pursuer,</b> whom I had the right to kill in self-defense. Joab said to Abner: Even so, <b>you could have saved</b> yourself <b>by</b> wounding <b>one of his limbs.</b> Abner replied: <b>I was not able to</b> do so as I was running and could not aim with precision. Joab said to him: <b>Now</b> seeing that <b>you</b> were able to <b>aim</b> and hit <b>him</b> precisely <b>in the fifth rib, could you not have</b> successfully aimed <b>at one of his limbs?</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: What is the meaning of <b>“to speak with him quietly [<i>basheli</i>]”? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> He took him aside to speak to him <b>by way of deception [<i>shalu</i>].</b> As for what is stated: <b>“And</b> Abner <b>smote him</b> with the butt end of the spear <b>in the <i>ḥomesh</i>”</b> (II Samuel 2:23), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> He hit him <b>in the fifth [<i>ḥamishit</i>] rib, the place where the gallbladder and liver hang.</b>

### Part 14
§ The verse states that Solomon said to Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, concerning Joab: <b>“And the Lord shall return the blood upon his own head, for he fell upon two men more righteous</b> and <b>better than he”</b> (I Kings 2:32). The Gemara explains: Amasa and Abner were <b>“better”</b> that Joab, <b>as they interpreted</b> the words <b><i>akh</i> and <i>rak</i></b> in a restrictive manner that limited the king’s authority, <b>while he did not interpret</b> them in that way, demonstrating that they were greater than him in Torah. Amasa and Abner were also <b>“more righteous”</b> than Joab, <b>as they</b> both received <b>oral</b> instructions directly from Saul to slay the priests of Nov <b>and they did not do</b> so, <b>whereas</b> Joab was instructed by David <b>in a letter</b> to kill Uriah and <b>he did</b> so.

### Part 15
The verse states: <b>“But Amasa took no heed of the sword in Joab’s hand”</b> (II Samuel 20:10). <b>Rav says:</b> Amasa took no heed of the sword <b>because he did not suspect</b> that Joab was capable of murdering him.

### Part 16
The verse states with regard to Joab: <b>“And he was buried in his own house, in the wilderness”</b> (I Kings 2:34). The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that Joab’s <b>house</b> was <b>a wilderness? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> Joab’s house was <b>like the wilderness; just as the wilderness is</b> freely <b>open to all, so too, Joab’s house</b> was freely <b>open to all,</b> as he generously opened his house to the poor and made them feel like members of the household. <b>Alternatively,</b> Joab’s house was <b>like the wilderness; just as the wilderness is clean of theft and sexual immorality,</b> as it is uninhabited, <b>so too, Joab’s house was clean of theft and sexual immorality,</b> owing to his righteousness. As for the verse: <b>“And Joab kept alive the rest of the city”</b> (I Chronicles 11:8), <b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> Not only would Joab feed the poor, but <b>he would even give them</b> treats of types of <b>small fish</b> so they would lack for nothing.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC