
### Part 1
<b>And if you would say the Rabbis disagree with Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> with regard to the minimum number of judges necessary to adjudicate, <b>but doesn’t Rabbi Abbahu say:</b> With regard to a court of <b>two</b> judges <b>that adjudicated</b> cases of <b>monetary law</b> of any type, which would include cases of admissions and loans, <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>their judgment is not</b> a valid <b>judgment,</b> as a court with fewer than three judges is invalid? The Gemara rejects this question: <b>Are you setting</b> the statement of one <b>man against</b> the statement of another <b>man?</b> Although Rabbi Abbahu asserts that all agree that two judges cannot issue a binding judgment, Shmuel differs. According to Shmuel, the Rabbis hold that the judgment of two judges is considered binding.

### Part 2
§ Since it was mentioned incidentally, the Gemara discusses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: Rabbi Abbahu says:</b> With regard to a court of <b>two</b> judges <b>that adjudicated</b> cases of <b>monetary law</b> of any type, which would include cases of admissions and loans, <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>their judgment is not</b> a valid <b>judgment. Rabbi Abba raised an objection to Rabbi Abbahu</b> from a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 28b): If a single judge <b>adjudicated</b> a case of monetary <b>law and</b> erroneously <b>exonerated the</b> litigant who should have been deemed <b>liable, or deemed liable the</b> litigant who should have been deemed <b>exempt,</b> or if one issued a halakhic ruling whereby he <b>deemed</b> ritually <b>impure that which is</b> actually <b>pure,</b> or <b>deemed pure that which is impure, what he did is done,</b> i.e., his ruling is binding. <b>And</b> the judge nevertheless <b>pays from his house,</b> i.e., from his own pocket, for the loss he has caused. Evidently, the ruling of even a single judge constitutes a valid judgment.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> a case in <b>which</b> the litigants <b>accepted</b> the singular judge <b>upon themselves,</b> and it is for that reason that his ruling is binding. Otherwise, it would not be binding, as a halakhic court must contain a minimum of three judges. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that the litigants agreed to accept whatever ruling the judge issued, <b>why</b> must the judge <b>pay from his</b> own <b>house?</b> The Gemara answers: The judge is liable <b>because</b> the case is where <b>they said to him: Adjudicate</b> the case <b>for us</b> according to <b>Torah law.</b> Since he did not issue a halakhically proper judgment, he is liable.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Safra said to Rabbi Abba:</b> This ruling applies <b>when</b> he <b>erred in what</b> respect? <b>If we say that</b> he <b>erred in a matter</b> that appears in the <b>Mishna,</b> and he mistakenly ruled against an explicitly stated <i>halakha</i>, that is difficult. <b>But doesn’t Rav Sheshet say</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami says:</b> If the judge <b>erred in a matter</b> that appears in the <b>Mishna,</b> the decision is <b>revoked</b> and the case retried? <b>Rather,</b> the case is <b>where</b> he <b>erred in</b> his <b>deliberation.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of an error <b>in deliberation? Rav Pappa said:</b> The circumstances of an error in deliberation are where, <b>for example,</b> there are <b>two <i>tanna’im</i> or two <i>amora’im</i> who disagree with one another, and the <i>halakha</i> was not stated</b> in accordance <b>with</b> the opinion of one <b>Sage or with</b> the opinion of the other <b>Sage; and the standard practice</b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>one of them, and he went and executed</b> the judgment <b>in accordance with the other</b> opinion; <b>this is</b> an error in <b>deliberation.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the dispute between Shmuel and Rabbi Abbahu about a court composed of two judges <b>is parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as detailed in the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>Mediation</b> can be performed <b>by</b> a panel of <b>three</b> judges; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Compromise</b> can be performed <b>by</b> even <b>a single</b> judge. The Sages <b>assumed</b> that <b>everyone</b> agrees that <b>we compare compromise to judgment,</b> and require the same amount of judges for each process.

### Part 7
<b>What, is it not</b> that <b>they disagree in this</b> matter, <b>that</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that <b>judgment</b> and compromise can be performed <b>by</b> a minimum of <b>three</b> judges, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>judgment</b> and compromise can be performed even <b>by two</b> judges? The Gemara rejects this analysis: <b>No,</b> it is <b>that everyone</b> holds that <b>judgment</b> must be performed <b>by</b> a minimum of <b>three</b> judges, <b>and here, they disagree with regard to this</b> matter: One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that <b>we compare compromise to judgment, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>we do not compare compromise to judgment.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let</b> us <b>say</b> that there are <b>three</b> opinions of <b><i>tanna’im</i> with regard to</b> mediation leading to <b>compromise, as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that mediation must be performed <b>by</b> a panel of <b>three</b> judges; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, <b>holds</b> that it can be performed <b>by two</b> judges; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that it can be performed <b>by a single</b> judge. The Gemara rejects this suggestion. <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, and some say Rabbi Yeimar bar Shelamya, said: The one who says</b> mediation must be performed by <b>two</b> judges would say that it may <b>even</b> be performed by <b>one. And</b> the reason <b>that he says two</b> is merely <b>that there would be</b> two <b>witnesses to</b> the proceedings, who could testify about them if necessary. In that way, neither side could later deny the terms of the compromise.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi says: Learn from</b> that discussion that <b>compromise does not require</b> a formal act of <b>acquisition,</b> which would legally transfer rights to the settlement payment to the other party. <b>As if it enters your mind</b> that compromise <b>requires</b> an act of <b>acquisition</b> to finalize its terms, <b>according to the one who says</b> it <b>requires</b> an act of acquisition, <b>why do I</b> need a formal court of <b>three</b> judges? <b>Let it suffice with two</b> judges, <b>and let</b> one litigant <b>perform an act of acquisition with</b> the other litigant to signify their commitment to abide by the compromise. If a formal act is required to grant halakhic force to the compromise, there is no advantage to having a panel of three judges with the status of a formal court. The Gemara concludes: <b>But</b> nevertheless, <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>a compromise requires</b> an act of <b>acquisition</b> to finalize its terms.

### Part 10
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 1:2–8): <b>Just as judgment</b> is performed <b>by three</b> judges, <b>so</b> too, <b>mediation</b> is performed <b>by three</b> judges.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC