
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Cases concerning <b>monetary law</b> are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges. Cases concerning <b>robbery and</b> personal <b>injury</b> are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges. Cases concerning <b>damage</b> that one is responsible for because he or his property caused the damage are adjudicated by three judges as well. Likewise, cases concerning payment for <b>half the damage,</b> which is paid in the event that an ox whose owner has not been warned that it gored more than two times gores another animal (see Exodus 21:35); cases concerning <b>payment of double</b> the principal by a thief who was caught stealing (see Exodus 22:3); <b>and</b> cases concerning <b>payment of four or five</b> times the principal by a thief who slaughtered or sold a stolen ox or a lamb (see Exodus 21:37) are all adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges.

### Part 2
Cases concerning <b>one who rapes or one who seduces</b> a virgin girl, and must therefore pay the girl’s father fifty silver shekels (see Deuteronomy 22:29, Exodus 22:15); <b>and</b> cases concerning <b>a defamer</b> who falsely asserts that his wife was not a virgin when she married him, and brings false witnesses who testify that she committed adultery while betrothed to him and who must therefore pay the girl’s father one hundred silver shekels as well as receive lashes (see Deuteronomy 22:13–19): All of these are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And the Rabbis say:</b> Cases concerning <b>a defamer</b> are adjudicated <b>by</b> a court of <b>twenty-three</b> judges, which is the type of court authorized to judge cases of capital law, <b>because</b> this case <b>includes</b> the possibility of becoming a case of <b>capital law.</b> The husband brings witnesses that his wife committed adultery. If she is found guilty, she is liable to receive the death penalty. This punishment applies to the witnesses if they are exposed as conspiring witnesses.

### Part 4
Cases concerning the violation of prohibitions that render one liable to receive <b>lashes</b> are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges. The Sages <b>stated in the name of Rabbi Yishmael:</b> Cases concerning lashes are adjudicated <b>by twenty-three</b> judges.

### Part 5
The <b>intercalation of the month</b> is performed <b>by</b> a panel of <b>three</b> judges. The <b>intercalation of the year,</b> meaning the decision to add an extra month to the year when necessary, is also decided <b>by</b> a panel of <b>three</b> judges; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> The deliberations <b>begin with three</b> judges, <b>and they debate</b> the matter <b>with five</b> judges, <b>and they conclude</b> the matter <b>with seven</b> judges, due to the significance of the decision. <b>And</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel concedes that <b>if they concluded</b> the matter <b>with</b> only <b>three</b> judges, the intercalation is valid and it is <b>a leap</b> year.

### Part 6
Both the <b>laying of hands by the Sages and the breaking of the heifer’s neck</b> in a case where a person was found murdered and it is not known who killed him (see Deuteronomy 21:1–9) are performed in front of a panel <b>of three</b> judges; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> These rituals are performed in front <b>of five</b> judges. Both <b><i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> the ritual through which the <i>yavam</i>, a surviving brother of a married man who died without sons, frees the <i>yevama</i>, the widow, of her levirate bond in a case where the <i>yavam</i> does not wish to marry the <i>yevama</i> (see Deuteronomy 25:5–10), <b>and the refusal</b> of a girl before reaching majority to remain married to the man to whom her mother or brother married her off, are performed before a court <b>of three</b> judges.

### Part 7
The <i>halakha</i> concerning fruit of a fourth-year sapling and second-tithe produce is that they are to be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there. If this is impractical, the produce can be redeemed and the redemption money brought to Jerusalem, where it is used to purchase food and drink. Valuation of fruit of <b>a fourth-year sapling or second-tithe</b> produce in cases <b>where their value is not known</b> is performed <b>by three</b> judges. The valuation of <b>consecrated</b> property for purposes of redemption is performed <b>by three</b> judges, and <b>the valuations that are movable property</b> (see Leviticus 27:1–8) are performed <b>by three</b> judges. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One of</b> the three judges must be <b>a priest.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And the</b> valuation of consecrated <b>land</b> is performed by <b>nine</b> judges <b>and,</b> in addition, one <b>priest. And</b> the valuation of <b>a person</b> for the purpose of a vow is performed in <b>a similar manner to</b> that of land.

### Part 9
§ Cases of <b>capital law</b> are judged <b>by twenty-three</b> judges. <b>An animal that copulated with a person and an animal that was the object of bestiality</b> are judged <b>by twenty-three</b> judges, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And if a woman approaches any animal to lie with it, <b>you shall kill the woman and the animal”</b> (Leviticus 20:16), <b>and it states:</b> “And if a man lies with an animal, he shall be put to death <b>and you shall kill the animal”</b> (Leviticus 20:15). In cases of bestiality, the verse juxtaposes the execution of the animal to the execution of the person, and therefore the case of the animal is adjudicated in the same way as cases of capital law.

### Part 10
Similarly, <b>an ox that is</b> to be <b>stoned</b> because it killed a person is judged <b>by twenty-three</b> judges, <b>as it is stated:</b> “But if the ox was wont to gore in time past, and warning has been given to its owner, but he did not guard it and it kills a man or a woman <b>the ox shall be stoned and also its owner shall be put to death”</b> (Exodus 21:29). From this verse it is derived that <b>just as</b> the manner of <b>the death of the owner, so is</b> the manner of <b>the death of the ox.</b> The same <i>halakha</i> applies in the case of <b>a wolf or a lion, a bear or a leopard, or a cheetah, or a snake</b> that killed a person: <b>Their death</b> is decreed <b>by twenty-three</b> judges. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says</b> these dangerous animals do not need to be brought to court; rather, <b>anyone who kills them first merits</b> the performance of a mitzva. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Their death</b> is decreed <b>by twenty-three</b> judges.

### Part 11
§ The court <b>judges</b> cases involving an entire <b>tribe</b> that sinned, <b>or a false prophet</b> (see Deuteronomy 18:20–22), <b>or a High Priest</b> who transgressed a prohibition that carries a possible death sentence, <b>only on the basis of a court of seventy-one</b> judges, i.e., the Great Sanhedrin. <b>And</b> the king may <b>bring</b> the nation <b>out to an optional war,</b> i.e., a war that was not mandated by the Torah and is not a war of defense, <b>only on the basis of a court of seventy-one</b> judges. <b>They may extend the city</b> of Jerusalem <b>or the courtyards</b> of the Temple <b>only on the basis of a court of seventy-one</b> judges. <b>And</b> they may <b>appoint</b> a lesser <b>Sanhedrin</b> of twenty-three judges <b>for the tribes only on the basis of a court of seventy-one</b> judges.

### Part 12
A city <b>may be designated</b> as <b>an idolatrous city,</b> i.e., a city whose residents all practice idolatry, and therefore according to Torah law all the residents must be killed and the city must be destroyed (see Deuteronomy 13:13–19), <b>only in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>a court of seventy-one</b> judges. Additionally, the court <b>may not designate</b> a city as <b>an idolatrous city</b> if it is <b>on the frontier,</b> close to the borders of Eretz Yisrael, <b>and three</b> adjoining cities may <b>not</b> be designated as idolatrous cities. <b>But</b> the court <b>may designate one</b> city, <b>or two</b> adjoining cities, as idolatrous cities.

### Part 13
§ With regard to the number of judges in the different courts the mishna presents a halakhic midrash: The <b>Great Sanhedrin was</b> composed <b>of seventy-one</b> judges, <b>and a lesser</b> Sanhedrin was composed <b>of twenty-three. From where</b> is it derived <b>that the Great</b> Sanhedrin <b>was</b> composed <b>of seventy-one</b> judges? <b>As it is stated: “Gather Me seventy men of the Elders of Israel,</b> whom you know to be the Elders of the people and officers over them, and bring them into the Tent of Meeting, and they shall stand there with you” (Numbers 11:16), <b>and</b> together with <b>Moses at the head of</b> this body, there are a total of seventy-one. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Moses was indeed at the head of the body, but he is not counted as part of the group. Consequently, a future Great Sanhedrin modeled after these Elders is to be composed of <b>seventy</b> judges.

### Part 14
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that a lesser</b> Sanhedrin <b>is</b> composed <b>of twenty-three</b> judges? <b>As it is stated: “And the congregation shall judge</b> between the assailant and the avenger…<b>and the congregation shall save</b> the manslayer from the hands of the avenger” (Numbers 35:24–25). Therefore, there must be <b>a congregation,</b> which consists of at least ten judges, that <b>judges</b> the accused and attempts to convict him, <b>and</b> there must be <b>a congregation,</b> also consisting of at least ten judges, which attempts to <b>save</b> the accused by finding him innocent. Together, <b>there are twenty</b> judges <b>here.</b>

### Part 15
Before proceeding to derive the requirement for the final three judges, the mishna clarifies: <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that a congregation</b> consists <b>of</b> at least <b>ten</b> men? <b>As it is stated</b> concerning the spies: <b>“How long shall I bear with this evil congregation</b> that keep complaining about me?” (Numbers 14:27) There were twelve spies; <b>excluding Joshua and Caleb,</b> who did not complain, there would be ten men who are called: A congregation. Accordingly, the verses describing a congregation that attempts to convict the accused and a congregation that attempts to acquit him together add up to twenty judges.

### Part 16
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>to bring three more</b> judges to the court? <b>From the implication of that</b> which <b>is stated: “You shall not follow a multitude to convict”</b> (Exodus 23:2), <b>I</b> would <b>derive that</b> I may not convict a person on the basis of a majority but <b>I should follow</b> the majority <b>to exonerate. If so, why is it stated</b> in the same verse: <b>“To incline after a multitude,”</b> from which it can be understood that the majority is followed in all cases? In order to resolve the apparent contradiction it must be explained: <b>Your inclination</b> after the majority <b>to exonerate is not like your inclination</b> after the majority <b>to convict. Your inclination</b> after the majority <b>to exonerate</b> can result in a verdict <b>by</b> a majority of <b>one</b> judge. But <b>your inclination</b> after the majority <b>to convict</b> a transgressor must be <b>by</b> a more decisive majority of at least <b>two.</b> Therefore, the court must have at least twenty-two judges.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC