
### Part 1
<b>the Tabernacle of David that is fallen [<i>hanofelet</i>]”</b> (Amos 9:11). That is why the Messiah is called <i>bar nifli</i>. Rabbi Yitzḥak <b>said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> During <b>the generation in which</b> the Messiah, <b>son of David, comes, Torah scholars decrease; and</b> as for <b>the rest</b> of the people, <b>their eyes fail with sorrow and grief, and troubles increase. And the harsh decrees will be introduced; before the first passes the second quickly comes.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>the seven-year</b> period, i.e., the Sabbatical cycle, <b>during which</b> the Messiah, <b>son of David, comes:</b> During <b>the first year, this verse will be fulfilled: “And I will cause it to rain upon one city and cause it not to rain upon another city”</b> (Amos 4:7). During the <b>second</b> year of that period, <b>arrows of famine will be shot,</b> indicating that there will be famine only in certain places. During the <b>third</b> year <b>there will be a great famine, and men, women, children, the pious, and men of action will die, and the Torah is forgotten by those who study it. During the fourth</b> year there will be <b>plenty but not</b> great <b>plenty. During the fifth</b> year there will be <b>great plenty and they will eat, and drink, and rejoice, and the Torah will return to those who study it. During the sixth</b> year, heavenly <b>voices</b> will be heard. <b>During the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>wars,</b> e.g., the war of Gog and Magog, will be waged involving the Jewish people. <b>During</b> the year after <b>the conclusion of the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>the son of David will come.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yosef said: Haven’t there been several Sabbatical</b> cycles during <b>which</b> events <b>transpired</b> in <b>that</b> manner <b>and</b> nevertheless, the Messiah <b>did not come? Abaye said: Have</b> the phenomena: <b>During the sixth</b> year, heavenly <b>voices,</b> and <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>wars, transpired? And furthermore, have</b> all these phenomena <b>transpired in</b> the <b>order</b> in which they were listed in the <i>baraita</i>?

### Part 4
The verse states: <b>“That Your enemies taunted, Lord, that they have taunted the footsteps of Your anointed”</b> (Psalms 89:52). <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: During the generation that the son of David comes, the hall of the assembly</b> of the Sages <b>will be</b> designated <b>for prostitution, and the Galilee will be destroyed, and the Gavlan,</b> i.e., Bashan, <b>will be desolate, and the residents of the border</b> who flee the neighboring gentiles <b>will circulate from city to city and will receive no sympathy. The wisdom of scholars will diminish, and sin-fearing</b> people <b>will be despised. And the face of the generation will be like the face of a dog</b> in its impudence and shamelessness.

### Part 5
<b>And the truth will be lacking, as it is stated: “And the truth is lacking [<i>ne’ederet</i>], and he who departs from evil is negated”</b> (Isaiah 59:15). <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>And the truth is lacking [<i>ne’ederet</i>]?</b> The Sages of <b>the study hall of Rav said:</b> This <b>teaches that</b> truth <b>will become like</b> so many <b>flocks [<i>adarim</i>] and walk</b> away. <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>“And he that departs from evil is negated”?</b> The Sages of <b>the study hall of Rabbi Sheila said: Anyone who deviates from evil is deemed insane by the people.</b>

### Part 6
§ Concerning the lack of truth, <b>Rava says: Initially I would say</b> that <b>there is no truth</b> anywhere <b>in the world.</b> There was <b>a certain one of the Sages, and Rav Tavut is his name, and some say Rav Tavyomei is his name,</b> who was so honest <b>that if they were</b> to <b>give him the entire world, he would not deviate</b> from the truth <b>in his statement.</b> He said to me: <b>One time I happened</b> to come <b>to a certain place, and Truth is its name, and</b> its residents <b>would not deviate</b> from the truth <b>in their statements, and no person from there would die prematurely. I married a woman from</b> among <b>them, and I had two sons from her.</b>

### Part 7
<b>One day his wife was sitting and washing the</b> hair on her <b>head. Her neighbor came</b> and <b>knocked on the door. He thought:</b> It is <b>not proper conduct</b> to tell the neighbor that his wife is bathing. <b>He said to her: She is not here.</b> Since he deviated from the truth <b>his two sons died. The people</b> residing <b>in</b> that <b>place came before him</b> and <b>said to him: What</b> is the meaning of <b>this? He said to them: This was</b> the nature of the <b>incident,</b> and told them what happened. <b>They said to him: Please leave our place and do not provoke</b> premature <b>death upon these people.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara resumes its discussion of the messianic period. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Nehorai says: During the generation</b> in <b>which the son of David comes, youths will humiliate elders and elders will stand</b> in deference <b>before youths, and a daughter will rebel against her mother, and a bride against her mother-in-law, and the face of the generation will be like the face of a dog, and a son will not be ashamed before his father.</b>

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says: During the generation that the son of David comes, arrogance will proliferate and the cost</b> of living <b>will corrupt</b> people so they will engage in deceit. <b>The vine will produce its fruit, and</b> nevertheless, <b>the wine</b> will be <b>costly. And the entire</b> gentile <b>monarchy will be converted to</b> the <b>heresy</b> of Christianity, <b>and there will be no</b> inclination among the people to accept <b>rebuke.</b> This <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak, as Rabbi Yitzḥak says: The son of David will not come until the entire kingdom will be converted to heresy. Rava says: What is the verse</b> from which this statement is derived? It is the verse: <b>“It is all turned white; he is ritually pure”</b> (Leviticus 13:13). One is a leper and ritually impure only if he has a leprous mark, however small, but not if his skin is completely leprous. Similarly, the world will be redeemed only when the Jewish people reach their lowest point.

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“For the Lord shall judge His people</b> and atone for His servants, <b>when He sees that their power is gone and there is none shut up or left”</b> (Deuteronomy 32:36). From the phrase “their power is gone” it is derived that <b>the son of David will not come until informers will proliferate. Alternatively,</b> the Messiah will not come <b>until the</b> number of <b>students</b> of Torah <b>diminishes. Alternatively,</b> the Messiah will not come <b>until</b> the <b><i>peruta</i> will cease from the purse. Alternatively,</b> the Messiah will not come <b>until they despair from the redemption, as it is stated: “And there is none shut up or left,” as though there were no supporter or helper for the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 11
This is <b>as</b> in <b>that</b> practice <b>of Rabbi Zeira,</b> who, <b>when he would find Sages who were engaging in</b> discussions about the coming of the Messiah, <b>said to them: Please, I ask of you, do not delay</b> his coming by calculating the end of days. <b>As we learn</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There are <b>three</b> matters that <b>come</b> only <b>by means of diversion of attention</b> from those matters, <b>and these are they:</b> The <b>Messiah, a lost item, and a scorpion.</b>

### Part 12
§ <b>Rav Ketina says: Six thousand years is</b> the duration of <b>the world,</b> and <b>it is in ruins</b> for <b>one</b> thousand years. The duration of the period during which the world is in ruins is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “And the Lord alone shall be exalted on that day”</b> (Isaiah 2:11), and the day of God lasts one thousand years. <b>Abaye says: It is in ruins</b> for <b>two</b> thousand years, <b>as it is stated: “After two days He will revive us; in the third day He will revive us, and we shall live in His presence”</b> (Hosea 6:2).

### Part 13
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Ketina: Just as the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>abrogates</b> debts <b>once in seven years, so too, the world abrogates</b> its typical existence for <b>one thousand years in</b> every <b>seven thousand years, as it is stated: “And the Lord alone shall be exalted on that day,” and it states: “A psalm, a song for the Shabbat day”</b> (Psalms 92:1), meaning <b>a day,</b> i.e., one thousand years, <b>that is entirely Shabbat. And it says</b> in explanation of the equation between one day and one thousand years: <b>“For a thousand years in Your eyes are but like yesterday when it is past,</b> and like a watch in the night” (Psalms 90:4).

### Part 14
<b>The school of Eliyahu taught: Six thousand years is</b> the duration of <b>the world. Two thousand</b> of the six thousand years are characterized by <b>chaos; two thousand</b> years are characterized by <b>Torah,</b> from the era of the Patriarchs until the end of the mishnaic period; and <b>two thousand years</b> are <b>the period of</b> the coming of <b>the Messiah.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC