
### Part 1
for example, the <b><i>halakha</i></b> of the prohibition against engaging in intercourse with <b>one’s daughter</b> born <b>from</b> the <b>victim of his rape.</b>

### Part 2
<b>As Rava says: Rav Yitzḥak bar Avudimi said to me:</b> This prohibition is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the word <b><i>henna</i>,</b> in the verse: “The nakedness of your son’s daughter, or of your daughter’s daughter, even their nakedness you shall not uncover; for theirs [<i>henna</i>] is your own nakedness” (Leviticus 18:10), and the word <b><i>henna</i></b> in a different verse: “You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter; you shall not take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness: They [<i>henna</i>] are near kinswomen; it is lewdness” (Leviticus 18:17). This verbal analogy indicates that just as intercourse with one’s granddaughter and with one’s wife’s daughter or granddaughter is forbidden, so too, intercourse with one’s daughter is prohibited.

### Part 3
Furthermore, it is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy between the word <b>“lewdness”</b> (Leviticus 18:17) and the word <b>“lewdness”</b> in the verse: “And if a man take with his wife also her mother, it is lewdness; they shall be burned with fire, both he and they, so that there be no lewdness among you” (Leviticus 20:14), that one who engages in sexual intercourse with his daughter or granddaughter is liable to be executed by burning.

### Part 4
<b>“Between blood and blood”;</b> this is the ability to discern <b>between</b> the disparate <i>halakhot</i> relevant to the <b>blood of menstruation,</b> the <b>blood of childbirth,</b> and the <b>blood of</b> a gonorrhea-like <b>discharge [<i>ziva</i>].</b> In each of these cases, there is a dispute between the Sages with regard to a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>. In the case of the <b>blood of menstruation,</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Akavya ben Mahalalel and the Rabbis, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nidda</i> 19a): With regard to <b>blood that is green</b> that is discharged by a woman, <b>Akavya ben Mahalalel deems</b> it blood of menstruation and <b>impure, and the Rabbis deem</b> it <b>pure.</b> According to Akavya ben Mahalalel, one who engages in intercourse with a woman who discharged green blood is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, while according to the Rabbis, he is exempt.

### Part 5
In the case of the <b>blood of childbirth,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rav and Levi.</b> This is <b>as it was stated</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> Blood that a woman discharges after childbirth <b>is</b> all from <b>one source; the Torah deemed ritually impure</b> the blood discharged for one week after the birth of a male and two weeks after the birth of a female, <b>and the Torah deemed</b> ritually pure the blood that is discharged for the subsequent thirty-three days for a male and sixty-six days for a female. Even if the blood flows continuously, the status of the blood changes after the conclusion of the period of impurity.

### Part 6
<b>And Levi says: It is</b> from <b>two sources; the impure</b> source <b>is sealed</b> after one week for a male and two weeks for a female, and then <b>the pure</b> source <b>is opened,</b> and at the conclusion of the period of the discharge of pure blood, <b>the pure</b> source <b>is sealed</b> and <b>the impure</b> source <b>is opened.</b> Only if the flow of impure blood ceases is a subsequent discharge deemed pure. Therefore, if one engaged in intercourse with a woman who experienced a continuous flow of blood beyond the time of the conclusion of the period of the flow of pure blood, according to Levi, he is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, and according to Rav, he is exempt.

### Part 7
In the case of the <b>blood of <i>ziva</i>,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nidda</i> 36b): In a case where a woman <b>experienced labor</b> pain accompanied by an emission of blood lasting <b>three</b> consecutive <b>days within</b> the <b>eleven days</b> between the periods when her emissions render her a menstruating woman, during which the emission of blood renders the woman a <i>zava</i>, <b>if she ceased</b> experiencing labor <b>for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period,</b> indicating that the blood was not the result of imminent birth, <b>and</b> then <b>she gave birth, that</b> woman <b>gives birth as a <i>zava</i></b> and is liable to bring the purification offerings of both a woman after childbirth and a <i>zava</i>; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna continues: <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> That is her status only if she ceased experiencing labor for a twenty-four-hour period that is <b>a night and</b> the <b>day</b> that follows, <b>like Shabbat evening and</b> the <b>day</b> that follows <b>it.</b> When the mishna says that she ceased, it is referring to a case <b>where she ceased from</b> having labor <b>pains and not from</b> having <b>the</b> flow of <b>blood.</b> The dispute is whether the woman who gave birth has the status of a <i>zava</i>, who is required to count seven clean days before immersing in flowing water, or whether she has the status of a woman after childbirth. If the two weeks of the blood of impurity after childbirth elapsed and she did not immerse in flowing water, according to Rabbi Eliezer, she remains a <i>zava</i>, and one who engages in intercourse with her is liable to receive <i>karet</i>. According to Rabbi Yehoshua, at that point the blood becomes the blood of purity, and one who engages in intercourse with her is not liable to receive <i>karet</i>.

### Part 9
<b>“Between plea and plea”;</b> this is the ability to discern <b>between</b> cases of <b>capital law,</b> cases of <b>monetary law,</b> and cases of <b>laws</b> involving <b>lashes.</b> The Gemara elaborates: In cases of <b>monetary law,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Shmuel and Rabbi Abbahu, as Shmuel says:</b> With regard to <b>two</b> judges <b>who sat in judgment</b> and issued a ruling in cases of monetary law, <b>their ruling is</b> a valid <b>ruling, but they are characterized as an impudent court. And Rabbi Abbahu says: Everyone agrees</b> that <b>their ruling is not</b> a valid <b>ruling.</b> If a tribunal of two judges rules that one of the litigants must pay the other money, and that litigant uses the money to betroth a woman, according to Shmuel she is betrothed, and one who intentionally engages in intercourse with her is liable to receive <i>karet</i>. According to Rabbi Abbahu she is not betrothed, and one who engages in intercourse with her is not liable.

### Part 10
In cases of <b>capital law,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and the Rabbis, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> with regard to that which is written: “If men struggle and they hurt a pregnant woman…and if there shall be a tragedy <b>you shall give a life for a life”</b> (Exodus 21:22–23), the reference is to <b>a monetary payment</b> for the life that he took. The tragedy referenced is the unintentional killing of the mother.

### Part 11
The <i>tanna</i> deliberates: <b>Do you say</b> that the reference is to <b>a monetary payment, or</b> perhaps the reference is <b>only</b> to giving his <b>actual life?</b> Based on the language employed in the verse, it can be determined that the reference is to monetary payment. In these verses, <b>giving is stated above:</b> “And you shall give a life for a life,” <b>and giving is stated below:</b> “He shall be punished, as the husband of the woman shall impose upon him, and he shall give as the judges determine” (Exodus 21:23). <b>Just as there,</b> in the phrase “Give as the judges determine,” the reference is to <b>monetary payment, so too here,</b> in the phrase “Give a life for a life,” the reference is to <b>monetary payment.</b> The Rabbis hold that the reference is to giving his actual life. If an heir of the victim betrothed a woman with money seized from the assailant, according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the woman is betrothed, while according to the Rabbis she is not betrothed.

### Part 12
In cases of <b>laws</b> involving <b>lashes,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Yishmael and the Rabbis, as we learned</b> in a mishna (2a): Cases concerning the violation of prohibitions that render one liable to receive <b>lashes</b> are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges. The Sages <b>stated in the name of Rabbi Yishmael:</b> Cases concerning lashes are adjudicated <b>by twenty-three</b> judges. According to Rabbi Yishmael, if a tribunal of three sentences an individual to lashes, that individual can claim damages for any injury caused as a result of the lashes, and if he betroths a woman with that money the betrothal is valid. According to the Rabbis, he cannot claim damages, as the court is authorized to sentence him to receive lashes.

### Part 13
<b>“Between mark and mark”;</b> this is the ability to discern <b>between</b> the disparate <i>halakhot</i> relevant to leprous <b>marks of a person,</b> leprous <b>marks on houses,</b> and leprous <b>marks on garments.</b>

### Part 14
In the case of leprous <b>marks of a person,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Yehoshua and the Rabbis, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 4:11): <b>If the snow-white</b> leprous <b>mark [<i>baheret</i>] preceded the white hair,</b> the individual is <b>impure</b> with leprosy, as that is the order of events that appears in the Torah, and <b>if the white hair preceded the <i>baheret</i>,</b> the individual is <b>pure.</b> If there is <b>uncertainty</b> concerning which appeared first, the Rabbis say: He is <b>impure,</b> and <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> It has <b>darkened.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: It has <b>darkened? Rava says:</b> Its status is like that of a <i>baheret</i> that <b>darkened,</b> with regard to which the Torah says that he is <b>pure.</b> If one with a <i>baheret</i> and a white hair entered the Temple, and there is uncertainty concerning which appeared first, according to the Rabbis he is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, and according to Rabbi Yehoshua he is not liable.

### Part 15
In the case of leprous <b>marks of houses,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, and the Rabbis, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 12:3): <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says: A house is never</b> deemed <b>impure</b> with leprosy <b>unless</b> the leprous mark <b>will be seen</b> to be the size of <b>two Cilician beans, on two stones, on two walls, in a corner</b> between two walls. <b>The length of</b> the mark <b>is</b> that of <b>two Cilician beans and its width is</b> that of one <b>Cilician bean.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon?</b> The Gemara answers: The word <b>wall is written</b> in the verse <b>and</b> the word <b>walls is written</b> in the same verse: And he shall see the leprous mark…in the walls of the house with hollow streaks, greenish or reddish, and their appearance is lower than the wall” (Leviticus 14:37). <b>Which is</b> one <b>wall that is like</b> multiple <b>walls? You must say: This is a corner</b> between two walls. The Rabbis hold that it is a leprous house even if the mark appears on one wall. Therefore, one who entered a house with a leprous mark on one wall and then entered the Temple is liable to receive <i>karet</i> according to the Rabbis; according to Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, he is not liable.

### Part 17
In the case of leprous <b>marks on garments,</b> the dispute concerning such a prohibition is <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute</b> between <b>Rabbi Yonatan ben Avtolemos and the Rabbis, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan ben Avtolemos says: From where</b> is it derived

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC