
### Part 1
<b>Sing every day, sing every day,</b> i.e., review your studies like a song that one sings over and over. <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avudimi says:</b> From <b>what verse</b> is this derived? It is <b>as it is stated: “The hunger of the laborer labors for him; for his mouth presses upon him”</b> (Proverbs 16:26), i.e., he exhausts his mouth through constant review and study. <b>He labors</b> in Torah <b>in this place,</b> this world, <b>and his Torah labors for him in another place,</b> the World-to-Come.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Elazar says: Every man was created for labor, as it is stated: “Man is born for toil”</b> (Job 5:7). Based on this verse, <b>I do not know whether he was created for toil of the mouth,</b> speech, or <b>whether he was created for the toil of labor. When</b> the verse <b>states: “For his mouth presses upon him”</b> (Proverbs 16:26), <b>you must say</b> that <b>he was created for toil of the mouth. And still I do not know</b> with regard to the toil of the mouth <b>whether it is for the toil of Torah or for the toil of conversation. When</b> the verse <b>states: “This Torah scroll shall not depart from your mouth”</b> (Joshua 1:8), <b>you must say</b> that <b>he was created for the toil of Torah. And that is</b> the meaning of <b>what Rava said: All bodies are like receptacles</b> to store items until use. <b>Happy is one who is privileged, who is a receptacle for Torah.</b>

### Part 3
The verse states: <b>“He who commits adultery with a woman lacks understanding”</b> (Proverbs 6:32). <b>Reish Lakish says: This is</b> a reference to <b>one who studies Torah intermittently,</b> who is like an adulterer, who sins with the other woman intermittently, <b>as it is stated</b> about words of Torah: <b>“For it is a pleasant thing if you keep them within your belly; let them be established on your lips”</b> (Proverbs 22:18) and keep the Torah always available.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that with regard to the verse: <b>“But the person who acts high-handedly,</b> whether he is born in the land, or a stranger, that person blasphemes the Lord” (Numbers 15:30), <b>this</b> is a reference to <b>Manasseh ben Hezekiah,</b> king of Israel, <b>who would sit and teach flawed</b> interpretations of Torah <b>narratives.</b>

### Part 5
Manasseh <b>said: But did Moses need to write only</b> insignificant matters that teach nothing, for example: <b>“And Lotan’s sister was Timna”</b> (Genesis 36:22), or: <b>“And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz,</b> son of Esau” (Genesis 36:12), or: <b>“And Reuben went in the days of the wheat harvest and found <i>duda’im</i> in the field”</b> (Genesis 30:14)? <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said to him: “You sit and speak against your brother; you slander your own mother’s son. These things you have done, and should I have kept silence, you would imagine that I was like you, but I will reprove you, and set the matter before your eyes”</b> (Psalms 50:20–21). The verses in the Torah are not empty matters, with regard to which you can decide their import.

### Part 6
<b>And about</b> Manasseh ben Hezekiah <b>it is stated explicitly in the</b> texts of <b>tradition,</b> the Prophets: <b>“Woe unto them who draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with a cart rope”</b> (Isaiah 5:18). <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“as with a cart rope”? Rabbi Asi says:</b> This is a reference to <b>the evil inclination. Initially, it seems like</b> a flimsy <b>spinning [<i>kuveya</i>] thread and ultimately it seems like</b> a sturdy <b>cart rope.</b>

### Part 7
Manasseh began by mocking a few verses and ultimately violated the entire Torah. The Gemara asks: With regard to that verse <b>that we came to</b> discuss, <b>in any event, what is</b> the significance of the phrase in the verse <b>“And Lotan’s sister was Timna”?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Timna was the daughter of kings, as it is written: “The chief of Lotan”</b> (Genesis 36:29), and: <b>“The chief of Timna”</b> (Genesis 36:40), <b>and each chief is</b> a member of <b>a monarchy,</b> albeit <b>without a crown.</b> That is why they are called chief and not king.

### Part 8
Timna <b>sought to convert. She came before Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and they did not accept her. She went and became a concubine of Eliphaz, son of Esau, and said,</b> referring to herself: <b>It is preferable that she will be a maidservant for this nation, and she will not be a noblewoman for another nation.</b> Ultimately, <b>Amalek,</b> son of Eliphaz, <b>emerged from her,</b> and that tribe <b>afflicted the Jewish people. What is the reason</b> that the Jewish people were punished by suffering at the hand of Amalek? It is due to the fact <b>that they should not have rejected her</b> when she sought to convert. Therefore, the verse is significant.

### Part 9
<b>“And Reuben went in the days of the wheat harvest”</b> (Genesis 30:14). <b>Rava, son of Rabbi Yitzḥak, says</b> that <b>Rav says: From here</b> it can be seen <b>that the righteous do not extend their hands</b> to engage <b>in robbery</b> even of small items, as rather than taking wheat, Reuben took only the ownerless <i>duda’im</i>. The verse continues: <b>“And he found <i>duda’im</i> in the field.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are <i>duda’im</i>? Rav says:</b> They are a plant called <b><i>yavruḥei</i>. Levi says:</b> They are <b>violets. Rabbi Yonatan says:</b> They are <b><i>seviskei</i>.</b>

### Part 10
§ Apropos the significance of Torah study, <b>Rabbi Alexandri says: Anyone who engages in</b> the study of <b>Torah for its own sake introduces peace into the</b> heavenly <b>entourage above and into the</b> earthly <b>entourage below, as it is stated: “Or let him take hold of My stronghold [<i>ma’uzi</i>], that he may make peace with Me; and he shall make peace with Me”</b> (Isaiah 27:5). One who observes the Torah, which is called <i>oz</i>, introduces peace, even before the presence of God, as it were.

### Part 11
<b>Rav says:</b> It is <b>as though he built a palace of</b> heaven <b>above and of</b> earth <b>below, as it is stated: “And I have placed My words in your mouth, and I have covered you in the shadow of My hand, to plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the earth,</b> and say to Zion, you are My people” (Isaiah 51:16). One who has the word of God placed in his mouth through Torah study has established heaven and earth. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> One who engages in Torah study <b>also protects the entire world, as it is stated: “And I have covered you in the shadow of My hand.” And Levi says: He also advances</b> the coming of <b>the redemption, as it is stated: “And say to Zion, you are My people.”</b>

### Part 12
<b>Reish Lakish said:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who teaches Torah to the son of another, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he formed</b> that student, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And Abram took Sarai his wife…<b>and the souls that they formed in Haran”</b> (Genesis 12:5). They are given credit for forming the students to whom they taught Torah. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> It is <b>as though he fashioned [<i>asa’an</i>] the words of Torah</b> themselves, <b>as it is stated: “Observe the words of this covenant, <i>va’asitem otam</i>”</b> (Deuteronomy 29:8), indicating that studying the Torah is like fashioning it. <b>Rava says:</b> It is <b>as though he fashioned himself, as it is stated: “<i>Va’asitem otam</i>.” Do not read</b> “<i>va’asitem <b>otam</b></i><b>”</b> as: And you shall fashion them; <b>rather,</b> read it as <i>va’asitem <b>atem</b></i><b>,</b> meaning: You shall fashion yourself.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Abbahu says:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who causes another to</b> engage in <b>a matter of a mitzva, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he performed it</b> himself, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And the Lord said to Moses…<b>and your rod, with which you struck the river,</b> take in your hand and go” (Exodus 17:5). <b>And</b> was it <b>Moses</b> who <b>struck</b> the river? <b>But isn’t</b> it written explicitly (see Exodus 7:19–20) that <b>Aaron struck</b> the river? <b>Rather,</b> that verse serves <b>to say to you: Anyone who causes another to</b> engage in <b>a matter of a mitzva, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he performed it</b> himself.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that those who have no share in the World-to-Come include <b>an <i>epikoros</i>. Rav and Rabbi Ḥanina both say: This</b> is <b>one who treats a Torah scholar with contempt. Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi say: This</b> is <b>one who treats another with contempt before a Torah scholar.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that <b>one who treats another with contempt before a Torah scholar is</b> the <b><i>epikoros</i></b> mentioned in the mishna, <b>one who treats a Torah scholar with contempt is</b> characterized as one <b>who interprets the Torah inappropriately,</b> due to his lowering of the status of a Torah scholar. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that <b>one who treats a Torah scholar himself with contempt is</b> the <b><i>epikoros</i></b> mentioned in the mishna, how would he characterize one <b>who interprets the Torah inappropriately? Like what</b> individual does such a person conduct himself? He is <b>like Manasseh, son of Hezekiah,</b> who would teach flawed interpretations of Torah narratives.

### Part 16
<b>And there are those who teach</b> this dispute <b>with regard to the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: From here Rabbi Elazar HaModa’i said: <b>One who interprets the Torah</b> inappropriately has no share in the World-to-Come. <b>Rav and Rabbi Ḥanina say: This</b> is <b>one who treats a Torah scholar with contempt. Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi say: This</b> is <b>one who treats another with contempt before a Torah scholar.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that <b>one who treats a Torah scholar himself with contempt is</b> the one mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> who <b>interprets the Torah</b> inappropriately, <b>one who treats another with contempt before a Torah scholar is</b> characterized as the <b><i>epikoros</i></b> mentioned in the mishna. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that <b>one who treats another with contempt before a Torah scholar is</b> the one mentioned in the <i>baraita</i> who <b>interprets the Torah</b> inappropriately, how would he characterize the <b><i>epikoros</i></b> mentioned in the mishna? <b>Like whom</b> does he conduct himself? <b>Rav Yosef says:</b> It is referring to one who conducts himself <b>like those who say:</b> In <b>what</b> manner <b>have the Sages benefited us</b> with all their Torah study? <b>They read</b> the Bible <b>for their</b> own benefit and <b>they study</b> the Mishna <b>for their</b> own benefit.

### Part 18
<b>Abaye said to him: That</b> person who questions the benefit provided by Sages is <b>also</b> in the category of one <b>who interprets the Torah</b> inappropriately, since with that statement he repudiates the Torah itself, <b>as it is written: “If not for My covenant, I would not have appointed day and night, the laws of heaven and earth”</b> (Jeremiah 33:25). The eternal covenant of the Torah is responsible for maintaining the existence of the entire world. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: From here too conclude</b> the same concept <b>from it, as it is stated:</b> “If I find in Sodom fifty just men within the city, <b>then I will spare the entire place for their sakes”</b> (Genesis 18:26). The righteous protect the place where they reside.

### Part 19
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>epikoros</i> mentioned in the mishna is referring to one who conducts himself <b>like one who sits before his teacher and a <i>halakha</i></b> that he learned <b>from another place happens to fall</b> into his consciousness <b>and</b> the student <b>says: This is what we say there, and he does not say</b> deferentially: <b>This is what the Master said,</b> even if he did not learn that matter from his teacher. <b>Rava said:</b> The term <i>epikoros</i> is referring to one who conducts himself <b>like those from the house of Binyamin the doctor, who say:</b> In <b>what</b> manner <b>have the Sages benefited us</b> with all their Torah study? <b>Never</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC