
### Part 1
<b>The righteous are greater than the ministering angels, as it is stated: “He answered and said: I see four men unbound, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods”</b> (Daniel 3:25). Nebuchadnezzar saw three righteous people and an angel in the fire of the furnace and noted the presence of the righteous people before noting the presence of the angel.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai says: At the moment that Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah emerged from the fiery furnace, all the nations of the world came and struck the enemies of Israel,</b> a euphemism for the Jewish people, <b>in the face</b> and <b>said to them: You have a God</b> with capabilities <b>like that and you bow to the graven image? Immediately</b> Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah <b>began and said: “Lord, righteousness is Yours, but we are shamefaced, as of this day”</b> (Daniel 9:7).

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says</b> on a similar note: <b>What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “I said: I will climb into the palm tree; I will grasp its boughs”</b> (Song of Songs 7:9)? <b>“I said: I will climb into the palm tree”; this is</b> a reference to <b>the Jewish people,</b> who are likened to a palm tree, as they are upright and have one heart directed toward their Father in Heaven. God continues: <b>And now</b> that I have tested them by means of the decrees of Nebuchadnezzar, <b>I have succeeded</b> in grasping <b>in My hand only</b> the <b>one bough of Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,</b> as only they were willing to give their lives.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “I saw the night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle bushes that were in the depths”</b> (Zechariah 1:8)? <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“I saw the night”? The Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to transform the entire world into night</b> and destroy it, as there were no righteous people. <b>“And behold, a man riding”;</b> the word <b>“man”</b> is referring to <b>no</b> one <b>but the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it is stated: “The Lord is a man of war, The Lord is His name”</b> (Exodus 15:3). <b>“Upon a red horse”</b> alludes to the fact that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to transform the whole world into blood.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Once He looked at Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah He was placated, as it is stated: “And he stood among the myrtle bushes [<i>hadassim</i>] that were in the depths [<i>bametzula</i>].” And <i>hadassim</i></b> is referring to <b>no</b> one <b>but the righteous, as it is stated: “And he raised Hadassah,</b> that is Esther, his uncle’s daughter” (Esther 2:7). Hadassah is an appellation for the righteous Esther. <b>And <i>metzula</i></b> is referring to <b>no</b> place <b>but Babylonia, as it is stated</b> with regard to the downfall of Babylonia: <b>“That says to the deep [<i>latzula</i>]: Be dry, and I will dry up your rivers”</b> (Isaiah 44:27). <b>Immediately</b> those messengers, in the form of horses, <b>filled with anger</b> and <b>became gray, and</b> those who were <b>red became white. Rav Pappa says: Conclude from it</b> that seeing <b>a white horse</b> in a dream <b>is a good</b> portent <b>for</b> that <b>dream,</b> as it presages peace and quiet.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the Sages,</b> Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, <b>where did they go</b> after their miraculous deliverance, as there is no further mention of them? <b>Rav says: They died</b> as the result <b>of the evil eye,</b> as everyone was jealous of their deliverance. <b>And Shmuel says: They drowned in the spittle</b> of the nations of the world who held the Jewish people in contempt due to their failure to serve God in the appropriate manner. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: They ascended to Eretz Yisrael and married women and fathered sons and daughters.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: This amoraic dispute is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. Rabbi Eliezer says: They died</b> as the result <b>of the evil eye. Rabbi Yehoshua says: They drowned in the spittle. And the Rabbis say: They ascended to Eretz Yisrael and married women and fathered sons and daughters, as it is stated: “Hear now, Joshua the High Priest, you and your fellows who sit before you, for they are men of wonder”</b> (Zechariah 3:8). <b>Who are the people who had a wonder performed for them</b> in that generation? <b>You must say that</b> it is <b>Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And where did Daniel go?</b> He certainly did not bow to the graven image, and he was not cast into the furnace. Apparently, he was elsewhere. <b>Rav says:</b> He went <b>to dig the great river in Tiberias. And Shmuel says:</b> Daniel went <b>to bring</b> choice <b>alfalfa seed</b> from a distance, and therefore he was not in Babylonia. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> He went <b>to bring the</b> high-quality <b>pigs of Alexandria of Egypt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so</b> that he went to bring the pigs? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Theodosius the doctor says: No cow or sow emerges from Alexandria of Egypt whose womb is not severed so that it will not give birth?</b> The Gemara answers: They were <b>small</b> pigs that <b>he brought without the knowledge of</b> the people of Alexandria.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught: Three were</b> partners <b>in that plan</b> to ensure that Daniel would not be in Babylonia when the decree of persecution was in effect: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He; Daniel; and Nebuchadnezzar. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: Let Daniel go from here, so that</b> people <b>would not say</b> that Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah <b>were delivered</b> from the fiery furnace <b>due to the virtue of</b> Daniel, rather than due to their own righteousness.

### Part 10
<b>And Daniel said</b> to himself: <b>I will go</b> away <b>from here so</b> that this verse <b>will not be fulfilled in my</b> regard: <b>“The graven images of their gods shall you burn with fire”</b> (Deuteronomy 7:25). Daniel was concerned that because Nebuchadnezzar worshipped him like a deity, his legal status was that of an idol, and he would be burned.

### Part 11
<b>And Nebuchadnezzar said: Daniel should go</b> away <b>from here so that</b> the people <b>will not say:</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>burned his god in fire. And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>worshipped</b> Daniel? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face and worshipped Daniel</b> and commanded that they should offer an offering and pleasing aromas to him” (Daniel 2:46).

### Part 12
§ Apropos the deliverance of Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, the Gemara cites the verses: <b>“So says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab, son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah, son of Maaseiah, who prophesy to you a lie in My name:</b> Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylonia; and he shall slay them before your eyes” (Jeremiah 29:21). <b>And it is written: “And of them shall be taken a curse by all the captivity of Judea, who are in Babylonia, saying: May the Lord make you like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylonia toasted in the fire”</b> (Jeremiah 29:22). It <b>is not stated: Whom</b> the king of Babylonia <b>burned, but “whom</b> the king of Babylonia <b>toasted.” Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: This teaches that he rendered them like toasted wheat,</b> which is toasted on all sides.

### Part 13
The verse states: <b>“Because they have committed baseness in Israel, and have committed adultery with the wives of their neighbors”</b> (Jeremiah 29:23). <b>What did they do?</b> The Gemara relates: <b>They went to the daughter of Nebuchadnezzar. Ahab said to her: So says the Lord: Submit to Zedekiah</b> and engage in intercourse with him. <b>And Zedekiah said</b> to her: <b>So says the Lord: Submit to Ahab</b> and engage in intercourse with him. <b>She went and said to her father</b> what they said to her. Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to her: The God of these</b> people <b>abhors lewdness,</b> so this is likely a false prophecy. <b>When they come to you, send them to me.</b>

### Part 14
<b>When they came to her, she sent them to her father.</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to them: Who told you</b> to do this? <b>They said:</b> It was <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He.</b> Nebuchadnezzar said: <b>But haven’t I have asked Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah</b> about this <b>and they said to me: It is prohibited? They said to him: We too are prophets like they are.</b> God <b>did not say</b> this prophecy <b>to them; He said</b> it <b>to us.</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to them:</b> If so, <b>I wish to put you to the test</b> to determine if you are righteous, <b>just as I put Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah to the test.</b>

### Part 15
Ahab and Zedekiah <b>said to</b> Nebuchadnezzar: <b>They were three and we are</b> only <b>two,</b> and our merit is not great enough to save us from the fire. Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to them: Choose for yourselves</b> a third person, <b>whomever you wish,</b> to be put to the test <b>with you. They said</b> to him: We choose <b>Joshua the High Priest.</b> They chose him because <b>they thought: Let Joshua</b> the High Priest <b>come</b> with us, <b>since his merit is great and it will protect us.</b>

### Part 16
<b>They took</b> the three of <b>them down</b> and <b>cast them</b> into the furnace. <b>They were burned,</b> and as for <b>Joshua the High Priest, his garments were singed, as it is stated: “And He showed me Joshua the High Priest, standing before the angel of the Lord,</b> and Satan was standing at his right to thwart him” (Zechariah 3:1). <b>And it is written: “And the Lord said to Satan, the Lord shall rebuke you,</b> Satan, the Lord Who has chosen Jerusalem shall rebuke you; is this man not a firebrand plucked from fire?” (Zechariah 3:2). This is an allusion to the fact that he was delivered from the fiery furnace, although he was slightly singed.

### Part 17
Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to</b> Joshua the High Priest: <b>I know you are righteous</b> because you were delivered from the fire, <b>but what is the reason</b> that <b>the fire was slightly effective concerning you,</b> and for <b>Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah</b> the fire <b>was not effective concerning them at all,</b> and their garments were not singed? Joshua the High Priest <b>said to him: They were three</b> righteous people, <b>and I am one.</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to him: But wasn’t Abraham one</b> person, and when he was cast into the furnace the fire had no effect? Joshua answered him: <b>There,</b> in the case of Abraham, <b>there were no wicked people with him, and license</b> to cause damage <b>was not given to the fire. Here,</b> in this case, <b>there were wicked</b> people <b>with me, and license</b> to cause damage <b>was given to the fire.</b> The Gemara adds that <b>this</b> explains the adage <b>that people say:</b> If there are <b>two dry firebrands and one moist one</b> in a fire, <b>the dry</b> firebrands <b>burn the moist one.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that Joshua the High Priest <b>was punished</b> and was cast into the furnace? <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> It was due to the fact <b>that his sons would marry women who were not fit for</b> marriage into the <b>priesthood, and he did not reprimand them, as it is stated: “And Joshua was clothed in filthy garments,</b> and he stood before the angel” (Zechariah 3:3). <b>And was it the</b> typical <b>manner of Joshua to wear filthy garments? Rather</b> this verse <b>teaches</b> an allusion <b>that his sons would marry women who were not fit for</b> marriage into the <b>priesthood, and he did not reprimand them.</b> That is why he appeared with soiled garments in the vision of the prophet Zechariah.

### Part 19
§ Apropos Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Tanḥum says</b> that <b>bar Kappara taught in Tzippori: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> with regard to the statement of Ruth to Naomi concerning Boaz: <b>“These six</b> grains of <b>barley he gave me”</b> (Ruth 3:17). <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“six</b> grains of <b>barley”? If we say</b> that the reference is to <b>six actual</b> grains of <b>barley, is it the</b> typical <b>manner of Boaz to give</b> a minimal <b>gift of six</b> grains of <b>barley?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC