
### Part 1
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the consecrated</b> property <b>in it must be redeemed. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 14:5): <b>If there were offerings of the most sacred order in it,</b> if they were animals <b>consecrated for</b> sacrifice on <b>the altar, they shall die;</b> one causes their death. Items <b>consecrated for Temple maintenance must be redeemed, and <i>terumot</i> must</b> be left to <b>decay, and second tithe and sacred scrolls must be interred. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> That is not so; rather, the term: <b>“Its animals”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:16), serves to <b>exclude a firstborn animal and</b> animal <b>tithe,</b> as they never belonged to the idolatrous city. The term: <b>“Its spoils”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:17), serves to <b>exclude consecrated money and tithe money.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara proceeds to analyze the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said: If there were offerings of the most sacred order in it,</b> if they were animals <b>consecrated for</b> sacrifice on <b>the altar, they shall die.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But why shall they die? They should graze until they become unfit, and</b> then <b>they should be sold and their value should be allocated for</b> communal <b>gift</b> offerings.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> They shall die, as it is written: <b>“The offering of the wicked is an abomination”</b> (Proverbs 21:27), and it is unacceptable for sacrifice on the altar. <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> They shall die because the animal <b>is the property of its owner</b> and is not exclusively consecrated property. <b>And</b> the reason it is considered the property of the owner is that <b>here,</b> the <i>tanna</i> is referring <b>to offerings</b> with regard to <b>which one bears</b> financial <b>responsibility for their</b> replacement. That responsibility renders the status of these consecrated animals like that of his property. <b>And</b> this <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who says:</b> An offering with regard to which one bears financial responsibility for its replacement <b>is the property of</b> its <b>owner.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara challenges: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> one may infer that <b>the first clause is not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> The Gemara suggests a new explanation: Rather, the animals that shall die are <b>offerings of lesser sanctity, and</b> the ruling of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, who says: Offerings of lesser sanctity are the property of</b> their <b>owner.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>But offerings of the most sacred order, what</b> shall be done with them? <b>They shall be redeemed.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>rather than teaching</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: Items <b>consecrated for Temple maintenance must be redeemed, let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>distinguish and teach</b> a distinction <b>within</b> the category of animals consecrated for sacrifice on the altar <b>itself,</b> as follows: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> that animals shall die, <b>said?</b> It is stated <b>with regard to offerings of lesser sanctity; but with regard to offerings of the most sacred order, they shall be redeemed.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since there is</b> among offerings of the most sacred order the case of the sin-offering whose owners were killed in the idolatrous city, rendering the animal <b>a sin-offering whose owners have died, which is left to die,</b> that distinction <b>is not clear-cut for</b> the <i>tanna</i>, as offerings of the most sacred order are not always redeemed. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> preferred to cite a distinction without exceptions.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted, Rabbi Yoḥanan does not say</b> his explanation of the <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish,</b> due to the fact <b>that it is written: “The offering of the wicked is an abomination,”</b> and he bases his explanation on that verse. <b>But Reish Lakish, what is the reason he does not say</b> his explanation of the <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan?</b> The Gemara answers: He could have <b>said to you</b> that <b>when we say: “The offering of the wicked is an abomination,” this statement</b> applies in a case <b>where</b> the offering <b>is in its unadulterated form. But here, since</b> if they were to redeem it, <b>it</b> would have <b>changed</b> and would no longer be the animal of the wicked itself, but rather an animal purchased with the proceeds of the redemption of the original, <b>it</b> would have <b>changed,</b> and it would no longer be an abomination.

### Part 7
§ The <i>baraita</i> continues. <b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> that the term <b>“its animals”</b> serves to <b>exclude a firstborn animal and</b> animal <b>tithe.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> animals <b>are we dealing with? If we say</b> that Rabbi Shimon is speaking <b>with regard to unblemished animals,</b> like all other offerings <b>they are the spoils of Heaven</b> and not the spoils of the inhabitants of the city. <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Shimon is speaking <b>with regard to blemished</b> animals, which belong to their owners. If so, <b>they are the spoils of</b> the city, and what is the reason that Rabbi Shimon says that there is no obligation to destroy these animals?

### Part 8
<b>Ravina says: Actually,</b> Rabbi Shimon is speaking <b>with regard to blemished</b> animals, <b>and</b> his statement should be understood as follows: The mitzva is to destroy that <b>which is eaten as its animals,</b> i.e., as the property of an inhabitant of an idolatrous city. <b>Excluded are those</b> firstborn and tithe animals, <b>which,</b> even when blemished, <b>are not eaten as its animals; rather,</b> they are eaten <b>as firstborn and tithe</b> animals. They are given as gifts to priests, and <b>are</b> considered <b>the spoils of Heaven.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>disputes</b> the statement <b>of Shmuel, as Shmuel says: Everything is sacrificed and everything is redeemed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying?</b> The Gemara explains that <b>this</b> is what <b>he is saying: Any</b> offering <b>that is sacrificed</b> on the altar <b>when it is unblemished and is redeemed when it is blemished is excluded from</b> the term “its <b>spoils,”</b> since it is considered the spoils of Heaven. <b>And</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>any</b> offering <b>that is sacrificed</b> on the altar <b>when it is unblemished and is not redeemed when it is blemished, e.g., a firstborn</b> animal <b>and</b> animal <b>tithe, is derived from</b> the term “its <b>animals,”</b> as they are not the city’s animals and they are not included in the city’s property.

### Part 10
§ The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b><i>Terumot</i> must</b> be left to <b>decay. Rav Ḥisda says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <b>only</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> that is still <b>in the possession of an Israelite,</b> who has not yet given it to a priest. <b>But</b> concerning <b><i>teruma</i></b> that is already <b>in the possession of a priest</b> who lives in the idolatrous city, <b>since it is his property, it shall be burned.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Yosef raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>Second tithe and sacred scrolls must be interred. But isn’t</b> the status of <b>second tithe in the possession of an Israelite like</b> that of <b><i>teruma</i> in the possession of a priest,</b> as he may partake of it and benefit from it in Jerusalem; <b>and</b> nevertheless, <b>it is taught:</b> They <b>must be interred? Rather, if</b> the statement of Rav Ḥisda <b>was stated, this is what was stated: Rav Ḥisda says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <b>only</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> that is already <b>in the possession of a priest</b> who lives in the idolatrous city, as even though it is his property, it maintains the sanctity of <i>teruma</i>. <b>But <i>teruma</i></b> that is still <b>in the possession of an Israelite,</b> which is not his property at all, <b>shall be given to a priest who is in another city,</b> and should not be left to decay.

### Part 12
<b>We learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>there: Second-tithe dough is exempt from</b> having <b><i>ḥalla</i></b> separated since it is property belonging to the Most High; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis deem</b> one <b>liable</b> to separate <i>ḥalla</i> from second-tithe dough. <b>Rav Ḥisda says:</b> This <b>dispute</b> is <b>with regard to second tithe in Jerusalem; as Rabbi Meir holds: Second-tithe</b> produce <b>is property</b> belonging <b>to the Most High,</b> but the Torah permitted its owners to partake of it in Jerusalem. Since it is the property of Heaven, one is exempt from separating priestly gifts. <b>And the Rabbis hold: It is non-sacred property</b> from which one is liable to separate <i>ḥalla</i>. <b>But</b> with regard to second-tithe dough <b>in the outlying areas, everyone agrees that one is exempt</b> from separating <i>ḥalla</i>, as outside of Jerusalem it is prohibited to partake of it.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yosef raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>Second tithe and sacred scrolls must be interred. What are we dealing with? If we say</b> that the reference is to second tithe <b>in Jerusalem, can</b> Jerusalem <b>be an idolatrous city? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ten matters were stated with regard to Jerusalem, and this is one of them: It does not become an idolatrous city. Rather,</b> apparently the reference is to second tithe <b>in a different city</b> that was rendered an idolatrous city, <b>and</b> before it was so rendered <b>one took</b> the second-tithe produce <b>up into</b> Jerusalem. The Gemara asks: In that case, <b>wasn’t</b> the produce <b>admitted</b> by <b>the walls</b> of Jerusalem, making it no longer associated with the idolatrous city, and it should therefore be permitted to partake of it?

### Part 14
<b>Rather,</b> is the reference in the mishna <b>not</b> to second-tithe produce <b>in an outlying area? And it is taught:</b> They <b>must be interred.</b> Apparently, second-tithe produce is not the property of Heaven; it belongs to an inhabitant of the idolatrous city. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, actually,</b> the reference in the mishna is to second-tithe produce <b>in a different city, and</b> before it was rendered an idolatrous city <b>one took</b> the second-tithe produce <b>up into</b> Jerusalem. <b>And what are we dealing with here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where</b> that second-tithe produce <b>became ritually impure.</b> Since it is prohibited to partake of it, there is no alternative to interment.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let him redeem it</b> in Jerusalem, <b>as Rabbi Elazar says: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to second-tithe</b> produce <b>that became impure, that one may redeem it even in Jerusalem?</b> As <b>the verse states:</b> “And if the way is too long for you <b>so that you are unable to carry it [<i>se’eto</i>]…</b>and you shall turn it into money” (Deuteronomy 14:24–25). <b>And <i>se’et</i></b> means <b>nothing other than eating, as it is stated: “And he took portions [<i>masot</i>] from before him”</b> (Genesis 43:34), indicating that second-tithe produce that cannot be eaten, whether due to the distance from Jerusalem or due to its impurity, may be redeemed. The Gemara answers: <b>What are we dealing with here?</b> It is not a case where the second-tithe produce became impure; rather, it is a case <b>where</b> an item <b>purchased</b> with second-tithe money became impure.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC