
### Part 1
<b>Why would we</b> want <b>this trouble?</b> Perhaps it would be better not to testify at all. <b>But</b> be aware, as <b>is it not already stated: “And he being a witness, whether he has seen or known, if he does not utter it,</b> then he shall bear his iniquity” (Leviticus 5:1)? It is a transgression not to testify when one can do so. <b>And perhaps you will say: Why would we</b> want <b>to be responsible for the blood of this</b> person? <b>But</b> be aware, as <b>is it not already stated: “When the wicked perish, there is song”</b> (Proverbs 11:10)?

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How does</b> the court describe testimony <b>based on conjecture?</b> The court <b>says to</b> the witnesses: <b>Perhaps you saw</b> this man about whom you are testifying <b>pursuing another into a ruin, and you pursued him and found a sword in his hand, dripping</b> with <b>blood, and the one</b> who was ultimately <b>killed</b> was <b>convulsing. If you saw</b> only <b>this,</b> it is as if <b>you saw nothing,</b> and you cannot testify to the murder.

### Part 3
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Shataḥ said</b> as an oath: <b>I will</b> not <b>see the consolation</b> of Israel <b>if I did not</b> once <b>see one</b> person <b>pursue another into a ruin, and I pursued him and saw a sword in his hand, dripping</b> with <b>blood, and the one</b> who was ultimately <b>killed</b> was <b>convulsing. And I said to him: Wicked person, who has killed this man? Either you or I. But what can I do, since your blood is not given over to me, as the Torah states: “At the mouth of two witnesses,</b> or three witnesses, <b>shall he that is to die be put to death”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:6), and I did not witness you killing him. <b>The One Who knows</b> one’s <b>thoughts shall punish this man who killed another.</b> The Sages <b>said: They did not move from there before a snake came and bit the</b> murderer, <b>and he died.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara questions this account: <b>But was this</b> murderer <b>fit</b> to die by being bitten <b>by a snake? But doesn’t Rav Yosef say, and so the school of Ḥizkiyya</b> also <b>taught: From the day that the Temple was destroyed, although the Sanhedrin ceased</b> to be extant, the <b>four</b> types of court-imposed <b>capital punishment have not ceased.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Have they</b> really <b>not ceased? But they have ceased,</b> as court-imposed capital punishment is no longer given. <b>Rather,</b> the intention is that <b>the <i>halakha</i> of</b> the <b>four</b> types of court-imposed <b>capital punishment has not ceased</b> to be applicable.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: How so? For <b>one who</b> would <b>be liable</b> to be executed by <b>stoning, either</b> he <b>falls from a roof or an animal mauls him</b> and breaks his bones. This death is similar to death by stoning, in which the one liable to be executed is pushed from a platform and his bones break from the impact of the fall. For <b>one who</b> would <b>be liable</b> to be executed by <b>burning, either</b> he <b>falls into a fire</b> and is burned <b>or a snake bites him,</b> as a snakebite causes a burning sensation. For <b>one who</b> would <b>be liable to</b> be executed by <b>slaying</b> through decapitation by the sword, <b>either</b> he <b>is turned over to the authorities</b> and they execute him with a sword, <b>or robbers come upon him</b> and murder him. <b>One who</b> would <b>be liable</b> to be executed by <b>strangling either drowns in a river</b> and is choked by the water <b>or dies of diphtheria [<i>bisronekhi</i>],</b> which causes his breathing to become constricted. According to this, a murderer, whose verdict in court would be death by slaying, should not be bitten by a snake.

### Part 6
The Sages <b>say</b> in explanation: <b>That</b> murderer <b>had another sin</b> for which he deserved execution by burning, and <b>as the Master says: One who is found liable</b> by the court <b>to</b> receive <b>two</b> types of <b>court-imposed capital punishment is sentenced to the harsher</b> of the two, and burning is considered a harsher death than slaying (see 50a).

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches that in cases of capital law the court warns the witnesses not to testify <b>based on conjecture.</b> The Gemara comments: One can infer that it is only <b>in</b> cases of <b>capital law that we do not</b> rule based on <b>conjecture, but in</b> cases of <b>monetary law, we do</b> rule based on <b>conjecture. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is the mishna taught? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Aḥa. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Bava Kamma</i> 3:6) that <b>Rabbi Aḥa says:</b> If there was <b>a rutting</b> male <b>camel</b> that was rampaging <b>among</b> other <b>camels, and</b> then <b>a camel was found killed at its side, it is evident that this</b> rampaging camel <b>killed it,</b> and the owner must pay for the damage caused. The <i>baraita</i> indicates that Rabbi Aḥa rules that cases of monetary law are decided based on conjecture.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to your reasoning,</b> with regard to <b>that</b> which the mishna <b>teaches,</b> that the court warns the witnesses not to provide <b>testimony</b> based on <b>hearsay,</b> should one infer that it is <b>in</b> cases of <b>capital law that we do not say</b> that testimony based on hearsay is allowed, <b>but in</b> cases of <b>monetary law, we do say</b> that testimony based on hearsay is allowed? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (29a): <b>If</b> the witness <b>said:</b> The defendant <b>said to me:</b> It is true <b>that I owe</b> the plaintiff, or if he says: <b>So-and-so said to me that</b> the defendant <b>owes</b> the plaintiff, the witness <b>has said nothing,</b> i.e., his testimony is disregarded. These two statements by witnesses are examples of testimony based on hearsay, yet they are not valid in cases of monetary law. A witness’s testimony is not valid testimony <b>unless he says,</b> for example: The defendant <b>admitted in our presence to</b> the plaintiff <b>that he owes him two hundred dinars,</b> as by admitting the debt in the presence of witnesses he rendered himself liable to pay the amount that he mentioned.

### Part 9
<b>Evidently, although</b> testimony based on hearsay <b>is invalid in</b> cases of <b>monetary law, we tell</b> the witnesses to be aware of this <b>in capital law. Here, too,</b> with regard to testimony based on conjecture, one can say that <b>although</b> testimony based on conjecture <b>is invalid in</b> cases of <b>monetary law, we tell</b> the witnesses to be aware of this <b>in</b> cases of <b>capital law.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that the court would say: <b>You should know</b> that cases of capital law are not like cases of monetary law, and would reference the murder of Abel by Cain. <b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, says:</b> By employing the plural term for blood, “The voice of your brother’s blood [<i>demei</i>] cries out to Me from the ground” (Genesis 4:10), the verse <b>teaches that Cain caused multiple wounds</b> and <b>multiple injuries to his brother Abel. As</b> Cain <b>did not know from where the soul departs,</b> he struck him multiple times. This continued <b>until he came to his neck</b> and struck him there, whereupon Abel died.

### Part 11
<b>And Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, says: From the day the earth opened its mouth and received the blood of Abel,</b> its mouth <b>has not opened again, as it is stated: “From the corner of the earth have we heard songs: Glory to the righteous”</b> (Isaiah 24:16): One can infer that the songs are heard <b>“from the corner of the earth,” but not from the mouth of the earth,</b> as the earth never again opened its mouth. <b>Ḥizkiyya,</b> Rav Yehuda’s <b>brother, raised an objection to</b> Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya: The verse states concerning Korah and his assembly: <b>“And the earth opened her mouth</b> and swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their goods” (Numbers 16:32). Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>said to him:</b> It <b>opened</b> again <b>for a deleterious</b> purpose; it <b>did not open</b> again <b>for a constructive</b> purpose.

### Part 12
<b>And Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, says: Exile atones</b> for <b>half</b> of <b>a sin.</b> As <b>initially</b> it <b>is written</b> in the verse concerning Cain that he said: <b>“And I shall be a fugitive [<i>na</i>] and a wanderer [<i>vanad</i> ]</b> in the earth” (Genesis 4:14), <b>and ultimately</b> it <b>is written:</b> “And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, <b>and dwelt in the land of Nod”</b> (Genesis 4:16). Rav Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, equates “Nod” with “<i>nad</i>,” and understands that Cain was given only the punishment of being a wanderer. Exile atoned for half his sin, thereby negating the punishment of being a fugitive.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yehuda says: Exile atones</b> for <b>three matters,</b> i.e., three types of death, <b>as it is stated: “So says the Lord:</b> Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death. <b>He that abides in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goes out, and falls away to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall survive, and his life shall be for him for a prey”</b> (Jeremiah 21:8–9), indicating that exile from Jerusalem will save one from those three deaths.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Exile atones for all</b> transgressions and renders a sinner like a new person, <b>as it is stated</b> concerning the king Jeconiah, a descendant of King David: <b>“So says the Lord: Write you this man childless, a man that shall not prosper in his days; for no man of his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling anymore in Judah”</b> (Jeremiah 22:30). <b>And after</b> Jeconiah <b>was exiled it is written: “And the sons of Jeconiah, the same is Assir, Shealtiel his son”</b> (I Chronicles 3:17). The verse employs the plural “sons of” although he had only one son, Shealtiel. <b>“Assir,”</b> literally, prisoner, teaches <b>that his mother conceived him in prison. “Shealtiel,”</b> literally, planted by God, teaches <b>that God planted him in a way atypical of</b> most <b>plants [<i>hanishtalin</i>],</b> i.e., people. It <b>is learned</b> as a tradition <b>that a woman does not conceive</b> when she is <b>standing</b> during sexual intercourse,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC