
### Part 1
<b>by</b> those <b>who were invited</b> by the <i>Nasi</i>, the president of the Great Sanhedrin, <b>for that</b> purpose. There was <b>an incident involving Rabban Gamliel, who said</b> to the Sages: <b>Bring me seven</b> of the Sages <b>early</b> tomorrow morning <b>to the loft</b> designated for convening a court to intercalate the year. He <b>went</b> to the loft <b>early</b> the next morning <b>and found eight</b> Sages there. Rabban Gamliel <b>said: Who is it who ascended</b> to the loft <b>without permission? He must descend</b> immediately.

### Part 2
<b>Shmuel HaKatan stood</b> up <b>and said: I am he who ascended without permission; and I did not ascend to</b> participate and be one of those to <b>intercalate the year, but</b> rather <b>I needed</b> to observe in order <b>to learn the practical <i>halakha</i>.</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>said to him: Sit, my son, sit. It would be fitting for all of the years to be intercalated by you,</b> as you are truly worthy. <b>But the Sages said: The year</b> may be <b>intercalated only by</b> those <b>who were invited for that</b> purpose. The Gemara notes: <b>And it was not</b> actually <b>Shmuel HaKatan</b> who had come uninvited, <b>but another person. And due to the embarrassment</b> of the other, Shmuel HaKatan <b>did</b> this, so that no one would know who had come uninvited.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates that the story about Shmuel HaKatan is <b>similar</b> to an incident that occurred <b>when Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi was <b>sitting and teaching, and</b> he <b>smelled the odor of garlic.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi was very sensitive and could not tolerate this odor. He <b>said: Whoever ate garlic</b> should <b>leave. Rabbi Ḥiyya stood up and left.</b> Out of respect for Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>all of those</b> in attendance <b>stood up and left.</b> The next day, <b>in the morning, Rabbi Shimon, son of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>found Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> and he <b>said to him:</b> Are <b>you the one who disturbed my father</b> by coming to the lecture with the foul smell of garlic? Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to him: There should not be such</b> behavior <b>among the Jewish people.</b> I would not do such a thing, but I assumed the blame and left so that the one who did so would not be embarrassed.

### Part 4
<b>And from where did Rabbi Ḥiyya learn that</b> characteristic of being willing to implicate himself in order to save someone else from being embarrassed? He learned it <b>from Rabbi Meir, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There was <b>an incident involving</b> a certain <b>woman who came to the study hall of Rabbi Meir. She said to him: My teacher, one of you,</b> i.e., one of the men studying in this study hall, <b>betrothed me through intercourse.</b> The woman came to Rabbi Meir to appeal for help in identifying the man, so that he would either marry her or grant her a divorce. As he himself was also among those who studied in the study hall, <b>Rabbi Meir arose and wrote her a bill of divorce, and</b> he <b>gave it to her.</b> Following his example, <b>all those</b> in the study hall <b>arose</b> and <b>wrote</b> bills of divorce <b>and gave</b> them <b>to her.</b> In this manner, the right man also gave her a divorce, freeing her to marry someone else.

### Part 5
<b>And from where did Rabbi Meir learn that</b> characteristic? <b>From Shmuel HaKatan,</b> in the incident outlined above. <b>And from where did Shmuel HaKatan learn it? From Shecaniah ben Jehiel, as it is written: “And Shecaniah, the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said to Ezra: We have broken faith with our God, and have married foreign women of the peoples of the land; yet now there is hope for Israel concerning this”</b> (Ezra 10:2). And although he confessed, Shecaniah is not listed among those who took foreign wives (Ezra 10:18–44). Evidently, he confessed only to spare the others from public embarrassment.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues: <b>And from where did Shecaniah ben Jehiel learn it? From</b> an incident involving <b>Joshua, as it is written: “And the Lord said to Joshua: Get yourself up; why do you fall upon your face? Israel has sinned”</b> (Joshua 7:10–11). Joshua <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, who sinned?</b> God <b>said to him: And am I your informer?</b> Rather, <b>cast lots</b> to determine who is guilty. In this way, God did not directly disclose the identity of the sinner to Joshua. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that Shecaniah ben Jehiel learned this <b>from</b> an incident involving <b>Moses, as it is written:</b> “And the Lord said to Moses: <b>How long do you refuse</b> to keep My mitzvot and My laws?” (Exodus 16:28). Although only a small number of people attempted to collect the manna on Shabbat, God spoke as though the entire nation were guilty, so as not to directly expose the guilty.

### Part 7
§ Since Shmuel HaKatan and his great piety were mentioned, the Gemara now relates several incidents that shed additional light on his personality. <b>The Sages taught: After the last of the prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, died, the Divine Spirit</b> of prophetic revelation <b>departed from the Jewish people. But nevertheless, they were</b> still <b>utilizing a Divine Voice,</b> which they heard as a kind of echo of prophecy. <b>One time,</b> a group of Sages <b>were reclining in the loft of the house of Gurya in Jericho, and a Divine Voice was bestowed upon them from Heaven,</b> saying: <b>There is one here who is fit for the Divine Presence to rest upon him as</b> it rested upon <b>Moses our teacher, but his generation is not deserving of this</b> distinction. <b>The Sages set their eyes upon Hillel the Elder,</b> trusting that he was the one indicated by the Divine Voice. <b>And when he died,</b> the Sages <b>said about him: Alas,</b> the <b>pious</b> man, <b>alas,</b> the <b>humble</b> man, <b>a disciple of Ezra.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Another time,</b> a group of Sages <b>were reclining in the loft in Yavne, and a Divine Voice was bestowed upon them from Heaven,</b> saying: <b>There is one here who is fit for the Divine Presence to rest upon him</b> in prophecy, <b>but his generation is not deserving of this</b> distinction. <b>The Sages set their eyes upon Shmuel HaKatan. And when</b> he <b>died,</b> the Sages <b>said about him: Alas,</b> the <b>pious</b> man, <b>alas,</b> the <b>humble</b> man, <b>a disciple of Hillel. Additionally, he said at the time of his death,</b> under the influence of the Divine Spirit: Rabban <b>Shimon</b> ben Gamliel, the <i>Nasi</i> of the Great Sanhedrin, <b>and</b> Rabbi <b>Yishmael,</b> the High Priest, will die <b>by the sword, and their friends</b> will die <b>by</b> other <b>executions, and the rest of the nation</b> will be <b>despoiled, and great troubles will ultimately come upon the world.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And</b> they also <b>wished to say thus:</b> Alas, the pious man, alas, the humble man, <b>about Yehuda ben Bava,</b> in their eulogy for him, <b>but the hour was torn,</b> i.e., the opportunity was lost, <b>as</b> one <b>does not eulogize those executed by the government.</b> As will be explained (14a), Yehuda ben Bava was executed by the government.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara returns to the discussion about intercalation of the year. <b>The Sages taught: The year</b> may be <b>intercalated only if the <i>Nasi</i></b> of the Sanhedrin <b>wants</b> to intercalate it. <b>And</b> there was once <b>an incident involving Rabban Gamliel, who went to ask permission</b> for some communal matter <b>from an officer [<i>hegmon</i>] in Syria, and</b> he <b>tarried in returning</b> until after it was too late to intercalate the year. <b>And</b> because they did not know what his opinion on the matter was, they <b>intercalated the year on the condition that Rabban Gamliel would want</b> to do so. <b>And when Rabban Gamliel came</b> back <b>and said: I want</b> to intercalate the year, <b>the year was found</b> to be retroactively <b>intercalated.</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught: The year</b> may be <b>intercalated only if it is necessary due to</b> damage to <b>the roads,</b> if the rain has damaged them in such a way that they are inaccessible for those ascending to Jerusalem for Passover; <b>or due to the bridges</b> that are likewise in disrepair; <b>or due to the ovens</b> for the <b>Paschal offerings</b> that are damaged and unfit for roasting the offerings; <b>or due to the Diaspora Jews who have left their homes and still have not arrived</b> due to delays in travel. <b>But</b> the year may <b>not</b> be intercalated <b>due to the snow, and not due to the cold, and not due to the Diaspora Jews who have not</b> yet <b>left from their homes,</b> even if they no longer have enough time to reach Jerusalem for the Festival.

### Part 12
<b>The Sages taught: The year may not</b> be <b>intercalated due to the young goats and not due to the lambs,</b> to allow them to grow larger before they are to be sacrificed as Paschal offerings; <b>and not due to the fledgling</b> doves <b>who have not</b> yet developed sufficiently to <b>fly,</b> so that there won’t be enough of them to supply all those who wish to bring bird offerings at the Festival. <b>But</b> all <b>these</b> considerations may be <b>made supporting</b> factors in the decision <b>to</b> intercalate <b>the year.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How</b> so? <b>Rabbi Yannai says in the name of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel,</b> i.e., this is the language Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel used in his declaration of the intercalation: <b>We are notifying you that the fledglings are tender, and that the lambs are thin [<i>de’arkin</i>], and time for the spring has not</b> yet <b>arrived. And</b> consequently, <b>the matter is good in my eyes, and I have</b> therefore <b>added thirty days onto this year.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the report that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel holds the intercalated month is thirty days long. It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How long is</b> the additional month in <b>an intercalated</b> leap <b>year?</b> The Rabbis say: <b>Thirty days. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> A standard <b>month,</b> which is twenty-nine days long. What, then, does Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel hold? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> Rabban Gamliel holds that if the court <b>wants,</b> it may add a standard <b>month,</b> and if it <b>wants,</b> it may add a month of <b>thirty days.</b>

### Part 14
Concerning the declaration of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, the Gemara observes: <b>Come</b> and <b>see what</b> difference <b>there is between</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC