
### Part 1
<b>his torso</b> was fashioned from dust taken <b>from Babylonia, and his head</b> was fashioned from dust taken <b>from Eretz Yisrael,</b> the most important land, <b>and his limbs</b> were fashioned from dust taken <b>from the rest of the lands</b> in the world. With regard to <b>his buttocks, Rav Aḥa says:</b> They were fashioned from dust taken <b>from Akra De’agma,</b> on the outskirts of Babylonia.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Ḥanina says: Daytime is twelve hours</b> long, and the day Adam the first man was created was divided as follows: In the <b>first hour</b> of the day, <b>his dust was gathered.</b> In the <b>second,</b> an undefined <b>figure was fashioned.</b> In the <b>third, his limbs were extended.</b> In the <b>fourth, a soul was cast into him.</b> In the <b>fifth, he stood on his legs.</b> In the <b>sixth, he called</b> the creatures by the <b>names</b> he gave them. In the <b>seventh, Eve was paired with him.</b> In the <b>eighth, they arose to the bed two, and descended four,</b> i.e., Cain and Abel were immediately born. In the <b>ninth, he was commanded not to eat of the Tree</b> of Knowledge. In the <b>tenth, he sinned.</b> In the <b>eleventh, he was judged.</b> In the <b>twelfth, he was expelled and left</b> the Garden of Eden, <b>as it is stated: “But man abides not in honor;</b> he is like the beasts that perish” (Psalms 49:13). Adam did not abide, i.e., sleep, in a place of honor for even one night.

### Part 3
<b>Rami bar Ḥama says</b> in explanation of the end of that verse: <b>A wild animal does not have power over a person unless</b> that person <b>seems to</b> the wild animal <b>like an animal, as it is stated: “He is like the beasts that perish.”</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara presents <b>a mnemonic</b> for the statements that follow: <b>At the time, to the end, Aramaic. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: At the time that the Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to create a person, He created one group of ministering angels. He said to them:</b> If <b>you agree, let us fashion a person in our image.</b> The angels <b>said before him: Master of the Universe, what are the actions of</b> this person You suggest to create? God <b>said to them: His actions are such and such,</b> according to human nature.

### Part 5
The angels <b>said before him: Master of the Universe: “What is man that You are mindful of him? And the son of man that You think of him?”</b> (Psalms 8:5), i.e., a creature such as this is not worth creating. God <b>outstretched His small finger among them and burned them</b> with fire. <b>And the same</b> occurred with <b>a second group</b> of angels. The <b>third group</b> of angels that He asked <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, the first</b> two groups <b>who spoke</b> their mind <b>before You, what did they accomplish? The entire world is Yours; whatever You wish to do in Your world, do.</b> God then created the first person.

### Part 6
<b>When</b> history <b>arrived at</b> the time of <b>the people of the generation of the flood and the people of the generation of the dispersion,</b> i.e., the Tower of Babel, <b>whose actions were ruinous,</b> the angels <b>said before God: Master of the Universe, didn’t the</b> first set of angels <b>speak appropriately before You,</b> that human beings are not worthy of having been created? God <b>said to them</b> concerning humanity: <b>“Even to your old age I am the same; and even to hoar hairs will I suffer you;</b> I have made and I will bear; and I will carry, and I will deliver you” (Isaiah 46:4), i.e., having created people, I will even suffer their flaws.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Adam the first</b> man spanned <b>from one end of the world until the other, as it is stated: “Since the day that God created man upon the earth, and from the one end of heaven unto the other”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:32), meaning that on the day Adam was created he spanned from one end of the heavens until the other. <b>Once</b> Adam <b>sinned, the Holy One, Blessed be He, placed His hand on him and diminished him, as it is stated: “Behind and before You have created me and laid Your hand upon me”</b> (Psalms 139:5), that at first Adam spanned “behind and before,” meaning everywhere, and then God laid His hand on him and diminished him.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The height of <b>Adam the first</b> man <b>was from the ground until the firmament, as it is stated: “Since the day that God created man upon the earth, and from the one end of heaven unto the other.”</b> Adam stood “upon the earth” and rose to the end of the heavens. <b>Once</b> Adam <b>sinned, the Holy One, Blessed be He, placed His hand on him and diminished him, as it is stated: “Behind and before You have created me</b> and laid Your hand upon me.” The Gemara asks: The interpretations of <b>the verses contradict each other.</b> The first interpretation is that his size was from one end of the world to the other, and the second interpretation is that it was from the earth until the heavens. The Gemara answers: <b>This and that,</b> from one end of the world to another and from the earth until the heavens, <b>are one measure,</b> i.e., the same distance.

### Part 9
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Adam the first</b> man <b>spoke in the language of Aramaic, as it is stated</b> in the chapter of Psalms speaking in the voice of Adam: <b>“How weighty also are Your thoughts to me, O God”</b> (Psalms 139:17).

### Part 10
<b>And this,</b> i.e., that the verse in Psalms is stated by Adam, is what <b>Reish Lakish says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “This is the book of the generations of Adam”</b> (Genesis 5:1)? This verse <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, showed</b> Adam <b>every generation and its</b> Torah <b>interpreters, every generation and its wise ones. When he arrived at</b> his vision of <b>the generation of Rabbi Akiva,</b> Adam <b>was gladdened by his Torah, and saddened by his</b> manner of <b>death. He said: “How weighty also are Your thoughts to me, O God,”</b> i.e., how it weighs upon me that a man as great as Rabbi Akiva should suffer.

### Part 11
<b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Adam the first</b> man <b>was a heretic, as it is stated: “And the Lord called to the man and said to him: Where are you”?</b> (Genesis 3:9), meaning, to <b>where has your heart turned,</b> indicating that Adam turned from the path of truth. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: He was</b> one who <b>drew his foreskin</b> forward, so as to remove any indication that he was circumcised. It <b>is written here: “And they like men [<i>adam</i>] have transgressed the covenant”</b> (Hosea 6:7), <b>and</b> it <b>is written there:</b> “And the uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people; <b>he has broken My covenant”</b> (Genesis 17:14).

### Part 12
<b>Rav Naḥman says: He was a denier of the fundamental principle</b> of belief in God. It <b>is written here:</b> “And they like men [<i>adam</i>] <b>have transgressed the covenant,” and</b> it <b>is written there: “He has broken My covenant,”</b> and it is written in a third verse: <b>“And then they shall answer: Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their God</b> and worshipped other gods and served them” (Jeremiah 22:9).

### Part 13
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Avot</i> 4:4): <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Be persistent to learn Torah, and know what to respond to the heretic [<i>la’apikoros</i>]. Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> This was <b>taught only</b> with regard to <b>a gentile heretic, but</b> not with regard to <b>a Jewish heretic,</b> as one should not respond to him. <b>All the more so,</b> if one does respond <b>he will become more heretical.</b> His heresy is assumed to be intentional, and any attempt to rebut it will only cause him to reinforce his position.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Any place</b> in the Bible from <b>where the heretics</b> attempt to <b>prove their heresy,</b> i.e., that there is more than one god, <b>the response to their</b> claim is <b>alongside them,</b> i.e., in the immediate vicinity of the verses they cite. The verse states that God said: <b>“Let us make man in our image”</b> (Genesis 1:26), employing the plural, <b>but it</b> then <b>states: “And God created man in His image”</b> (Genesis 1:27), employing the singular. The verse states that God said: <b>“Come, let us go down and there confound their language”</b> (Genesis 11:7), but it also states: <b>“And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower”</b> (Genesis 11:5). The verse states in the plural: <b>“There God was revealed [<i>niglu</i>] to him</b> when he fled from the face of his brother” (Genesis 35:7), but it also states in the singular: <b>“To God Who answers [<i>haoneh</i>] me in the day of my distress”</b> (Genesis 35:3).

### Part 15
Rabbi Yoḥanan cites several examples where the counterclaim is in the same verse as the claim of the heretics. The verse states: <b>“For what nation is there so great that has God so near to them as the Lord our God is whenever we call upon Him?”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:7), where the term “near” is written in plural, <i>kerovim</i>, but the term “upon Him” is written in singular. Another verse states: <b>“And who is like Your people, like Israel, a nation one in the earth, whom God went to redeem unto Himself for a people?”</b> (II Samuel 7:23), where the term “went” is written in plural, <i>halekhu</i>, but the term “Himself” is written in singular. Another verse states: “I beheld <b>till thrones were placed, and one that was ancient of days did sit”</b> (Daniel 7:9); where the term “thrones” is written in plural, <i>kharsavan</i>, but the term “sit” is written in singular.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>these</b> instances of plural words? Why does the verse employ the plural at all when referring to God? The Gemara explains: This is <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The Holy One, Blessed be He, does not act unless He consults with the entourage of Above,</b> i.e., the angels, <b>as it is stated: “The matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the sentence by the word of the holy ones”</b> (Daniel 4:14).

### Part 17
The Gemara clarifies: This <b>works out well for</b> almost <b>all</b> the verses, as they describe an action taken by God, but <b>what is there to say</b> concerning the verse: “I beheld <b>till thrones were placed”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> throne is <b>for Him and one</b> throne is <b>for David,</b> i.e., the messiah, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> throne is <b>for Him and one</b> throne is <b>for David;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yosei said to him: Akiva! Until when will you desacralize the Divine Presence</b> by equating God with a person? <b>Rather,</b> the correct interpretation is that both thrones are for God, as <b>one</b> throne is <b>for judgment and one</b> throne is <b>for righteousness.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: Did Rabbi Akiva <b>accept</b> this explanation <b>from</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>or</b> did he <b>not accept it from him?</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof to the matter from what was taught in another <i>baraita</i>, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> throne is <b>for judgment and one</b> throne is <b>for righteousness;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said to him: Akiva! What are you doing near,</b> i.e., discussing, matters of <b><i>aggada</i>? Go near</b> tractates <b><i>Nega’im</i> and <i>Oholot</i>,</b> which examine the complex <i>halakhot</i> of ritual purity, where your knowledge is unparalleled. <b>Rather,</b> the correct interpretation is that while both thrones are for God, <b>one</b> is <b>for a throne and one</b> is <b>for a stool.</b> There is <b>a throne for God to sit upon, and a stool</b> that serves <b>as His footstool.</b>

### Part 19
<b>Rav Naḥman says: This one,</b> i.e., any person, <b>who knows</b> how <b>to respond to the heretics</b> as effectively <b>as Rav Idit should respond</b> to them, <b>but if</b> he does <b>not</b> know, he <b>should not respond</b> to them. The Gemara relates: <b>A certain heretic said to Rav Idit:</b> It <b>is written</b> in the verse concerning God: <b>“And to Moses He said: Come up to the Lord”</b> (Exodus 24:1). The heretic raised a question: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>Come up to Me.</b> Rav Idit <b>said to him: This</b> term, “the Lord,” in that verse <b>is</b> referring to the angel <b>Metatron, whose name is like the name of his Master, as it is written:</b> “Behold I send an angel before you to keep you in the way and to bring you to the place that I have prepared. Take heed of him and obey his voice; do not defy him; for he will not pardon your transgression, <b>for My name is in him”</b> (Exodus 23:20–21).

### Part 20
The heretic said to him: <b>If so,</b> if this angel is equated with God, <b>we should worship him</b> as we worship God. Rav Idit said to him: It <b>is written: “Do not defy [<i>tammer</i>] him,”</b> which alludes to: <b>Do not replace Me [<i>temireni</i>] with him.</b> The heretic said to him: <b>If so, why do I</b> need the clause <b>“For he will not pardon your transgression”?</b> Rav Idit <b>said to him: We believe that we did not accept</b> the angel <b>even as a guide [<i>befarvanka</i>]</b> for the journey, <b>as it is written: “And he said to him: If Your Presence go not with me</b> raise us not up from here” (Exodus 33:15). Moses told God that if God Himself does not accompany the Jewish people they do not want to travel to Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 21
The Gemara relates: <b>A certain heretic said to Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei:</b> It <b>is written: “And the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord</b> out of heaven” (Genesis 19:24). The heretic raised the question: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>From Him</b> out of heaven. <b>A certain launderer said to</b> Rabbi Yishmael: <b>Leave him be; I will respond to him.</b> This is <b>as it is written: “And Lemech said to his wives: Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; wives of Lemech,</b> hearken to my speech” (Genesis 4:23). One can raise the question: <b>It should have</b> been written: <b>My wives,</b> and not: “Wives of Lemech.” <b>Rather, it is</b> the style of <b>the verse</b> to <b>speak in this</b> manner. <b>Here too, it is</b> the style of <b>the verse</b> to <b>speak in this</b> manner. Rabbi Yishmael <b>said to</b> the launderer: <b>From where did you</b> hear <b>this</b> interpretation? The launderer <b>said to him: I heard it at the lecture of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 22
The Gemara comments: This is <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: When Rabbi Meir would teach his lecture he would expound one-third <i>halakha</i>, one-third <i>aggada</i>,</b> and <b>one-third parables. And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Meir had,</b> i.e., taught, <b>three hundred parables of foxes, and we have only three.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC