
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are the ones who are saved</b> from transgressing even <b>at</b> the cost of <b>their lives;</b> that is to say, these people may be killed so that they do not perform a transgression: <b>One who pursues another to kill him, or</b> pursues <b>a male</b> to sodomize him, <b>or</b> pursues <b>a betrothed young woman</b> to rape her. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>one who pursues an animal</b> to sodomize it, <b>or one who</b> seeks to <b>desecrate Shabbat, or</b> one who is going to <b>engage in idol worship,</b> they <b>are not saved at</b> the cost of <b>their lives.</b> Rather, they are forewarned not to transgress, and if they proceed to transgress after having been forewarned, they are brought to trial, and if they are found guilty, they are executed.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that with regard to one who pursues another</b> in order <b>to kill him,</b> the pursued party <b>may be saved at</b> the cost of the pursuer’s <b>life? The verse states: “You shall not stand idly by the blood of another”</b> (Leviticus 19:16); rather, you must save him from death. The Gemara asks: <b>But does this</b> verse really <b>come to</b> teach us <b>this? This</b> verse <b>is required for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that one who sees another drowning in a river, or being dragged away by</b> a wild <b>animal, or being attacked by bandits [<i>listin</i>], is obligated to save him? The Torah states: “You shall not stand idly by the blood of another.”</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> it <b>is indeed so</b> that this verse relates to the obligation to save one whose life is in danger.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks again: <b>But from where do we</b> derive that one <b>may be saved at</b> the cost of the pursuer’s <b>life?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>derived by means of an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> governing <b>a betrothed young woman</b> who was assaulted by a rapist: <b>If</b> in the case of <b>a betrothed young woman, whom</b> the rapist <b>comes only to degrade,</b> i.e., the result of the rape will be that her status is lowered, <b>the Torah said</b> that <b>she may be saved</b> even <b>at</b> the cost of the rapist’s <b>life,</b> then in the case of <b>one who pursues another</b> person <b>to kill him, all the more so</b> should one say that he may be saved even at the cost of the pursuer’s life.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But does</b> the court <b>administer punishment</b> based <b>on</b> an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference?</b> The Gemara answers: A Sage <b>of the school of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught:</b> This <i>halakha</i> <b>is</b> also derived from an analogy based on <b>a juxtaposition.</b> How so? With regard to the rape of a betrothed young woman it is written: “But you shall do nothing to the young woman; the young woman has committed no sin worthy of death; <b>for as when a man rises against his neighbor, and slays him,</b> so too with this matter” (Deuteronomy 22:26). But why would the verse mention murder in this context? <b>But what do we learn</b> here <b>from a murderer?</b>

### Part 5
<b>Now,</b> the mention of murder <b>came</b> in order <b>to teach</b> a <i>halakha</i> about the betrothed young woman, <b>and it turns out</b> that, in addition, <b>it derives</b> a <i>halakha</i> from that case. The Torah <b>juxtaposes</b> the case of <b>a murderer to</b> the case of <b>a betrothed young woman</b> to indicate that <b>just as</b> in the case of a betrothed young woman <b>one may save her at</b> the cost of the rapist’s <b>life, so too,</b> in the case of <b>a murderer, one may save</b> the potential victim <b>at</b> the cost of the murderer’s <b>life.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to the <b>betrothed young woman herself, from where do we</b> derive that she may be saved at the cost of the rapist’s life? The Gemara explains: <b>As it was taught in the school of Rabbi Yishmael:</b> The verse states: “For he found her in the field, and the betrothed young woman cried out, <b>and there was none to save her”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:27). <b>But if there was someone to save her,</b> he must do so <b>by any means that can save</b> her, even by killing the potential rapist.

### Part 7
Concerning <b>the</b> matter <b>itself,</b> it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that one who sees another drowning in a river, or being dragged away by</b> a wild <b>animal, or being attacked by bandits, is obligated to save him? The verse states: “You shall not stand idly by the blood of another”</b> (Leviticus 19:16). The Gemara asks about this derivation: <b>But is this</b> really <b>derived from here?</b> It is <b>derived from there,</b> i.e., from a different verse, as it is taught: The Torah teaches that one must return lost property to its rightful owner. But <b>from where</b> is it derived that one must help his neighbor who may suffer <b>the loss of his body</b> or his health? <b>The verse states: “And you shall restore it [<i>vahashevato</i>] to him [<i>lo</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:2), which can also be read as: And you shall restore him [<i>vehashevato</i>] to him, i.e., saving his body. Consequently, there should be no need for the additional verse: “You shall not stand idly by the blood of another.”

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> this <i>halakha</i> were derived only <b>from there, I would say</b> that <b>this matter</b> applies only <b>to</b> saving the person in danger <b>by himself,</b> i.e., that he himself must come to his neighbor’s rescue if he can, as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to returning a lost item. <b>But to trouble himself and hire workers</b> for this purpose, one might <b>say</b> that he is <b>not</b> obligated, just as he is not obligated to hire workers to recover another’s lost item. Therefore, the verse “Do not stand by the blood of another” <b>teaches us</b> that he must even hire workers, and he transgresses a prohibition if he does not do so.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> yet another <i>baraita</i> on the topic of a pursuer: <b>One who pursues another to kill him; or</b> pursues <b>a male</b> to sodomize him; <b>or</b> pursues <b>a betrothed young woman</b> to rape her; <b>or</b> pursues a woman who is forbidden to him by a prohibition, the violation of which renders him <b>liable to</b> receive <b>a court</b>-imposed <b>death</b> penalty; <b>or</b> pursues a woman who is forbidden to him by a prohibition, the violation of which renders him <b>liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>,</b> all these people <b>are to be saved at</b> the cost of <b>the life of</b> the transgressor. But with regard to <b>a widow</b> who is being pursued <b>by a High Priest,</b> or <b>a divorcée, or a woman who has performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>]</b> who is being pursued <b>by an ordinary priest,</b> they <b>are not saved at</b> the cost of the rapist’s <b>life,</b> because these unions are subject only to a mere prohibition.

### Part 10
Furthermore, if <b>a sin had already been committed</b> with the betrothed young woman, <b>she is not saved at</b> the cost of the rapist’s <b>life.</b> In addition, if <b>there is one to save her,</b> i.e., if there is another way to save the betrothed young woman that does not involve killing the rapist, <b>she is not saved at</b> the cost of <b>his life. Rabbi Yehuda says: Also,</b> if the betrothed young woman <b>says</b> to those who come to rescue her: <b>Let</b> the rapist <b>be,</b> she is saying this <b>so that he should not kill her,</b> and therefore the rapist is not killed.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states: “But you shall do nothing to the young woman [<i>na’ara</i>]; the young woman has committed no sin worthy of death”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:26). The word is read as young woman, “<i>na’ara</i>,” but it is written as young man, <i>na’ar</i>. <b><i>Na’ar</i>,</b> as it is written, <b>this is</b> an allusion to <b>sodomy. “<i>Na’ara</i>,”</b> as it is read, <b>this is a betrothed young woman. “Sin”; these are</b> women who are forbidden to him by a prohibition the violation of which renders him <b>liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>. “Death”; these are</b> women who are forbidden to him by a prohibition the violation of which renders him <b>liable to</b> receive <b>a court</b>-imposed <b>death</b> penalty.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>all these</b> different cases? Why does it not suffice to offer one example from which all the others can be derived? The Gemara answers: These cases <b>are</b> all <b>necessary, as had the Merciful One written</b> only <b><i>na’ar</i></b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> with regard to sodomy, one might say that this victim alone is saved at the cost of his attacker’s life, <b>because it is not his way</b> to engage in intercourse with a man, and so he would suffer excessive embarrassment and pain were he not saved. <b>But a young woman, whose</b> natural <b>way</b> is to engage in intercourse with a man, one might <b>say</b> that her attacker may <b>not</b> be killed.

### Part 13
<b>And had the Merciful One wrote</b> only <b>“<i>na’ara</i>”</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> concerning a betrothed young woman, one might say that she alone is saved at the cost of her attacker’s life, <b>because he degrades her</b> by taking her virginity, and she will be cheapened in the eyes of her betrothed. <b>But a young man, who is not</b> similarly <b>degraded,</b> one might <b>say</b> that his attacker may <b>not</b> be killed.

### Part 14
<b>And had the Merciful One wrote</b> both of <b>these,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC