
### Part 1
<b>in judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous”</b> (Psalms 1:5). <b>“Therefore the wicked shall not stand in judgment”; this</b> is referring to <b>the generation of the flood,</b> about whom it is written: “The wickedness of man was great upon the earth” (Genesis 6:5). <b>“Nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous”; these are the people of Sodom,</b> about whom it is written: “And the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners” (Genesis 13:13). The Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Neḥemya: <b>They will not stand</b> in judgment for resurrection <b>in the congregation of the righteous, but they will stand</b> in judgment <b>in the congregation of the wicked.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The spies</b> who spread an evil report of their visit to Canaan <b>have no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And those men who spread the evil report about the land died by plague before the Lord”</b> (Numbers 14:37). <b>“And…died”</b> indicates <b>in this world; “by plague”</b> indicates <b>for the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 3
The members of <b>the generation of the wilderness have no share in the World-to-Come and will not stand in judgment, as it is stated: “In this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die”</b> (Numbers 14:35). “They shall be consumed” indicates in this world; “and there they shall die” indicates for the World-to-Come; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The members of the generation of the wilderness were essentially righteous, and <b>about them</b> the verse <b>says: “Gather My pious together to Me, those that have entered into My covenant by offering”</b> (Psalms 50:5). It is they who entered into the covenant with God and they will certainly be rewarded in the future.

### Part 4
<b>The assembly of Korah is not destined to arise</b> for resurrection, <b>as it is stated: “And the earth closed upon them”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in this world,</b> and also: <b>“And they perished from among the assembly”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in the World-to-Come;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Eliezer says: About them</b> the verse <b>says: “The Lord kills and makes alive; He lowers to the grave, and raises”</b> (I Samuel 2:6), indicating that the assembly of Korah has a share in the World-to-Come.

### Part 5
gemara <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The members of <b>the generation of the flood have no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And He obliterated every living thing that was upon the face of the ground,</b> from man to cattle to creeping animal to the birds of the heaven; and they were obliterated from the earth” (Genesis 7:23). <b>“And He obliterated every living thing”</b> indicates <b>in this world,</b> whereas <b>“and they were obliterated from the earth”</b> indicates <b>for the World-to-Come;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> The members of the generation of the flood will <b>neither live nor be judged, as it is stated: “My soul shall not abide [<i>yadon</i>] in man forever”</b> (Genesis 6:3), meaning <b>neither</b> will they stand in <b>judgment [<i>din</i>], nor</b> shall their <b>souls</b> be restored to them. <b>Alternatively, “My soul shall not abide”</b> means <b>their souls will not return to their sheaths [<i>nadan</i>],</b> i.e., to their bodies.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Menaḥem, son of Rabbi Yosef, says: Even at a time when the Holy One, Blessed be He, restores souls to lifeless corpses,</b> the souls of the generation of the flood <b>will</b> afflict <b>them harshly</b> as if they were <b>in Gehenna, as it is stated: “You shall conceive chaff; you shall bring forth straw; your soul is a fire that shall devour you”</b> (Isaiah 33:11).

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Sota</i> 3:10): <b>The generation of the flood became haughty</b> and sinned <b>due only to the</b> excessive <b>goodness that the Holy One, Blessed be He, bestowed upon them. And what is written concerning them,</b> indicating that goodness? <b>“Their houses are safe without fear, nor is the rod of God upon them”</b> (Job 21:9). <b>And it is written: “Their bull sires, and will not fall; their cow calves, and does not cast her calf”</b> (Job 21:10). <b>And it is written: “They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance”</b> (Job 21:11). <b>And it is written: “They sing to the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the pipe”</b> (Job 21:12). <b>And it is written: “They shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures”</b> (Job 36:11). <b>And it is written: “And peacefully they go down to the grave”</b> (Job 21:13).

### Part 8
<b>And that</b> success <b>caused</b> them <b>to say to God: “Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of Your ways. What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him, and what profit should we have if we pray unto Him”</b> (Job 21:14–15). The members of the generation of the flood <b>said: Do we need Him for anything, even for</b> the <b>drop of rain</b> that He causes to fall? <b>We have rivers and springs from which we take our supply</b> of water; we do not fear Him. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: With the goodness that I bestowed upon them, with</b> that <b>they infuriate Me and with it I will sentence them, as it is stated: “And behold I will bring the flood of water”</b> (Genesis 6:17).

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: The generation of the flood became haughty due only to the</b> covetousness of the <b>eyeball, which is similar to water, as it is stated:</b> “And the sons of the prominent men saw that the daughters of men were fair; <b>and they took for themselves wives from anyone they chose”</b> (Genesis 6:2). <b>Consequently,</b> God <b>punished them with water, which is similar to an eyeball [<i>legalgal ha’ayin</i>], as it is stated: “All the fountains [<i>mayenot</i>] of the great deep were breached, and the flues of heaven were opened”</b> (Genesis 7:11).

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The members of <b>the generation of the flood sinned with “great” and were punished with “great.” They sinned with “great,” as it is stated: “And the Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great”</b> (Genesis 6:5). <b>And they were punished with great, as it is stated: “All the fountains of the great deep</b> were breached” (Genesis 7:11). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Three</b> fountains <b>of</b> the great deep that were breached in the flood <b>remained,</b> and boiling water continues to flow in them as it did during the flood. They are: <b>Beloa of Gader, and the hot springs of Tiberias, and the great spring of Beiram.</b>

### Part 11
With regard to the verse: <b>“For all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth”</b> (Genesis 6:12), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> This <b>teaches that</b> the people of the generation of the flood <b>mated</b> male <b>domesticated animals with</b> female <b>undomesticated animals, and</b> male <b>undomesticated animals with</b> female <b>domesticated animals, and all</b> male animals <b>with human</b> females, <b>and human</b> males <b>with all</b> female animals. <b>Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says: And</b> after the flood <b>all of</b> the creatures <b>returned</b> to mate with their own species, <b>except</b> for the bird called <b><i>tushlami</i>,</b> which continued to mate with other species.

### Part 12
With regard to the verse: <b>“And God said to Noah: The end of all flesh is come before Me,</b> for the earth is filled with robbery through them, and behold, I will destroy them with the earth” (Genesis 6:13), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Come and see how great is the power of robbery, as the generation of the flood violated every</b> precept, <b>but their sentence</b> to be destroyed <b>was not sealed until they extended their hands</b> and engaged <b>in robbery, as it is stated: “For the earth is filled with robbery through them, and behold, I will destroy them with the earth”</b> (Genesis 6:13). <b>And it is written: “Robbery is risen up into a rod of wickedness; nothing comes from them, nor from their multitude, nor from any of them, nor shall there be wailing [<i>no’ah</i>] for them”</b> (Ezekiel 7:11).

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> This <b>teaches that</b> robbery <b>straightened itself like a rod and stood before the Holy One, Blessed be He, and said before Him: Master of the Universe: “Nothing comes from them, nor from their multitude, nor from any of them, nor shall there be wailing for them,”</b> i.e., none of the robbers are fit to exist.

### Part 14
<b>And the sentence of Noah was also sealed;</b> he was going to die with the rest of the generation of the flood, <b>as it is stated: Nor shall there be <i>No’aḥ</i> for them.</b> The Gemara interprets the term spelled <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, in the aforementioned verse, as if it were spelled <i>nun</i>, <i>ḥet</i>. <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: The sentence of Noah was also decided; but</b> he was spared through the kindness of God due to the fact <b>that he found favor in the eyes of God, as it is stated: “For I regret that I have made them. And Noah found favor in the eyes of the Lord”</b> (Genesis 6:7–8). The juxtaposition of the term “and Noah” to the phrase “for I regret that I have made them” indicates that Noah should have been killed as well.

### Part 15
It is written: <b>“<i>Vayyinaḥem</i> the Lord that He made man on the earth [<i>ba’aretz</i>]”</b> (Genesis 6:6). The meaning of the term “<i>vayyinaḥem</i>” is subject to a dispute. <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> in explanation: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: I did well that I prepared graves for</b> people <b>in the earth [<i>ba’aretz</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is it <b>inferred</b> that the term “<i>vayyinaḥem</i>” has a positive connotation? The Gemara answers: <b>It is written here: “<i>Vayyinaḥem</i>,” and it is written there: “And he comforted them [<i>vayenaḥem otam</i>] and spoke to their heart”</b> (Genesis 50:21).

### Part 16
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that the term “<i>vayyinaḥem</i>” has a different meaning: <b>I did not do well that I prepared graves for</b> people <b>in the earth,</b> as I should not have created them in order to destroy them. From where is it inferred that the term “<i>vayyinaḥem</i>” has a negative connotation? <b>It is written here: “<i>Vayyinaḥem</i>,” and it is written there: “And the Lord regretted [<i>vayyinaḥem</i>] the evil that He thought to do to His people”</b> (Exodus 32:14).

### Part 17
§ With regard to the verse: <b>“These are the generations of Noah; Noah was a righteous man, and wholehearted in his generations”</b> (Genesis 6:9), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Relative to the other people <b>of his generation</b> he was righteous and wholehearted, <b>but not</b> relative to those <b>of other generations. And Reish Lakish says: In his generation</b> he was righteous and wholehearted despite being surrounded by bad influences; <b>all the more so</b> would he have been considered righteous and wholehearted <b>in other generations.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> There is <b>a parable</b> for the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan; to what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a barrel of wine that was placed in a cellar</b> where <b>vinegar</b> is stored; <b>in its place, its fragrance diffuses,</b> i.e., is noticeable, relative to the odor of the vinegar. When it is <b>not in its place</b> surrounded by vinegar, <b>its fragrance does not diffuse,</b> and its pleasant odor is not sensed. <b>Rabbi Oshaya says:</b> There is <b>a parable</b> for the statement <b>of Reish Lakish; to what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a flask of perfume [<i>palyaton</i>] that was placed in a location of filth. In its place its fragrance diffuses</b> despite the ambient odor, <b>and all the more so</b> is its fragrance noticeable if it is placed <b>in a location</b> where there is <b>perfume.</b>

### Part 19
With regard to the verse: <b>“And He obliterated every living thing that was upon the face of the ground,</b> from man to cattle to creeping animal to the birds of the heaven” (Genesis 7:23), the Gemara asks: <b>If man sinned,</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>did</b> the <b>animal</b> kingdom <b>sin</b> that it, too, warranted destruction?

### Part 20
The Gemara answers: It was <b>taught in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa:</b> There is <b>a parable</b> for this matter, <b>to a man who fashioned a wedding canopy for his son and prepared all sorts of</b> food for the wedding <b>feast. Sometime</b> later, before the wedding, <b>his son died.</b> What did the man do? <b>He arose and dismantled his</b> son’s <b>wedding canopy. He said: Did I do</b> this for any reason <b>other than for my son? Now that</b> my son has <b>died, why do I</b> need <b>a wedding canopy? So too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, said: Did I create domesticated animals and non-domesticated animals</b> for any reason <b>other than for man? Now that man sins</b> and is sentenced to destruction, <b>why do I</b> need <b>domesticated animals and non-domesticated animals?</b>

### Part 21
It is written: <b>“Of all that was on dry land died”</b> (Genesis 7:22), from which it is inferred: <b>But not the fish that are in the sea,</b> which are not on dry land.

### Part 22
<b>Rabbi Yosei from Caesarea taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He is swift upon the face of the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth;</b> he turns not by way of the vineyards” (Job 24:18)? This <b>teaches that Noah the righteous would rebuke</b> the people of his generation <b>and say to them: Repent. And if</b> you do <b>not, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will bring a flood upon you and float your corpses on the water like wineskins</b> filled with air that float on water, <b>as it is stated: “He is swift upon the face of the waters.” Moreover, a curse is taken from them to all who enter the world,</b> as people will curse others, saying: They shall be like the generation of the flood. <b>As it is stated: “Their portion is cursed in the earth.”</b>

### Part 23
The conclusion of that verse: <b>“He turns not by way of the vineyards,” teaches that they would clear a path through vineyards. They said to</b> Noah: <b>And who is preventing</b> the flood from coming? Noah <b>said to them: I have one pigeon,</b> Methuselah, who will die at his appointed time, which I must <b>remove from among you</b> before the flood.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC