
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that <b>each one</b> is <b>as it is written,</b> and conclude that the Torah requires, respectively, three, two, and two interrogations in the three cases of idol worship, an idolatrous city, and conspiring witnesses, discussed in those verses? <b>As, if</b> it is <b>so,</b> i.e., if there is a requirement of seven interrogations in all cases of capital law, <b>let the Merciful One write them in one</b> place, and it would be derived from there to other cases. The Gemara answers: <b>Since they are all written together,</b> i.e., they all employ analogous terminology, <b>one learns</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>one from the other, and once one learns</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>one from the other,</b> they <b>are considered as if they are written in one</b> place.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> those three instances of idol worship, an idolatrous city, and conspiring witnesses <b>are not similar to each other,</b> so how can one derive the <i>halakhot</i> of one from the other? The Gemara records <b>a mnemonic</b> device for the following terms: <b>Escapes, sword, forewarning.</b>

### Part 3
What are the differences? The case of <b>an idolatrous city</b> is <b>not similar to those two,</b> i.e., idol worship and conspiring witnesses, <b>because</b> for the others <b>their money escapes</b> their fate. Although the court executes those transgressors, their money is not confiscated. By contrast, in the case of an idolatrous city, not only are the residents executed, all of their property is destroyed. <b>Idol worship</b> is <b>not similar to those two, as</b> the other two transgressions are judged <b>by the sword,</b> while the punishment for idol worship is death by stoning. The case of <b>conspiring witnesses</b> is <b>not similar to those two, as</b> those who transgress the two other transgressions <b>require forewarning</b> in order to be liable for the transgression, while conspiring witnesses are not forewarned before they testify.

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: This is not an association based on conceptual similarity alone; rather, <b>we learn one from the other based on</b> a verbal analogy employing the words <b>“diligently”</b> and <b>“diligently.”</b> “Diligently” is used in all three verses. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this <b>verbal analogy</b> must be <b>free,</b> i.e., these terms must be superfluous in their context. The Torah included them for the express purpose of establishing the verbal analogy. A verbal analogy that is based on otherwise extraneous terms cannot be logically refuted. This is <b>because if</b> these terms are <b>not free,</b> the verbal analogy <b>can be refuted.</b> The Gemara concludes: This is <b>not so [<i>la’ei</i>],</b> i.e., the verbal analogy cannot be refuted, as <b>they are free.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Since</b> the Torah <b>could have written: And they inquire and investigate, and the verse modified its statement by</b> writing <b>“diligently,” learn from it</b> that this term’s function is <b>to have it be free,</b> to enable a verbal analogy.

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges this explanation: <b>And yet it</b> is <b>free on</b> only <b>one side,</b> as the term is superfluous in two of the verses but not in all three of them. The Gemara explains: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to <b>these two,</b> idol worship and conspiring witnesses, <b>it is free, because it could have</b> been <b>written</b> only: And you inquire and you investigate, but instead the word “diligently” also appears in the verse. <b>But</b> in the verses concerning <b>an idolatrous city, what could it have written</b> differently? <b>They are all written.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> it is <b>also free,</b> as the term is superfluous in that verse as well. <b>Since</b> the Torah <b>could have written: You shall inquire, or: You shall investigate,</b> in an emphatic form by doubling the verb, <b>and the verse modified its statement by</b> writing: “And you shall inquire and investigate <b>diligently,” learn from it</b> that this term’s function is <b>to have it be free</b> in order to enable a verbal analogy. By way of this verbal analogy, the Gemara has derived the requirement for seven interrogations in cases of capital law where the punishment is either death by stoning or death by the sword.

### Part 7
The Gemara continues: <b>And</b> one can <b>learn</b> that this applies to <b>those</b> transgressors <b>who are strangled</b> as well, <b>by</b> means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from those</b> transgressors who are <b>stoned and from those</b> who are <b>killed</b> by the sword. Just as in these cases, where the transgression is severe as evidenced by their severe mode of execution, seven interrogations are required, the requirement should apply all the more so to those transgressors who are strangled, who committed a less severe transgression. <b>And</b> one can <b>learn</b> that this applies to <b>those</b> transgressors who are <b>burned</b> as well, <b>by</b> means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from those</b> transgressors who are <b>stoned.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara questions this last inference: <b>This works out well according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that <b>stoning</b> is more <b>severe</b> than burning (see 49b). Consequently, it is possible to derive by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference the <i>halakha</i> of a transgression whose punishment is burning from the <i>halakha</i> of a transgression whose punishment is stoning. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who says</b> that <b>burning</b> is more <b>severe</b> than stoning, <b>what is there to say?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rather, Rav Yehuda said:</b> There are an additional two phrases in the verses that are used to teach the <i>halakha</i> of the seven interrogations. The verse states with regard to the idolatrous city: “And you shall inquire, and investigate, and ask diligently <b>and behold it be truth,</b> the matter <b>certain”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:15). Additionally, the verse states with regard to idol worship: “You have inquired diligently <b>and behold it be truth,</b> the matter <b>certain”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:4). When one adds the two usages of “truth” and “certain” to the seven expressions stated earlier, <b>consequently,</b> there are <b>eleven</b> expressions; <b>seven</b> are used <b>to</b> teach the <i>halakha</i> of the <b>seven interrogations,</b> and of the four that remain, <b>remove three,</b> one for each verse, <b>for</b> the purpose of the <b>verbal analogy,</b> and <b>one remains.</b>

### Part 10
<b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> this additional expression serves <b>to include</b> the <i>halakha</i> that the seven interrogations applies to <b>those</b> transgressors who are <b>burned. According to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> as well, who learned this from an <i>a fortiori</i> inference, the additional expression teaches this same <i>halakha</i>, as with regard to <b>a matter that can be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference, the <b>verse</b> nevertheless <b>takes the trouble and writes it</b> explicitly.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Abbahu ridiculed this</b> explanation: <b>Say</b> this additional expression serves <b>to add</b> that there are <b>eight interrogations.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And are there eight interrogations?</b> What interrogation can be added? The Gemara suggests: And <b>why not? But there is</b> the possibility <b>to add</b> this question to the interrogation: <b>When in the hour,</b> i.e., at what time within the hour. <b>And this is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They would examine him with eight interrogations.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara comments: <b>This works out well according to</b> the explanation of <b>Abaye of</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir, who says,</b> in explaining Rabbi Meir’s opinion: <b>A person does not err at all,</b> i.e., when witnesses state an hour in which an event occurred, it is assumed that they are completely accurate. <b>And also according to the version</b> of his statement <b>that</b> Abaye <b>says: A person errs a bit;</b> it is <b>well.</b> Consequently, there is a reason to ask at what time during the hour the event occurred. <b>But according to</b> the explanation of <b>Abaye of</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, who says,</b> in explaining Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion: <b>A person errs</b> up to <b>half an hour, and according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rava, who says: People err</b> even <b>more</b> than that; <b>what can be said?</b> There is no reason to ask at what time during the hour the event occurred, as any inconsistency will be ascribed to an innocent error.

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests: <b>Rather,</b> there is the possibility <b>to add</b> the question: <b>In how many</b> years <b>within the jubilee,</b> i.e., in which of the fifty years, the event occurred.

### Part 14
The Gemara questions this explanation: <b>This is</b> exactly the same question as: <b>In which seven-year</b> period of the jubilee did the event occur, as one can calculate the year within the jubilee by knowing the seven-year period. The Gemara suggests: <b>Rather,</b> there is the possibility <b>to add</b> the question of: <b>In which jubilee</b> cycle did the event occur, in the current cycle or the previous cycle? <b>And the other</b> Sage, i.e., Rabbi Abbahu, who assumes that there cannot be an eighth interrogation, holds that <b>once</b> the witness <b>said in which seven-year</b> period of the jubilee the event occurred, there is <b>no need</b> to ask <b>in which jubilee</b> it occurred, as the court would have no reason to think that he is testifying about an event that occurred fifty years prior.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> they ask only on which day, at which hour, and in which place the event occurred, but not more. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> the reasoning behind this dispute: <b>Rabbi Yosei said to the Rabbis: According to your statement</b> that the court asks all seven interrogations, when there is a witness <b>who came</b> to court <b>and said:</b> The accused <b>killed</b> the victim <b>last night,</b> should the judge <b>say to him</b> in his examination: <b>In which seven-year</b> period of the jubilee, <b>in which year, in which month, on which</b> day <b>of the month</b> did the accused murder the victim? What would be the purpose of asking these questions? It suffices that they ask him about the day, the time, and the place.

### Part 16
The Rabbis <b>said to him: According to your statement,</b> when there is a witness <b>who came</b> to court <b>and said:</b> The accused <b>killed</b> the victim just <b>now,</b> should the judge <b>say to him</b> in his examination: <b>On which day, at which hour, in what place</b> did the accused murder the victim? The witness already stated that the murder had just occurred.

### Part 17
The Rabbis continue: <b>Rather,</b> even according to your opinion, <b>although it is not necessary</b> to ask these questions in this particular case, <b>we impose</b> the obligation to answer all the interrogations <b>on</b> the witnesses, <b>in accordance with</b> the explanation <b>of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar,</b> that the court beleaguers the witnesses in attempt to confuse them (see 32b). <b>Here too, although it is not necessary</b> to ask these questions in this particular case, <b>we impose</b> the obligation to answer all the interrogations <b>on</b> the witnesses, <b>in accordance with</b> the explanation <b>of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what would <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> respond to this claim? The Gemara explains: He holds that the witness testifying: The accused <b>killed</b> the victim <b>last night, is common in most testimonies.</b> Therefore, this testimony is taken into account when deciding the content of the interrogations. By contrast, the witness testifying: The accused <b>killed</b> the victim just <b>now, is not common in most testimonies,</b> i.e., it is relatively rare. Therefore, this testimony is not taken into account when deciding the content of the interrogations.

### Part 19
§ The mishna teaches that after the interrogations the court asks several questions essential to the testimony, such as: <b>Do you recognize him? The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a trial for murder, the court asks the witness: <b>Do you recognize</b> the accused? <b>Did he kill a gentile? Did he kill a Jew? Did you forewarn him? Did he accept the forewarning on himself,</b> i.e., acknowledge the warning? <b>Did he release himself to death,</b> i.e., acknowledge that he is aware that the court imposes capital punishment for murder? <b>Did he kill within</b> the time required <b>for speaking</b> a short phrase, as if not, he could claim he forgot the warning?

### Part 20
In the case of <b>one who</b> is an accused <b>idol worshipper,</b> the court asks the witness: <b>Whom</b> among the idols <b>did he worship? Did he worship Peor? Did he worship Markulis? And in what</b> manner <b>did he worship?</b> Was it <b>by sacrificing</b> an offering, or <b>by burning</b> incense, <b>by pouring</b> wine <b>as a libation,</b> or <b>by prostrating</b> before the idol?

### Part 21
<b>Ulla says: From where in the Torah</b> is the obligation <b>of forewarning</b> derived? <b>As it is stated: “And if a man shall take his sister, his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter, and see her nakedness</b> and she see his nakedness, it is a disgraceful deed and they shall be cut off in the sight of their people” (Leviticus 20:17). One can ask: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>the matter is dependent on sight?</b> The transgression is engaging in sexual intercourse, not seeing each other. <b>Rather,</b> the meaning of “and see” is: He is not liable <b>until he sees the reason of the matter,</b> that it should be clear to him that he is committing a transgression by having been forewarned. <b>If</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>is not needed for the matter of excision [<i>karet</i>],</b> as this punishment is in the hands of Heaven, and God is aware whether or not he acted intentionally,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC