
### Part 1
<b>who comes from</b> the tribe of <b>Judah. “Moab is My washing pot”; this</b> is referring to <b>Gehazi, who was afflicted</b> with leprosy <b>over matters of washing,</b> as he took money from Naaman, who he instructed to immerse in the Jordan River. <b>“Over Edom I will cast My shoe”; this</b> is referring to <b>Doeg the Edomite. “Philistia, cry aloud [<i>hitroa’i</i>] because of Me”;</b> this is referring to the fact that <b>the ministering angels said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, if David, who killed the Philistine and bequeathed</b> the city of <b>Gath to your sons, will come</b> and complain that You gave a share in the World-to-Come to his enemies Doeg and Ahithophel, <b>what will You do concerning him?</b> Will you accept his complaint? God <b>said to</b> the ministering angels: <b>It is upon me to render</b> David and his enemies <b>friends [<i>re’im</i>] with each other,</b> and even David will agree.

### Part 2
§ With regard to the verse: <b>“Why is this people of Jerusalem slid back in perpetual backsliding?”</b> (Jeremiah 8:5), <b>Rav says: The congregation of Israel answered</b> with <b>a convincing response to the prophet. The prophet said to the Jewish people: Repent,</b> as <b>your ancestors sinned,</b> and <b>where are they? They said</b> to the prophets: <b>And your prophets who did not sin, where are they?</b> They too died, <b>as it is stated: “Your fathers, where are they, and the prophets; do they live forever?”</b> (Zechariah 1:5). The prophet <b>said to</b> the Jewish people: <b>Your ancestors reconsidered and conceded</b> that the admonitions of the prophets were fulfilled, <b>as it is stated: “By my words and My statutes, which I commanded My servants the prophets,</b> did they not overtake your fathers? And they repented and said: As the Lord of hosts intended to do to us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has He dealt with us” (Zechariah 1:6).

### Part 3
<b>Shmuel says</b> that this was the convincing answer: <b>Ten people came and sat before</b> the prophet Ezekiel. <b>He said to them: Repent. They said to</b> Ezekiel: In the case of <b>a slave sold by his owner</b> to another master, <b>or a woman divorced by her husband, does this</b> person <b>have any</b> claim <b>upon that</b> person? Since God gave the Jewish people to other masters, the ties that existed between Him and us were severed. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to the prophet: Go say to them: “Where is your mother’s scroll of severance, with which I sent her away? Or to which of My creditors have I sold you? For your iniquities you sold yourselves and for your transgressions was your mother sent away”</b> (Isaiah 50:1). Learn from this that God did not sever His ties to the Jewish people.

### Part 4
<b>And that is what Reish Lakish says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “David, My slave”</b> (II Samuel 3:18), and: <b>“Nebuchadnezzar, my slave”</b> (Jeremiah 43:10)? How can the wicked Nebuchadnezzar be depicted as a slave of God in the same manner that David was depicted? Rather, <b>it is revealed and known before the One Who spoke and the world came into being, that the Jewish people are destined to say that</b> God sold them to the nations and they no longer have ties to Him. <b>Therefore, the Holy One, Blessed be He, preemptively called</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>His slave.</b> With regard to the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a slave who acquires property, the slave</b> belongs <b>to whom</b> and <b>the property</b> belongs <b>to whom?</b> They both belong to the master, in this case, the Holy One, Blessed be He.

### Part 5
With regard to the verse: <b>“And what comes into your mind shall never come to be, that you say: We will be like the nations, like the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone. As I live, says the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out, will I rule over you”</b> (Ezekiel 20:32–33), <b>Rav Naḥman says: Let the Merciful One become wrathful at us</b> with <b>all that wrath, and redeem us.</b>

### Part 6
With regard to the verse: <b>“And chastise in judgment; his God will instruct him”</b> (Isaiah 28:26), <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>the prophet said to the Jewish people: Repent. They said to him: We cannot,</b> since <b>the evil inclination dominates us. He said to them: Chastise your inclinations. They said to him: “His God will instruct him,”</b> i.e., God should instruct the evil inclination to allow us to overcome him, as we are incapable of doing so on our own.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches that <b>four</b> prominent <b>commoners, Balaam, Doeg, Ahithophel, and Gehazi,</b> have no share in the World-to-Come. The Gemara elaborates: The name <b>Balaam</b> is interpreted as a contraction of: <b>Without a nation [<i>belo am</i>],</b> or one who has no share in the World-to-Come with the Jewish nation. <b>Alternatively,</b> the name <b>Balaam</b> is interpreted as one <b>who wore down the</b> Jewish <b>people [<i>bila am</i>].</b> He is the <b>son of Beor,</b> one <b>who engaged in bestiality [<i>be’ir</i>].</b>

### Part 8
It was <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>He is Beor,</b> father of Balaam, <b>he is Cushan-Rishathaim, he is Laban the Aramean.</b> He was called <b>Beor because he engaged in bestiality.</b> He was called <b>Cushan-Rishathaim because he performed two evil deeds [<i>rishiyyot</i>] to the Jewish people, one during the time of Jacob,</b> when he pursued him intending to kill him, <b>and one during the time when the judges judged. And what was his</b> actual <b>name? His name was Laban the Aramean.</b>

### Part 9
<b>It is written: “Son of Beor”</b> (Numbers 22:5), <b>and it is written</b> elsewhere: <b>“His son Beor”</b> (Numbers 24:3). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> in resolving the apparent contradiction: Balaam’s <b>father was his son in</b> terms of <b>prophecy,</b> as Balaam was a much greater prophet.

### Part 10
The Gemara infers from the mishna: <b>Balaam is</b> the <b>one who does not come into the World-to-Come; but other</b> gentiles <b>come</b> into the World-to-Come. <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b>

### Part 11
<b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> It is written: <b>“The wicked shall be turned back to the netherworld, all that nations that forget God”</b> (Psalms 9:18). <b>“The wicked shall be turned back to the netherworld”; these are the sinners of the Jewish people,</b> as only the sinners are sentenced to the netherworld. <b>“All the gentiles that forget God”; these are the sinners of the gentiles.</b> From the fact that it is written: “All the gentiles,” it is apparent that none of the gentiles have a share in the World-to-Come. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua said to him: But is it stated</b> in the verse that the sinners of the Jewish people will be <b>like all of the gentiles? It is stated only: “All the gentiles that forget God.” Rather, the wicked shall be turned back to the netherworld,</b> and <b>who are they?</b> They are <b>all the gentiles that forget God.</b> Gentiles who fear God do have a share in the World-to-Come.

### Part 12
<b>And that wicked person,</b> Balaam, <b>also provided a sign with regard to himself. He said: “Let me die the death of the righteous,</b> and let my end be like his” (Numbers 23:10). <b>If I die the death of the righteous,</b> by natural causes, <b>my end will be like his,</b> i.e., I will receive a share in the World-to-Come like the Jewish people. <b>And if</b> I do <b>not</b> die by natural causes: <b>“I will go to my people”</b> (Numbers 24:14), i.e., my fate will be that of the rest of the wicked people in my generation, who have no share in the World-to-Come.

### Part 13
With regard to the verse: <b>“And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian set out</b> with their divinations in their hands, and they came to Balaam” (Numbers 22:7), it was <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Midian and Moab</b> had previously <b>never had peace</b> between them, and they were always at war with each other. What led them to make peace at that time? There is <b>a parable of two dogs that were with the flock, and they were hostile to one another. A wolf came</b> and attacked <b>one. The</b> other <b>one said: If I do not help him, today he kills him and tomorrow he comes to</b> attack <b>me. They both went and killed the wolf.</b> Moab and Midian joined together to face the potential common threat, the Jewish people. <b>Rav Pappa says</b> that <b>this</b> is in accordance with the adage <b>that people say: A weasel [<i>karkushta</i>] and a cat made a wedding from the fat of the luckless.</b> Despite their hatred of one another, they join together for their mutual benefit at the expense of a third party.

### Part 14
It is written: <b>“And the princes of Moab stayed with Balaam”</b> (Numbers 22:8). The Gemara asks: <b>And to where did the princes of Midian</b> who accompanied the princes of Moab <b>go?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Once</b> Balaam <b>said to them: “Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word</b> when the Lord speaks to me” (Numbers 22:8), the elders of Midian <b>said:</b> If he seeks permission from the Lord, he will not join us, as <b>is there any father who hates his son?</b> Certainly the Lord will help the Jewish people.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Naḥman says: Impudence is effective even toward Heaven.</b> How so? <b>Initially, it is written</b> that God said to Balaam: <b>“You shall not go with them”</b> (Numbers 22:12), <b>and ultimately</b> after Balaam persisted and asked, <b>it is written: “Rise up and go with them”</b> (Numbers 22:20). <b>Rav Sheshet says: Impudence is monarchy without a crown,</b> as it is an assertion of leadership and lacks only the official coronation as king, <b>as it is written: “And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me”</b> (II Samuel 3:39). The sons of Zeruiah, due to their impudence, were as formidable as David himself.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Balaam was disabled in one of his legs, as it is stated</b> concerning him: <b>“And he went limping [<i>shefi</i>]”</b> (Numbers 23:3). <b>Samson</b> was disabled <b>in both his legs, as it is stated</b> with regard to Samson, who was from the tribe of Dan, in the prophetic blessing of Jacob: “Dan shall be a serpent by the way, <b>an adder [<i>shefifon</i>] in the path that bites the horse’s heels”</b> (Genesis 49:17). Rabbi Yoḥanan interprets <i>shefifon</i> as the plural of <i>shefi</i>, indicating disability in both legs. <b>Balaam was blind in one of his eyes, as it is stated: “Whose eye is open”</b> (Numbers 24:3), indicating that one eye was open and the other was blind.

### Part 17
The Gemara relates: Balaam <b>was a diviner by</b> using <b>his penis. It is written here: “Fallen, yet with opened eyes”</b> (Numbers 24:4), <b>and it is written there: “And Haman was fallen upon the divan</b> whereupon Esther was” (Esther 7:8), indicating that the verb fallen has sexual connotations. <b>It was stated</b> that there is an amoraic dispute with regard to this matter. <b>Mar Zutra says:</b> Balaam <b>was a diviner by</b> using <b>his penis. Mar, son of Ravina, says: He engaged in bestiality with his donkey. The one who says</b> that he <b>was a diviner by</b> using <b>his penis</b> derives it <b>as we stated. And the one who says</b> that <b>he engaged in bestiality with his donkey</b> derives it as follows: <b>It is written here: “He crouched, he lay down”</b> (Numbers 24:9), <b>and it is written there: “Between her legs</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC