
### Part 1
Rav Pappa answered: <b>And were it not</b> for <b>the force of his</b> action, the stone <b>would go down</b> and not to the side. <b>Rather,</b> although <b>it is a weak force,</b> the force of his action is a partial cause of the damage caused by the stone going to the side; therefore, he is liable.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>ten people struck</b> an individual <b>with ten sticks and</b> as a result of the beating <b>he died, whether</b> they beat him <b>simultaneously,</b> or <b>whether</b> they beat him <b>one after the other, they are exempt</b> from liability for killing him, as two people are not liable for an action that they performed together. <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> If they struck him <b>one after the other, the</b> one who struck him <b>last</b> is <b>liable, because he hastened his death.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And both</b> Rabbis, i.e., the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, <b>interpreted the same verse</b> in drawing their halakhic conclusion. The verse states: <b>“And a man who strikes any soul mortally,</b> he shall be put to death” (Leviticus 24:17). <b>The Rabbis hold</b> that <b>“any soul”</b> means that one is liable for murder <b>only when there is an entire soul,</b> i.e., when the murderer alone is responsible for taking the entire life of the victim. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira holds</b> that <b>“any soul”</b> means that one is liable for murder for taking <b>any soul,</b> even if the victim had already been beaten and was close to death.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rava says: All concede</b> that <b>in</b> the case of one who <b>kills one who has a wound that will cause him to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>]</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from liability, as in a certain sense the legal status of the victim is that of a dead person. All concede <b>in</b> a case where one kills an individual <b>dying</b> from an illness caused <b>at the hand of Heaven that he is liable,</b> as no other individual took action contributing to his death, and the murderer alone took his remaining soul. <b>They disagree only in</b> a case where one kills an individual <b>dying</b> from injury caused <b>at the hand of a person.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>likens</b> this case <b>to</b> the case of <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> and therefore rules that the one who kills him is exempt. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>likens</b> this case <b>to</b> the case of an individual <b>dying</b> from an illness caused <b>at the hand of Heaven,</b> and therefore rules that the one who kills him is liable.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: As for <b>the one who likens</b> this case <b>to</b> the case of <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, what is the reason</b> that <b>he does not liken it to</b> the case of an individual <b>dying</b> from an illness caused <b>at the hand of Heaven?</b> The Gemara answers: In the case of an individual <b>dying</b> from an illness caused <b>at the hand of Heaven, no action was performed</b> by a person <b>to</b> kill <b>him,</b> whereas in <b>this</b> case of an individual dying from injury caused at the hand of a person, <b>an action was performed</b> by an individual <b>to</b> kill <b>him.</b> Therefore, it is a case of two people who performed an action together, and they are not liable.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the one who likens</b> this case <b>to</b> the case of an individual <b>dying</b> from an illness caused <b>at the hand of Heaven, what is the reason</b> that <b>he does not liken it to a <i>tereifa</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: In the case of <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> his status is like that of one whose <b>organs,</b> the trachea and the esophagus, <b>are cut,</b> who is considered to be slaughtered. The status of <b>this</b> individual dying from injury caused at the hand of a person is <b>not</b> like that of one whose <b>organs,</b> the trachea and the esophagus, <b>are cut,</b> as there is no particular defect; rather, he is like one suffering from general frailty, like any frail or elderly individual.

### Part 7
<b>A <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Sheshet:</b> The verse that states: <b>“And a man who strikes any soul mortally,</b> he shall be put to death” (Leviticus 24:17), serves <b>to include</b> the case of <b>one who strikes another and</b> it is a blow <b>in which there is not sufficient</b> force <b>to kill, and</b> then <b>another</b> individual <b>comes and kills him;</b> the verse teaches <b>that</b> the second individual <b>is liable.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara challenges: If the first individual struck him with a blow in which <b>there is not sufficient</b> force <b>to kill,</b> this <i>halakha</i> is <b>obvious,</b> as the first did not perform an act of killing at all, and it is only the second who killed him. <b>Rather,</b> emend the <i>baraita</i> to teach: The verse serves to include the case of one who strikes another and it is a blow <b>in</b> which <b>there is sufficient</b> force <b>to kill, and</b> then <b>another</b> individual <b>comes and kills him;</b> the verse teaches <b>that</b> the second individual <b>is liable. And</b> this <b>unattributed</b> <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira,</b> who holds that one who completes the killing of an individual is liable to be executed as a murderer.

### Part 9
<b>Rava says: One who kills a <i>tereifa</i> is exempt</b> as it is as though he killed a dead person. <b>And</b> as for <b>a <i>tereifa</i> who kills</b> another individual, if he killed him <b>before</b> the judges in <b>court,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to be executed. If the killing was <b>not before</b> the judges in <b>court,</b> he is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: In the case of a <i>tereifa</i> who killed <b>before</b> the <b>court, what is the reason</b> that he is <b>liable?</b> He is liable, <b>as it is written: “And you shall eradicate the evil from your midst”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:6), from which it is derived that there is a mitzva for the court to eradicate evil that it witnesses firsthand. In the case where the killing was <b>not before</b> the judges in <b>court,</b> he is <b>exempt, as</b> any testimony against the <i>tereifa</i> <b>is testimony that you cannot render conspiratory</b> testimony. Even if the witnesses testifying that the <i>tereifa</i> committed murder are found to be conspiring witnesses, they cannot be executed, as they conspired to kill a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>And any testimony that you cannot render conspiratory</b> testimony <b>is not characterized as testimony,</b> and is not accepted in court.

### Part 11
<b>And Rava says: One who sodomizes</b> a male who is <b>a <i>tereifa</i></b> is <b>liable</b> to be executed for committing an act of sodomy. <b>And</b> as for <b>a <i>tereifa</i> who sodomizes</b> a male, if he does so <b>before</b> the judges in <b>court,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to be executed. If the act of sodomy was <b>not before a court,</b> he is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara explains: If he committed an act of sodomy <b>before</b> the <b>court,</b> he is <b>liable, as it is written: “And you shall eradicate the evil from your midst.”</b> If the act of sodomy was <b>not before a court,</b> he is <b>exempt, as</b> any testimony against a <i>tereifa</i> <b>is testimony that you cannot render conspiratory</b> testimony.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I also</b> need <b>this</b> ruling? <b>This</b> case of sodomy is identical to <b>that</b> case of murder; why then does Rava cite two cases with regard to capital transgressions involving a <i>tereifa</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>It was necessary for him</b> to mention the case of <b>one who sodomizes a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> as there is a novel element introduced in that <i>halakha</i>. <b>Lest you say: Let</b> the status of one who sodomizes a male who is a <i>tereifa</i> <b>be like one who engages in necrophilia, and let him be exempt</b> from execution. To counter this, Rava <b>teaches us that</b> his liability <b>is due to the pleasure</b> that he experiences, <b>and this</b> man who sodomizes a <i>tereifa</i> <b>has pleasure,</b> as, although the legal status of a <i>tereifa</i> is that of a dead person in certain senses, he is, in fact, alive.

### Part 13
<b>And Rava says: Witnesses who testified with regard to a <i>tereifa</i></b> that he committed a capital transgression, <b>and</b> then <b>they were rendered conspiring witnesses are not executed,</b> as they conspired to kill one whose status is that of a dead person. <b>Witnesses</b> who are themselves <b><i>tereifa</i> who were rendered conspiring witnesses are executed. Rav Ashi says: Even witnesses</b> who are themselves <b><i>tereifa</i> who were rendered conspiring witnesses are not executed, due to</b> the fact <b>that they are not</b> susceptible to a situation <b>where witnesses who rendered them conspiring witnesses</b> can themselves be <b>rendered conspiring witnesses.</b> Witnesses who render the witnesses who are themselves <i>tereifa</i> conspiring witnesses who then are rendered conspiring witnesses are not executed, because they sought to kill a <i>tereifa</i>, whose status is that of a dead person. Therefore, their testimony is testimony that you cannot render conspiratory testimony and is disregarded.

### Part 14
<b>And Rava says: An ox</b> that is <b>a <i>tereifa</i> that killed</b> an individual is <b>liable</b> to be executed, like any animal that kills a person. <b>And an ox</b> belonging to <b>a person</b> who is <b>a <i>tereifa</i> that killed</b> an individual is <b>exempt. What is the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? It is as <b>the verse states: “The ox shall be stoned and its owner shall also be put to death”</b> (Exodus 21:29). Based on the juxtaposition between the owner and his ox it is derived: <b>Anywhere that we</b> can <b>read concerning</b> the situation: <b>“And its owner shall also be put to death,” we read,</b> i.e., apply, <b>concerning it: “The ox shall be stoned.” And anywhere that we cannot read concerning it: “And its owner shall also be put to death,” we do not read concerning it: “The ox shall be stoned.”</b> Since the owner of the ox cannot be executed, as he is a <i>tereifa</i>, his ox is also not liable to be stoned.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ashi says: Even an ox</b> that is <b>a <i>tereifa</i> that killed</b> an individual is <b>exempt. What is the reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? Based on the juxtaposition between the ox and the owner, <b>since if the owner</b> were a <i>tereifa</i> <b>he would be exempt, an ox</b> that is a <i>tereifa</i> that killed an individual <b>is also exempt.</b>

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>one set a dog against</b> an individual and the dog killed him, or if one set a snake against an individual and the snake killed him, the one who set the dog or the snake is exempt from punishment. If he imbedded the snake’s fangs into another person and caused the snake to bite him and kill him, Rabbi Yehuda deems him liable to be executed, and the Rabbis exempt him. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov says: When</b> you analyze the matter <b>you will find that according to the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, venom of a snake stands within its fangs,</b> and in this case the entire action is performed by the individual who imbeds the fang in the other person’s skin. The snake is passive. <b>Therefore,</b> the <b>one who causes</b> the snake to <b>bite</b> is liable to be executed by beheading <b>with a sword</b> as a murderer, <b>and</b> the <b>snake</b> is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 17
<b>According to the statement of the Rabbis, venom of a snake is discharged by</b> the snake <b>itself.</b> The snake directly causes the death, while the individual who imbeds the fang is merely an indirect cause. <b>Consequently, the snake</b> is executed <b>by stoning, and the one who caused</b> the snake to <b>bite</b> is <b>exempt</b> from execution.

### Part 18
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who strikes another, whether</b> he does so <b>with a stone or with</b> his <b>fist, and</b> the doctors <b>assessed</b> his condition, estimating that it would lead <b>to death, and</b> then his condition <b>eased from what it was,</b> and the doctors revised their prognosis and predicted that he would live, <b>and thereafter</b> his condition <b>worsened and he died,</b> the assailant is <b>liable</b> to be executed as a murderer. <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says:</b> He is <b>exempt, as there is a basis for the matter</b> of assuming that he is not liable. Since the victim’s condition eased in the interim, a cause other than the blow struck by the assailant ultimately caused his death.

### Part 19
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: Rabbi Neḥemya interpreted this</b> verse in arriving at his ruling. It is written: <b>“If he rises and walks outside</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC