
### Part 1
<b>“Because he has desired Me, therefore I will deliver him; I will set him on high, because he has known My name. He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him; I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him. With long life I will satisfy him, and show him My salvation”</b> (Psalms 91:14–16).

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And He will withhold their light from the wicked [<i>resha’im</i>], and the high arm shall be broken”</b> (Job 38:15)? <b>For what</b> reason is the letter <b><i>ayin</i> of</b> the word <b><i>resha’im</i> suspended</b> slightly above the rest of the letters? It is suspended so that the word will be read <i>rashim</i>, meaning poor people. It means: <b>Once a person becomes poor</b> on earth <b>below</b> and the number of his enemies grows, <b>he becomes poor</b> in Heaven <b>above,</b> as he is certainly a sinner and that is why he is hated.

### Part 3
The Gemara challenges: If that is the meaning, <b>let</b> the <i>ayin</i> <b>not be written at all</b> and let the verse say: <i>Rashim</i>. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar</b> both explain why the <i>ayin</i> was not omitted. <b>One says:</b> It was <b>due to</b> the desire to preserve <b>the honor of David,</b> who had numerous enemies below despite the fact that he was a righteous person and had a place in the World-to-Come. <b>And one says:</b> It was <b>due to</b> the desire to preserve <b>the honor of Nehemiah, son of Hacaliah,</b> who also had numerous enemies below, despite his righteousness.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Manasseh,</b> king of Judea, <b>would study fifty-five</b> different <b>aspects in</b> interpreting <b><i>Torat Kohanim</i>,</b> the halakhic midrash on Leviticus, <b>corresponding to the years of his reign,</b> indicating that he possessed great knowledge. <b>Ahab</b> was greater and studied <b>eighty-five</b> aspects, and <b>Jeroboam</b> was greater still and studied <b>one hundred and three</b> aspects.

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir would say: Absalom has no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And they smote Absalom and they killed him”</b> (II Samuel 18:15). <b>“And they smote</b> Absalom” is referring to death <b>in this world,</b> while <b>“and they killed him”</b> is referring to death <b>in the World-to-Come. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says in the name of Rabbi Meir: Ahaz and Ahaziah,</b> kings of Judea, <b>and all of the kings of</b> the kingdom of <b>Israel about whom it is written: “And he did evil in the eyes of the Lord”</b> (see, e.g., I Kings 15:34), <b>neither live</b> in the World-to-Come <b>nor are sentenced</b> to Gehenna.

### Part 6
It is stated: <b>“And Manasseh shed a great deal of innocent blood, until he filled Jerusalem from one end to another [<i>peh lafeh</i>], beside his sin that he made Judea sin, to do evil in the eyes of the Lord”</b> (II Kings 21:16). <b>Here,</b> in Babylonia, <b>they interpret</b> the verse to mean <b>that he killed</b> the prophet <b>Isaiah</b> (see <i>Yevamot</i> 49b). <b>In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say that</b> Manasseh <b>crafted an idol</b> so large that it was <b>a burden</b> requiring <b>one thousand people</b> to carry it, <b>and each and every day he</b> would require them to carry it, which would <b>kill all of them.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>is that which Rabba bar bar Ḥana says: The soul of one righteous person is equal</b> in value <b>to the entire world?</b> It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the one who says: He killed Isaiah.</b>

### Part 7
<b>It is written</b> that Manasseh crafted <b>“an idol”</b> (II Chronicles 33:7), <b>and it is written</b> that Manasseh crafted <b>“idols”</b> (II Chronicles 33:19). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Initially, he crafted one face [<i>partzuf</i> ] for</b> the idol, <b>and ultimately, he crafted four faces for it so that the Divine Presence would see</b> it from each side <b>and become angry.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Ahaz placed</b> that idol <b>in the upper chamber</b> in the Temple, <b>as it is stated: “And the altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz”</b> (II Kings 23:12). <b>Manasseh placed it in the Sanctuary</b> itself, <b>as it is stated: “And he set the graven image of the <i>ashera</i> that he had crafted, in that house of which the Lord said to David, and to Solomon his son: In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen from all the tribes of Israel, will I put My name forever”</b> (II Kings 21:7). <b>Amon introduced it into the Holy of Holies, as it is stated: “For the bed is too short for spreading, and the covering too narrow for when he gathers himself”</b> (Isaiah 28:20).

### Part 9
<b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“For the bed is too short for spreading”? Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says</b> that it means: <b>For his bed is too narrow for two colleagues to spread upon it together,</b> as it is impossible that service of God and idol worship will coexist there. <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“and the covering [<i>masekha</i>] too narrow [<i>tzara</i>]</b> for when he gathers himself [<i>kehitkanes</i>]”? <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says: When Rabbi Yonatan would reach this verse he would cry. He about whom it is written: “He gathers [<i>kones</i>] the waters of the sea like a rampart”</b> (Psalms 33:7), <b>shall a graven image [<i>masekha</i>] be a rival [<i>tzara</i>]?</b>

### Part 10
<b>Ahaz nullified the</b> Temple <b>service and sealed the Torah,</b> prohibiting its study, <b>as it is stated: “Bind up the testimony, seal the Torah among my disciples”</b> (Isaiah 8:16). <b>Manasseh excised the mentions</b> of God’s names from sacred books <b>and destroyed the altar. Amon burned the Torah and sacrificed a gecko,</b> an impure creeping animal, <b>upon the altar. Ahaz permitted</b> engaging in sexual intercourse with <b>forbidden relatives,</b> and announced that marriage between those relatives is permitted. <b>Manasseh</b> exploited that pronouncement and <b>engaged in sexual intercourse with his sister.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Amon engaged in sexual intercourse with his mother, as it is stated: “But Amon increased his guilt”</b> (II Chronicles 33:23), indicating that he performed a greater and more disgraceful transgression than anyone else. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar</b> disagreed about his transgression; <b>one says that he burned the Torah, and one says that he engaged in sexual intercourse with his mother. His mother said to him: Do you have any pleasure</b> by engaging in intercourse <b>from the place from which you emerged? He said to her: I am doing</b> this <b>only to express insolence to my Creator,</b> not for my pleasure.

### Part 12
<b>When Jehoiakim came</b> along and reigned, <b>he said:</b> My <b>predecessors did not know</b> how <b>to express insolence to</b> God. <b>Do we need</b> God <b>even for his light?</b> Since <b>we have <i>parvayim</i> gold that we use</b> that shines, <b>let</b> God <b>take His light</b> from the world. <b>They said to him: Aren’t the silver and the gold His, as it is stated: “The silver is mine and the gold is mine says the Lord of hosts”</b> (Haggai 2:8)? Jehoiakim <b>said to them: He has already given it to us, as it is stated: “The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, but the earth He has given to the children of men”</b> (Psalms 115:16).

### Part 13
§ <b>Rava said to Rabba bar Mari: For what</b> reason <b>did</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>not enumerate Jehoiakim</b> among the kings who have no share in the World-to-Come? One would imagine that he has no share in the World-to-Come, <b>because it is written concerning him: “And the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and his abominations that he did, and that which was found on him”</b> (II Chronicles 36:8). The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase <b>“and that which was found on him”? Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar</b> disagree; <b>one says that he etched the name of idols on his penis</b> due to his devotion to them, <b>and one says that he etched the name of Heaven on his penis</b> in a display of contempt.

### Part 14
Rabba bar Mari <b>said to</b> Rava: <b>With regard to</b> the list of <b>kings, I did not hear</b> why Jehoiakim was excluded; but <b>with regard to</b> the list of <b>commoners, I heard</b> why a certain sinner was excluded. <b>For what</b> reason <b>did</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>not enumerate Micah</b> among those with no share in the World-to-Come? After all, he crafted idols that the Jewish people worshipped (see Judges, chapter 17). It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that his bread</b> was <b>available for passersby, as it is stated: All those who pass by the Levites.</b> He would provide sustenance to all hosted in his house.

### Part 15
With regard to that which is written: <b>“And He shall pass through the sea with affliction and shall strike the waves in the sea”</b> (Zechariah 10:11), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This</b> affliction is a reference to <b>the idol of Micah,</b> as Micah passed through the sea during the exodus from Egypt. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> The distance <b>from Gerav,</b> where Micah resided, <b>to Shiloh,</b> where the Tabernacle was at that time, <b>was three <i>mil</i>, and the smoke from the arrangement</b> of wood on the altar in Shiloh <b>and the smoke</b> from the worship <b>of the idol of Micah would intermingle with each other.</b>

### Part 16
<b>The ministering angels sought to dismiss him</b> from the world. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to them: Leave him, as his bread is available for travelers. And it is for this matter,</b> the sin of Micah’s idol, that <b>the people</b> involved in the incident of <b>the concubine in Gibeah were punished.</b> The tribes of Israel waged war with the tribe of Benjamin and forty thousand of them were killed. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to them: You did not protest for My honor</b> and took no action to destroy Micah’s idol, but <b>you protested for the honor of</b> one of <b>flesh and blood</b> who was killed? Therefore, the other tribes were initially unsuccessful, and many of their soldiers were killed.

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Yosei ben Kisma: Great is eating, as it distanced two clans from the Jewish people, as it is stated:</b> “An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the <b>Lord…because they met you not with bread and with water”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:4–5). <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan himself says:</b> Food <b>distances the near, and draws near the distant, and averts eyes from the wicked,</b> sparing them from punishment, <b>and causes the Divine Presence to rest on the prophets of the Baal; and an unwitting</b> transgression <b>with regard to it</b> is at times <b>considered an intentional</b> transgression.

### Part 18
The Gemara elaborates: The fact that it <b>distances the near</b> is derived

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC