
### Part 1
§ Apropos the last verse cited in this <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who slaughters his</b> evil <b>inclination</b> after it has tempted him to sin, if he repents <b>and confesses</b> his sin, <b>the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he had honored the Holy One, Blessed be He, in two worlds, this world and the World-to-Come, as it is written: “Whoever slaughters a thanks-offering [<i>toda</i>] honors Me [<i>yekhabdaneni</i>]”</b> (Psalms 50:23), which can also be read as: Whoever slaughters his evil inclination and confesses [<i>mitvadeh</i>] honors Me, and the two instances of the letter <i>nun</i> in the word <i>yekhabdaneni</i> allude to the two worlds.

### Part 2
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> also <b>says: When the Temple is standing,</b> if <b>a person sacrifices a burnt-offering, he has the reward</b> given <b>for</b> bringing <b>a burnt-offering,</b> and if he sacrifices <b>a meal-offering, he has the reward</b> given <b>for</b> bringing <b>a meal-offering. But</b> as for <b>one whose spirit is humble, the verse ascribes him</b> credit for his prayer <b>as though he has sacrificed all the offerings, as it is stated: “The offerings of God are a broken spirit”</b> (Psalms 51:19), which teaches that a broken spirit is equivalent to the offerings to God, in the plural. <b>And moreover, his prayer is not rejected, as it is stated</b> in the continuation of that verse: <b>“A broken and contrite heart, God, You will not despise.”</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>When</b> the condemned man <b>is at a distance of about ten cubits from the place of stoning, they say to him: Confess</b> your transgressions, <b>as the way of all who are being executed is to confess. As whoever confesses</b> and regrets his transgressions <b>has a portion in the World-to-Come. For so we find with regard to Achan, that Joshua said to him: “My son, please give glory to the Lord, God of Israel, and make confession to Him”</b> (Joshua 7:19). And the next verse states: <b>“And Achan answered Joshua, and said: Indeed I have sinned against the Lord, God of Israel, and like this and like that</b> have I done.” <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> Achan’s <b>confession achieved atonement for him?</b> It is derived from here, <b>as it is stated: “And Joshua said: Why have you brought trouble on us? The Lord shall trouble you this day”</b> (Joshua 7:25). Joshua said to Achan as follows: <b>On this day</b> of your judgment <b>you are troubled, but you will not be troubled in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And if</b> the condemned man <b>does not know how to confess,</b> either from ignorance or out of confusion, <b>they say to him: Say</b> simply: <b>Let my death be an atonement for all my sins. Rabbi Yehuda says: If</b> the condemned man <b>knows that he was convicted by the testimony of conspiring witnesses,</b> but in fact he is innocent, <b>he says: Let my death be an atonement for all my sins except for this sin.</b> The Sages who disagreed with Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to him: If so, every person</b> who is being executed <b>will say that, to clear himself</b> in the eyes of the public. Therefore, if the condemned man does not make such a statement on his own, the court does not suggest it to him as an alternative.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Since the mishna referred to Achan’s sin, the Gemara cites several statements concerning that incident. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Joshua said to Achan: <b>“Please [<i>na</i>]</b> give glory to the Lord, God of Israel, and make confession to Him.” The word <b>“<i>na</i>” is nothing other than an expression of supplication.</b> Why would Joshua employ an expression of supplication when approaching Achan?

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> explains: <b>When the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Joshua: “Israel has sinned”</b> (Joshua 7:11), Joshua <b>said to Him: Master of the Universe, who</b> is the one who has <b>sinned?</b> God <b>said to him: Am I an informer [<i>deilator</i>]? Go cast lots</b> and find out for yourself. Joshua then <b>went and cast lots, and the lot fell upon Achan.</b> Achan <b>said to him: Joshua, do you come to</b> execute <b>me</b> merely <b>based on a lot,</b> without any corroborating evidence? <b>You and Elazar the priest are the two</b> most <b>distinguished</b> leaders <b>of the generation,</b> but <b>if I cast a lot upon</b> the two of <b>you, it will</b> perforce <b>fall upon one of you.</b> What then can you prove from a lottery? Joshua <b>said to him: I ask of you, do not spread slander about the lots, as Eretz Yisrael will</b> one day <b>be divided by lots, as it is stated: “Nevertheless, the land shall be divided by lot”</b> (Numbers 26:55). Due to you the results of that lottery may be challenged. Therefore, Joshua used the word “<i>na</i>,” pleading with Achan to confess.

### Part 7
Joshua said to Achan: “Please give glory to the Lord, God of Israel, and <b>make confession</b> to Him.” <b>Ravina says:</b> Joshua <b>won over</b> Achan <b>with</b> his <b>words,</b> saying: <b>Do we ask anything of you but a confession? Make confession to Him and be discharged.</b> Thinking that if he confessed, he would be pardoned, Achan <b>immediately</b> responded: <b>“And Achan answered Joshua, and said: Indeed I have sinned against the Lord, God of Israel, and like this and like that have I done”</b> (Joshua 7:20).

### Part 8
With regard to the words “And like this and like that have I done,” <b>Rav Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: This teaches that Achan misused</b> consecrated property from <b>three dedications,</b> i.e., three groups of property that had been dedicated to the Lord. <b>Two</b> were during wars waged <b>in the days of Moses, and one</b> was <b>in the days of Joshua, as it is stated:</b> “And <b>like this and like that have I done,”</b> indicating that he had already committed similar offenses twice before committing the offense in Jericho. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon:</b> Achan misused property from <b>five</b> dedications, <b>four</b> during wars waged <b>in the days of Moses, and one in the days of Joshua, as it is stated: “I have sinned</b> against the Lord, God of Israel, <b>and like this and like that have I done,”</b> with each “and” alluding to an additional prior offense.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>what is the reason that</b> the Jewish people <b>were not punished</b> on Achan’s account <b>until now? Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon: Because</b> God <b>did not punish</b> the nation as a whole <b>for hidden</b> sins committed by individuals <b>until the Jewish people crossed the Jordan</b> River.

### Part 10
The Gemara notes that this is <b>subject to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> The verse states: <b>“The hidden matters belong to the Lord our God, but those matters that are revealed belong to us and to our children forever [<i>ad olam</i>],</b> that we may do all the words of this Torah” (Deuteronomy 29:28). <b>Why</b> in a Torah scroll <b>are there dots over</b> each of the letters in the words <b>“to us and to our children” and over the</b> letter <b><i>ayin</i> in</b> the word <b>“forever [<i>ad</i>]”?</b> The dots, which function like erasures that weaken the force of the words, <b>teach that</b> God <b>did not punish</b> the nation <b>for hidden</b> sins <b>until the Jewish people crossed the Jordan</b> River. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: And does</b> God <b>ever punish</b> the nation as a whole <b>for hidden</b> sins committed by individuals? <b>But isn’t it already stated:</b> “The hidden matters belong to the Lord our <b>God…forever,”</b> indicating that the Jewish people will never be collectively held responsible for the secret sins of individuals? <b>Rather,</b> the dots over the words teach that <b>just as</b> God <b>did not</b> ever <b>punish</b> the nation as a whole <b>for hidden</b> sins committed by individuals, <b>so</b> too, <b>He did not punish</b> the entire nation <b>for</b> sins committed publicly by individuals <b>until the Jewish people crossed the Jordan</b> River. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC