
### Part 1
<b>But according to the one who says</b> that in a case where <b>this</b> permitted factor <b>and that</b> forbidden factor <b>cause</b> an outcome to be produced, that outcome is <b>permitted, what can be said?</b> Since deriving benefit from the bull that sired the offspring is permitted, deriving benefit from the offspring should be permitted as well.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Ravina says:</b> Emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say</b> that the distinction in the <i>baraita</i> is: <b>If before its verdict was finalized,</b> the cow <b>was impregnated and calved, its offspring is permitted. If before its verdict was finalized,</b> the cow <b>was impregnated and after its verdict was finalized it calved, its offspring is forbidden</b> because the legal status of <b>the fetus is</b> not that of an independent entity; rather, its status is like that of <b>its mother’s thigh,</b> i.e., a part of its body. Therefore, when the mother is sentenced to death, the offspring is also forbidden once it is born.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>All</b> those <b>liable to</b> be executed with different court-imposed <b>death</b> penalties who became intermingled are sentenced to the most lenient form of execution. The Gemara noted: <b>Conclude from</b> the mishna that an individual who is <b>forewarned for a severe matter is forewarned for a lesser matter.</b> If one is forewarned that if he violates a certain prohibition then he is liable to be stoned, while in fact, he is liable to be executed with a less severe form of execution, the forewarning is effective and he is executed with the less severe form of execution. That is the reason for the <i>halakha</i> in the mishna that even those liable to be executed with a more severe form of execution are executed with the less severe form of execution.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya</b> rejects that proof and <b>says: With what are we dealing here?</b> It is a case <b>where</b> the witnesses <b>forewarned</b> the individual that if he violates the prohibition he is liable to be executed, <b>without specification</b> of the mode of execution. <b>And</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>all the others,</b> those who are <b>liable for</b> the various <b>death penalties</b> stated <b>in the Torah</b> other than the inciter to idol worship, the court <b>executes them only when</b> the following elements are present: <b>The congregation,</b> represented by the court, <b>and witnesses, and forewarning</b> just before the defendant commits the transgression. <b>And</b> the court does not execute him <b>unless</b> the witnesses <b>informed</b> the defendant <b>that he is liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty from</b> the <b>court. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The defendant is not executed <b>unless</b> the witnesses <b>informed</b> the defendant <b>by which</b> form of <b>death</b> penalty <b>he is</b> to be <b>executed.</b>

### Part 5
Based on the statement of Rabbi Yehuda, it may be inferred that according to the first <i>tanna</i>, although they must inform him that he is liable to be executed, they are not required to inform him of the specific mode of execution. The Gemara explains the basis for the dispute between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yehuda: <b>The first <i>tanna</i> derived</b> forewarning <b>from</b> the incident of the <b>wood gatherer</b> (see Numbers 15:32–36), who was executed even though even Moses did not know with which death penalty he was to be executed. Clearly, the mode of execution could not have been included in his forewarning. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The execution of the <b>wood gatherer was a provisional edict</b> based on the word of God. The <i>halakha</i> throughout the generations cannot be derived from it.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: In a case where those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>stoned</b> were intermingled <b>with</b> those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>burned,</b> Rabbi Shimon says: They are all sentenced to be executed by stoning, and the Rabbis say: They are all sentenced to be executed by burning. <b>Rav Yeḥezkel taught</b> a different version <b>to Rami, his son:</b> In a case where those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>burned</b> were intermingled <b>with</b> those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>stoned, Rabbi Shimon says: They shall</b> all <b>be sentenced</b> to execution <b>by stoning, as burning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Yehuda,</b> son of Rav Yeḥezkel, <b>said to him: Father, do not teach it</b> in <b>that manner,</b> as it is difficult to understand: <b>Why</b> does Rabbi Shimon teach that the reason is <b>specifically that burning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution than stoning? <b>Derive</b> this <i>halakha</i>, <b>that</b> they are stoned, for a different reason: The principle with regard to a mixture is to follow the majority, and in <b>this</b> case <b>the majority</b> of the intermingled group <b>is liable to be stoned.</b> Rav Yeḥezkel asked Rav Yehuda: <b>Rather, how</b> then <b>shall I teach it?</b>

### Part 8
Rav Yehuda said: You should teach: In a case where those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>stoned</b> were intermingled <b>with</b> those <b>who are</b> liable to be <b>burned,</b> where the majority is liable to be burned, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: They shall</b> all <b>be sentenced</b> to execution <b>by stoning, as burning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution. Rav Yeḥezkel, his father, asked: <b>If so, say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>And the Rabbis say: They shall</b> all <b>be sentenced</b> to execution <b>by burning, as stoning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution. If so, <b>derive</b> this <i>halakha</i>, <b>that</b> they are burned because in <b>this</b> case <b>the majority</b> of the intermingled group <b>is liable to be burned,</b> not because stoning is a more severe form of execution.

### Part 9
Rav Yehuda answered: <b>There,</b> in the latter clause, <b>it is the Rabbis who say to Rabbi Shimon: According to you, who say</b> that <b>burning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution than stoning, the fact that the majority is liable to be burned does not warrant the execution of the entire group by burning, since the minority was sentenced to stoning, which is more lenient in your opinion. That is <b>not</b> so, as <b>stoning is</b> a more <b>severe</b> form of execution. And that reason is extraneous, as in this case, they are burned because the majority of the group is liable to be burned.

### Part 10
When this narrative was heard, <b>Shmuel said to Rav Yehuda: Long-toothed one:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC