
### Part 1
<b>But if</b> one <b>was</b> a judge accepted as <b>an expert for the public,</b> then <b>he may judge</b> cases <b>even</b> as the <b>lone</b> judge. <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> One <b>such as I may judge</b> cases of <b>monetary law as</b> the <b>lone</b> judge. <b>And similarly, Rabbi Ḥiyya said:</b> One <b>such as I may judge</b> cases of <b>monetary law as</b> the <b>lone</b> judge.

### Part 2
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: What is the meaning of: Such as I, in the statements of these Rabbis? Did they intend to say: <b>Such as I,</b> in <b>that I have studied and</b> have the skills to <b>extrapolate</b> and derive new rulings on the basis of earlier decisions, <b>and have</b> also <b>received permission</b> to judge as the lone judge? <b>But</b> accordingly, if one <b>has not received permission</b> to judge as the lone judge, <b>his judgment is not</b> a valid <b>judgment? Or perhaps</b> this is not the correct reading of the statements, and the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>even though he did not receive permission</b> to judge as the lone judge, <b>his judgment is</b> nevertheless a valid <b>judgment?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution to this dilemma from the following case: <b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Naḥman,</b> once <b>adjudicated</b> a certain <b>case and erred</b> in his ruling. Upon recognizing his error, <b>he came before Rav Yosef</b> to ask what he should do. Rav Yosef <b>said to him: If</b> the litigants <b>accepted you upon themselves</b> as the lone judge, and both had agreed that they would accept your ruling, <b>you are not</b> liable to <b>pay</b> restitution to the party who lost the case due to your erroneous ruling. <b>But if</b> they did <b>not</b> accept you on themselves, but were rather compelled to be judged before you, you must <b>go</b> and <b>pay</b> restitution. And <b>learn from it</b> that even in a case <b>where one did not receive permission</b> to judge as the lone judge, <b>his ruling is</b> a valid <b>judgment.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the case.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav says: One who wants to adjudicate a case and wants to be exempt</b> from payment of restitution <b>if he errs</b> in his judgment <b>must receive permission from the Exilarch</b> to judge cases. <b>And similarly, Shmuel says:</b> In such a case <b>he must receive permission from the Exilarch.</b> Once he receives permission, even an erroneous decision carries halakhic force and therefore it is as if he did not err.

### Part 5
Since the Gemara mentioned the importance of a judge receiving authorization from the Exilarch, it now discusses the scope of this authority. It is <b>obvious</b> that <b>from here to here,</b> meaning relying on permission granted by the Exilarch in Babylonia in order to adjudicate cases within Babylonia, <b>and from there to there,</b> relying on permission granted by the <i>Nasi</i> in Eretz Yisrael in order to adjudicate cases within Eretz Yisrael, the authorization <b>is effective. And</b> it is also obvious that <b>from here to there,</b> relying on permission granted by the Exilarch to adjudicate cases within Eretz Yisrael, it <b>is also effective,</b> as the authority of the Exilarch is greater than that of the <i>Nasi</i>. This is so <b>since</b> the Exilarch <b>here</b> in Babylonia may be termed <b>a scepter,</b> i.e., a ruler with actual power of governance, <b>and</b> the <i>Nasi</i> <b>there</b> in Eretz Yisrael is only <b>a staff,</b> i.e., a legislator with limited power.

### Part 6
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “The scepter shall not depart from Judah nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet until Shiloh comes” (Genesis 49:10). The term “Shiloh” is understood as a reference to the Messiah, and therefore the verse is interpreted as delineating the authority of Jewish rulers during the exile, before the Messiah comes. <b>“The scepter shall not depart from Judah”; these are the Exilarchs in Babylonia, who</b> are empowered by the government and consequently <b>subjugate the Jewish people</b> as <b>with a scepter. “Nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet”; These are the grandchildren of Hillel</b> the Elder <b>who</b> hold the position of <i>Nasi</i> and <b>teach Torah in public,</b> but do not have authority to actually enforce their judgments.

### Part 7
If one has permission <b>from there,</b> from the <i>Nasi</i>, and wants <b>to</b> adjudicate cases <b>here</b> in Babylonia, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> an incident <b>that</b> occurred: <b>Rabba bar Ḥana adjudicated a case</b> in Babylonia <b>and erred. He came before Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> to ask what he should do. Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to him: If</b> the litigants <b>accepted you upon themselves, you are not</b> liable to <b>pay</b> restitution to the party who unjustly lost the case, <b>but if not, go</b> and <b>pay. But Rabba bar Ḥana received permission</b> from the <i>Nasi</i> in Eretz Yisrael; therefore, <b>learn from</b> this incident that permission <b>from there to</b> adjudicate cases <b>here is not effective.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Learn from it</b> that this is the case.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is this permission <b>not effective? But when Rabba bar Rav Huna was</b> involved <b>in a dispute with the</b> members of <b>the house of the Exilarch he said:</b> It is <b>not from you</b> that <b>I received permission</b> to judge cases. <b>I received permission from my father, my master,</b> i.e., Rav Huna, <b>and my father, my master,</b> received permission <b>from Rav, and Rav from Rabbi Ḥiyya, and Rabbi Ḥiyya from Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi in Eretz Yisrael. Therefore, it seems that permission received in Eretz Yisrael is in fact effective in Babylonia. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>He was</b> merely <b>standing up to them with words alone,</b> but there was no halakhic validity to his statement.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But since</b> permission to judge received in Eretz Yisrael <b>is not effective</b> in Babylonia, <b>why did Rabba bar Ḥana</b> need to <b>receive permission</b> when he left for Babylonia? What was the value of that permission? The Gemara answers: The permission is effective <b>for the cities that stand on the borders</b> of Babylonia, which are not entirely in the jurisdiction of Babylonia, so permission from Eretz Yisrael is effective there.

### Part 10
§ <b>What</b> is the specific nature of this <b>permission?</b> The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabba bar Ḥana descended to Babylonia,</b> his uncle <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>My brother’s son is descending to Babylonia. May he teach</b> people and issue rulings with regard to what is prohibited and what is permitted? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to him: <b>He may teach.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya then asked: <b>May he</b> also <b>adjudicate</b> cases of monetary law, and be absolved from payment if he errs? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to him: <b>He may adjudicate.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya continued: <b>May he declare a firstborn</b> animal <b>permitted?</b> The male firstborn of a kosher animal may not be eaten, as it is supposed to be offered in the Temple. But if it acquires a permanent blemish it is unfit for an offering, and it may be eaten. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to him: <b>He may declare</b> such an animal <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 11
Similarly, <b>when Rav,</b> who was also Rabbi Ḥiyya’s nephew, <b>descended to Babylonia, Rabbi Ḥiyya said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>My sister’s son is descending to Babylonia. May he teach</b> people and issue rulings with regard to what is prohibited and what is permitted? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to him: <b>He may teach.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya then asked: <b>May he</b> also <b>adjudicate</b> cases of monetary law, and be absolved from payment if he errs? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi responded: <b>He may adjudicate.</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya continued: <b>May he declare a firstborn</b> animal <b>permitted?</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said to him: <b>He may not declare</b> such an animal <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 12
This incident raises several questions, which the Gemara asks in sequence. <b>What is different concerning this Sage,</b> Rabba bar Ḥana, <b>that</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>called him: My brother’s son, and what is different concerning that Sage,</b> Rav, <b>that</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>called him: My sister’s son? And if you would say that this was</b> the <b>situation:</b> Rabba bar Ḥana was his brother’s son and Rav was his sister’s son, <b>but doesn’t the Master say: Aivu,</b> Rav’s father, <b>and Ḥana,</b> the father of Rabba bar Ḥana, <b>and Sheila, and Marta, and Rabbi Ḥiyya, were all sons of Abba bar Aḥa Karsala from Kafrei?</b> Consequently, Rav would also be Rabbi Ḥiyya’s brother’s son. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav</b> was <b>his brother’s son who was</b> also <b>his sister’s son,</b> as Rabbi Ḥiyya’s half-brother married Rabbi Ḥiyya’s half-sister; while <b>Rabba bar Ḥana was his brother’s son who was not his sister’s son.</b> Therefore, he referred to Rav in a manner that emphasized the additional relationship.

### Part 13
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that he called him: My sister’s son, for a different reason:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC