
### Part 1
<b>who did eat of my bread, has lifted his heel against me”</b> (Psalms 41:10). Bread is a metaphor for Torah knowledge.

### Part 2
§ Apropos Ahithophel, the Gemara relates the events that led to his death. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: A person should never bring himself to</b> undergo <b>an ordeal, as David, king of Israel, brought himself to</b> undergo <b>an ordeal and failed.</b> David <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, for what</b> reason <b>does one say</b> in prayer: <b>God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, and one does not say: God of David?</b> God <b>said</b> to David: <b>They have undergone ordeals before Me, and you have not undergone an ordeal before Me.</b> David <b>said before Him: Examine me and subject me to an ordeal, as it is stated: “Examine me, Lord, and subject me to an ordeal;</b> try my kidneys and my heart” (Psalms 26:2).

### Part 3
God <b>said</b> to him: <b>I will subject you to an ordeal, and I will perform a matter for you</b> that I did not perform for the Patriarchs, <b>as for them, I did not inform them</b> of the nature of the ordeal, <b>while I am informing you that I will subject you to an ordeal involving a matter of</b> a married woman, with whom <b>relations</b> are <b>forbidden. Immediately,</b> it is written: <b>“And it came to pass one evening that David rose from his bed”</b> (II Samuel 11:2).

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> Once David heard the nature of his ordeal, he sought to prevent himself from experiencing lust. <b>He transformed his nighttime bed into his daytime bed,</b> i.e., he engaged in intercourse with his wives during the day, in an attempt to quell his lust. <b>But a <i>halakha</i>,</b> i.e., a Torah statement, <b>escaped him: There is a small limb in man</b> that he employs in sexual intercourse. If <b>he starves</b> the limb, and does not overindulge, it <b>is satiated; but</b> if <b>he satiates</b> the limb and overindulges in sexual intercourse, it <b>is starving,</b> and desires more. Therefore, his plan had the opposite effect.

### Part 5
The verse states: <b>“And he walked upon the roof of the king’s house; from the roof he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very fair to look upon”</b> (II Samuel 11:2). <b>Bathsheba was shampooing her head behind a beehive,</b> which concealed her from sight. <b>Satan came and appeared to</b> David <b>as a bird.</b> David <b>shot an arrow at</b> the bird, the arrow <b>severed the beehive,</b> Bathsheba <b>was exposed, and</b> David <b>saw her.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Immediately,</b> it is written: <b>“And David sent and inquired after the woman. And one said: Is not this Bathsheba, daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite? And David sent messengers, and took her, and she came to him, and he lay with her, for she was purified from her impurity, and then she returned to her house”</b> (II Samuel 11:3–4). <b>And that is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You have proved my heart; You have visited me in the night: You have tried me, but You find nothing; let no presumptuous thought pass my lips”</b> (Psalms 17:3). David <b>said: Oh, that a muzzle would have fallen upon the mouth of the one who hates me,</b> a euphemism for his own mouth, <b>and I would not have said anything like that</b> and I would have withstood the ordeal.

### Part 7
<b>Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “To the leader, of David. In the Lord I put my trust; how can you say to my soul: Flee like a bird to your mountain”</b> (Psalms 11:1)? <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, pardon me for that sin</b> with Bathsheba so <b>that</b> the wicked people <b>will not say: The mountain that is among you,</b> i.e., the luminary of the generation, David, <b>was driven</b> from the world due to <b>a bird</b> that led to his transgression.

### Part 8
<b>Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Against You, only You, have I sinned, and done what is evil in Your eyes; that You are justified when You speak, and right when You judge”</b> (Psalms 51:6)? <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: It is revealed and known before You that if I sought to suppress my</b> evil <b>inclination, I would have suppressed it; but I said:</b> I will sin, so <b>that they will not say a servant overcame his master</b> and withstood the ordeal even though God said that he would not.

### Part 9
<b>Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For I am ready to stumble [<i>letzela</i>] and my pain is always before me”</b> (Psalms 38:18)? <b>Bathsheba, daughter of Eliam, was</b> designated as <b>fit for David from the six days of Creation.</b> Rava interprets that the term <i>letzela</i> is referring to Eve, who was taken from the side [<i>tzela</i>] of Adam, the first man, and explains that she was destined for him, just as Eve was destined for Adam. <b>But she came to him through pain. And likewise, the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Bathsheba, daughter of Eliam, was</b> designated as <b>fit for David, but he partook of her unripe,</b> before the appointed time. David would have ultimately married her in a permitted manner after the death of Uriah.

### Part 10
<b>Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And when I limped they rejoiced and gathered, the wretched gather themselves together against me, and those whom I know not; they tore and did not cease [<i>dammu</i>]”</b> (Psalms 35:15)? <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe. It is revealed and known before you that if</b> my enemies <b>were to tear my flesh, my blood [<i>dami</i>] would not flow to the ground,</b> due to excessive fasting (see II Samuel 12:16–17).

### Part 11
David continued: <b>Moreover,</b> my enemies torment me to the extent that <b>at the time when they are engaged in</b> the public study of the <i>halakhot</i> of the <b>four court-imposed death penalties they interrupt their study and say to me: David,</b> concerning <b>one who engages in intercourse with a married woman, his death</b> is effected <b>with what</b> form of execution? And <b>I said to them:</b> Concerning <b>one who engages in intercourse with a married woman</b> before witnesses and with forewarning, <b>his death is by strangulation, and he has a share in the World-to-Come. But one who humiliates another before the multitudes has no share in the World-to-Come.</b> The transgression of those who humiliated David is clearly more severe than the transgression of David himself.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Even during the time of his illness he fulfilled</b> the mitzva of <b>conjugal rights for eighteen</b> wives, <b>as it is stated: “I am weary with my groaning; every night I speak in my bed; I melt away my couch with tears”</b> (Psalms 6:7). Even when he was weary and groaning he still spoke in his bed, a euphemism for sexual intercourse. <b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: David sought to engage in idol worship</b> during Absalom’s coup, <b>as it is stated: “And it came to pass when David was at the top [<i>rosh</i>] of the ascent, where he would bow to God”</b> (II Samuel 15:32), <b>and <i>rosh</i></b> means <b>nothing other than idol worship, as it is stated: “As for that image, its head [<i>reishei</i>] was of fine gold”</b> (Daniel 2:32).

### Part 13
It is written: <b>“Behold Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat rent and earth upon his head”</b> (II Samuel 15:32). Hushai <b>said to David: Shall they say a king like you will engage in idol worship?</b> David <b>said to him:</b> Is it preferable that they say with regard to <b>a king like me,</b> known to be righteous, that <b>his son will kill him?</b> David continued, referring to himself in third person: <b>It is preferable that he shall engage in idol worship and the name of Heaven shall not be desecrated in public</b> through the murder of a righteous king in this manner.

### Part 14
Hushai <b>said</b> to him: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>you married a beautiful woman,</b> the mother of Absalom? David <b>said to him:</b> With regard to <b>a beautiful woman, the Merciful One permitted</b> marrying <b>her.</b> Hushai <b>said to him:</b> But <b>you did not interpret the juxtaposed</b> verses, <b>as juxtaposed to</b> the portion of the beautiful woman is the portion beginning: <b>“If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:18). From that juxtaposition it is derived: <b>Anyone who marries a beautiful woman has a stubborn and rebellious son.</b> Therefore, even if Absalom kills you, there will be no desecration of God’s name, as the people will attribute his actions to his mother.

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Dostai from Biri taught: To what is David comparable?</b> He is comparable <b>to a Samaritan merchant,</b> who incrementally lowers the price until the buyer agrees to purchase the merchandise. <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe: “Who can discern his errors”</b> (Psalms 19:13), i.e., forgive me for the unwitting sins that I committed. God <b>said to him: They are forgiven for you.</b> David asked more: <b>“Cleanse me from hidden faults”</b> (Psalms 19:13), i.e., pardon me for transgressions that I committed in private, even if I performed them intentionally. God said to him: <b>They are forgiven for you.</b> David requested: <b>“Keep back your servant also from intentional sins”</b> (Psalms 19:14). God said to him: <b>They are forgiven for you.</b> David requested: <b>“Let them not have dominion over me, then I shall be faultless”</b> (Psalms 19:14), and I further request <b>that the Sages will not speak of me</b> and condemn me. God said to him: <b>They are forgiven for you.</b>

### Part 16
David requested: <b>“And I shall be clear from great transgression”</b> (Psalms 19:14), meaning <b>that my transgression</b> with Bathsheba and Uriah <b>will not be written</b> in the Bible. God <b>said to him:</b> That is <b>impossible. And just as</b> the letter <b><i>yod</i> that I removed from</b> the name of <b>Sarai,</b> wife of Abraham, when I changed her name to Sarah, was <b>standing and screaming several years</b> over its omission from the Bible <b>until Joshua came and I added</b> the <i>yod</i> <b>to his</b> name, <b>as it is stated: “And Moses called Hosea, son of Nun, Joshua [<i>Yehoshua</i>]”</b> (Numbers 13:16); <b>the entire portion</b> of your transgression, which is fit to be included in the Bible, <b>all the more so</b> it cannot be omitted.

### Part 17
The verse states: <b>“And I shall be clear from great transgression”</b> (Psalms 19:14). David <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, pardon me for that entire sin.</b> God <b>said</b> to him: <b>Your son Solomon is already destined to say with his wisdom: “Can a man take fire in his lap and his garments not be burned? Can one walk on hot coals and his feet not be scorched? So too one who lies with his neighbor’s wife; anyone who touches her shall not go unpunished”</b> (Proverbs 6:27–29). David <b>said to Him: Will that man,</b> David, <b>be expelled</b> for <b>that entire</b> transgression, with no remedy? God <b>said to</b> David: <b>Accept upon yourself afflictions,</b> and that will atone for your sins. <b>He accepted</b> afflictions <b>upon himself.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> For <b>six months David was afflicted with leprosy and the Divine Presence abandoned him and</b> the members of <b>the Sanhedrin dissociated</b> themselves <b>from him. He was afflicted with leprosy, as it is stated: “Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow”</b> (Psalms 51:9), indicating that he required purification like a leper. <b>The Divine Presence abandoned him, as it is stated: “Restore me to joy of Your salvation; and uphold me with a willing spirit”</b> (Psalms 51:14). <b>And</b> the members of <b>the Sanhedrin dissociated</b> themselves <b>from him, as it is stated: “Let those who fear You turn to me,</b> and those who have known Your testimonies” (Psalms 119:79). <b>From where do we</b> derive that this lasted for <b>six months?</b> It is derived <b>as it is written: “And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC