
### Part 1
Once <b>the</b> verdict of the <b>judgment has been issued,</b> it <b>is not permitted</b> for <b>you to mediate</b> a dispute.

### Part 2
The Gemara presents <b>a mnemonic</b> device alluding to the names of <i>tanna’im</i> in the coming discussion: <b><i>Samekh</i>, <i>reish</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>shin</i>; <i>beit</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>kuf</i>, <i>shin</i>.</b> The <i>Tosefta</i> cites several statements of <i>tanna’im</i> related to compromise and the term <i>botze’a</i>. <b>Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, says:</b> It is <b>prohibited to mediate</b> a dispute; <b>and anyone who mediates [<i>habotze’a</i>]</b> a dispute <b>is a sinner; and anyone who blesses the mediator is cursing</b> God. <b>And of this, it is stated:</b> “And <b>the covetous [<i>botze’a</i>] blesses himself, though he despises the Lord”</b> (Psalms 10:3).

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> the judge must assure that <b>the</b> true <b>judgment will</b> prevail at all costs and metaphorically <b>pierce the mountain, as it is stated: “For the judgment is God’s”</b> (Deuteronomy 1:17). <b>And similarly, Moses would say: Let the judgment pierce the mountain. But</b> by contrast, <b>Aaron,</b> whose role was not that of a judge, was <b>a lover of peace and a pursuer of peace, and</b> he <b>would apply peace between</b> one <b>person and the other, as it is stated: “The law of truth was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his lips; he walked with Me in peace and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity”</b> (Malachi 2:6).

### Part 4
The <i>Tosefta</i> cites several other interpretations of the above-mentioned verse from Psalms. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If <b>one stole a <i>se’a</i> of wheat and ground it and baked it and separated <i>ḥalla</i> from it,</b> i.e., separated the portion of the dough that must be given to the priests, <b>how can he</b> possibly <b>recite the blessing</b> on the mitzva of <i>ḥalla</i>? <b>He is not blessing; rather,</b> he is <b>cursing</b> God. <b>And of this</b> offense <b>it is stated: “And the covetous [<i>uvotze’a</i>] blesses himself, though he despises the Lord,”</b> interpreted homiletically as: And whoever blesses upon breaking [<i>botze’a</i>] the bread despises the Lord.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> The term <b><i>botze’a</i></b> employed in that verse <b>was stated only with regard to Judah, as it is stated: “And Judah said to his brothers: What profit [<i>betza</i>] is it if we slay our brother</b> and conceal his blood? Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites” (Genesis 37:26–27). <b>And</b> consequently, <b>anyone who blesses Judah</b> for this act <b>is cursing</b> God, <b>and of this it is stated: “And the covetous [<i>uvotze’a</i>] blesses himself, though he despises the Lord,”</b> interpreted homiletically as: “And whoever blesses the profiteer [<i>botze’a</i>] despises the Lord.”

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says:</b> It is <b>a mitzva to mediate</b> a dispute, <b>as it is stated: “Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates”</b> (Zechariah 8:16). <b>Is it not that in the place where there is</b> strict <b>judgment there is no</b> true <b>peace, and in a place where there is</b> true <b>peace, there is no</b> strict <b>judgment? Rather, which is the judgment that has peace within it? You must say: This is mediation,</b> as both sides are satisfied with the result.

### Part 7
<b>And similarly, with regard to David, it says: “And David executed justice and charity</b> to all his people” (II Samuel 8:15). <b>And is it not</b> that <b>wherever there is</b> strict <b>justice, there is no charity, and</b> wherever there is <b>charity, there is no</b> strict <b>justice? Rather, which is the justice that has within it charity? You must say: This is mediation.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara cites an alternative interpretation of David’s method of judgment, in which <b>we come to</b> the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> i.e., Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, who says that it is prohibited to mediate a dispute: If a judge <b>adjudicated</b> a case of monetary <b>law,</b> and he correctly <b>exonerated the</b> party who was <b>exempt</b> from payment <b>and deemed liable the</b> party who was <b>liable</b> to pay, if he then <b>saw that</b> due to his ruling <b>a poor person became liable</b> to pay an amount of <b>money</b> that is beyond his means <b>and</b> therefore the judge himself <b>paid for him from his</b> own <b>house, this is justice and</b> also <b>charity.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara continues: It is <b>justice for this</b> one <b>and charity for that</b> one: It is <b>justice for this</b> one, <b>because</b> the judge <b>restored</b> his <b>money to him; and</b> it is <b>charity for that</b> poor person, <b>because</b> the judge <b>paid for him from his</b> own <b>house. And similarly, with regard to David, it says: “And David executed justice and charity to all his people”</b> (II Samuel 8:15). He executed <b>justice for this</b> one, <b>because</b> he <b>restored his money to him, and charity for that</b> one, <b>because</b> he <b>paid for him from his</b> own <b>house.</b>

### Part 10
This interpretation of the verse is <b>difficult for Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. If the word “charity” is meant to demonstrate that David supported the poor defendants, <b>this</b> term: <b>“To all his people,”</b> is incorrect. If the interpretation is correct, <b>it should have</b> stated: Charity <b>to the poor people. Rather, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Although</b> he <b>did not pay from his</b> own <b>house, it is</b> still <b>justice and charity.</b> It is <b>justice for this</b> one <b>and charity for that</b> one. It is <b>justice for this</b> one, <b>because</b> the judge <b>restored his money to him, and charity for that</b> one, <b>because</b> the judge <b>removed</b> the <b>stolen item from his possession.</b> By adjudicating the case correctly and compelling the liable party to pay his debt, the judge thereby ensures that the liable party does not illegitimately maintain property to which he is not entitled.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya says:</b> If <b>two</b> litigants <b>come before you for a judgment, before you hear their</b> respective <b>statements</b> and claims; <b>or after you hear their statements but you do not</b> yet <b>know where the judgment is leaning,</b> meaning that it is not yet clear to the judge which party is in the right, <b>you</b> are <b>permitted to say to them: Go out and mediate.</b> But <b>after you hear their statements and you know where the judgment is leaning, you are not permitted to say to them: Go out and mediate, as it is stated: “The beginning of strife is as when one releases water; therefore leave off contention before the quarrel breaks out”</b> (Proverbs 17:14). Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya interprets the verse to mean: <b>Before</b> the resolution of <b>the contention is revealed, you can cast it off. Once</b> the resolution of <b>the contention is revealed, you cannot cast it off.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And Reish Lakish says:</b> If <b>two</b> litigants <b>come for a judgment,</b> and <b>one</b> is <b>flexible</b> and agreeable <b>and one</b> is <b>rigid</b> and contentious, <b>before you hear their</b> respective <b>statements, or after you hear their statements but you do not</b> yet <b>know where the judgment is leaning,</b> it <b>is permitted</b> for <b>you to say to them: I will not submit to</b> your request to judge <b>you.</b> The judge may refuse the case out of fear that <b>perhaps the strong</b> and contentious one will <b>be</b> found <b>liable, and</b> it will <b>turn out</b> that <b>the strong</b> one will <b>pursue</b> the judge with intent to harm <b>him.</b> But <b>once you hear their statements and you know where the judgment is leaning, you may not say to them: I will not submit to</b> your request to judge <b>you, as it is stated: “You shall not be afraid before any man”</b> (Deuteronomy 1:17).

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a student who is sitting before his teacher and</b> he <b>sees</b> a point of <b>merit for a poor person or liability for a wealthy person, from where</b> is it derived <b>that he should not be silent? As it is stated: “You shall not be afraid before any man”;</b> he should fear neither his teacher nor the wealthy litigant. <b>Rabbi Ḥanin says:</b> The verse intimates: <b>Do not suppress your statement before</b> any <b>man. And the witnesses should know about whom they are testifying, and before Whom they are testifying, and Who will ultimately exact payment from them, as it is stated: “Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:17).

### Part 14
<b>And the judges should know whom they are judging, and before Whom they are judging, and Who will ultimately exact payment from them, as it is stated: “God stands in the congregation of God”</b> (Psalms 82:1). <b>And similarly, with regard to Jehoshaphat it says: “And he said to the judges: Consider what you do; for you judge not for man, but for the Lord”</b> (II Chronicles 19:6). And <b>lest the judge say: What</b> value is there <b>for me with this suffering?</b> Why should I engage in such a burdensome and difficult task? <b>The verse states: “He is with you in giving judgment,”</b> from which it is derived that in rendering his decision, <b>a judge has only that which his eyes see.</b> He is enjoined to render the best judgment possible based on the information he has available, and he is not accountable for anything else.

### Part 15
Earlier, the <i>Tosefta</i> stated that once the verdict has been issued, it is not permitted for the judge to arrange a compromise. The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>a verdict,</b> i.e., what is the formal action that signifies the conclusion of the case? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It is when the judge says: <b>So-and-so, you are liable; so-and-so, you are exonerated. Rav says: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa,</b> who said it is a mitzva to mediate a dispute. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? And was it</b> not that <b>Rav Huna was a student of Rav,</b> and <b>when</b> litigants <b>would come before Rav Huna he would say to them: Do you want</b> a strict <b>judgment,</b> or <b>do you want a compromise?</b> Evidently, Rav’s student Rav Huna did not hold that it is a mitzva to specifically arrange a compromise. The Gemara clarifies: <b>What</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa</b> mean <b>that he says</b> it is <b>a mitzva?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC