
### Part 1
Shimon ben Shataḥ <b>turned to his right.</b> The judges <b>forced their faces to the ground</b> out of fear and said nothing. <b>He turned to his left, and they forced their faces to the ground</b> and said nothing. <b>Shimon ben Shataḥ said to them: You are masters of thoughts,</b> enjoying your private thoughts, and not speaking. <b>May the Master of thoughts,</b> God, <b>come and punish you. Immediately,</b> the angel <b>Gabriel came and struck</b> those judges <b>to the ground, and they died. At that moment,</b> when they saw that the Sanhedrin does not have power to force the king to heed its instructions, the Sages <b>said: A king does not judge</b> others <b>and</b> others <b>do not judge him,</b> and <b>he does not testify and</b> others <b>do not testify concerning him,</b> due to the danger of the matter.

### Part 2
The mishna teaches that the king <b>does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with his brother’s widow <b>and</b> his brother <b>does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with his wife, and Rabbi Yehuda says that he may do so if he wishes. The Gemara challenges Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion: <b>Is that so? But doesn’t Rav Ashi say: Even according to the one who says</b> that with regard to <b>a <i>Nasi</i> who relinquished</b> the <b>honor</b> due <b>him, his honor is relinquished,</b> nevertheless, with regard to <b>a king who relinquished</b> the <b>honor</b> due <b>him, his honor is not relinquished, as it is stated: “You shall set a king over you”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:15), meaning <b>that his fear should be upon you.</b> The preservation of a king’s honor is mandated by the Torah. How could Rabbi Yehuda allow him to waive it? The Gemara answers: <b>A mitzva is different;</b> a king is not disgraced if he relinquishes his honor to perform a mitzva.

### Part 3
The mishna teaches: <b>And no one may marry</b> the king’s widow, and Rabbi Yehuda says that a king may marry another king’s widow, as proven by King David, who was promised with regard to King Saul after his death: “And I have given you the house of your master and the wives of your master” (II Samuel 12:8). <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Sages <b>said to Rabbi Yehuda:</b> The meaning of the verse is not that David married Saul’s widows, but that he married <b>women appropriate for him from the house of the king. And who are they? Merab and Michal,</b> the daughters of Saul.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates a discussion about David’s marriage to Merab and Michal from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Sota</i> 11:9): <b>Rabbi Yosei’s students asked him: How did David marry two sisters while they were</b> both <b>alive?</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>said to them: He married Michal</b> only <b>after the death of Merab,</b> which is permitted. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says</b> a different explanation: <b>His betrothal to Merab was in error</b> and therefore void from the outset, and so Michal was permitted to him. This is <b>as it is stated</b> in the words of King David to Saul’s son Ish-bosheth: <b>“Deliver me my wife Michal, whom I betrothed to me for one hundred foreskins of the Philistines”</b> (II Samuel 3:14).

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>the</b> biblical <b>derivation</b> here? How does Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa learn from this verse that King David’s betrothal to Merab was in error? <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> In the verse, David indicates: <b>Michal</b> is <b>my wife but Merab</b> is <b>not my wife.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> caused the betrothal between David and Merab to be <b>a mistaken betrothal?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>As it is written</b> about Israel’s war against the Philistines and Goliath: <b>“And it shall be that the man who kills him, the king will enrich him with great riches</b> and will give him his daughter, and make his father’s house free in Israel” (I Samuel 17:25). David <b>went</b> and <b>killed</b> Goliath. King Saul <b>said to him: You have a loan</b> in <b>my</b> possession, as I owe you the great wealth that I promised, though David had not given him an actual monetary loan. <b>And</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that with regard to <b>one who betroths</b> a woman <b>by</b> forgiving <b>a loan, she is not betrothed,</b> and therefore David’s betrothal of Merab did not take effect.

### Part 7
Saul <b>went</b> and <b>gave</b> Merab <b>to Adriel, as it is written: “But it came to pass at the time when Merab, Saul’s daughter, should have been given to David,</b> that she was given to Adriel the Meholathite as a wife” (I Samuel 18:19). Saul <b>said to</b> David: <b>If you want me to give you Michal, go bring me one hundred foreskins of the Philistines</b> (see I Samuel 18:25–27). David <b>went</b> and <b>brought</b> Saul two hundred foreskins. Saul <b>said to him:</b> Even though you brought the foreskins, the betrothal is not valid, as <b>you,</b> David, <b>have a loan and</b> one <b><i>peruta</i></b> in <b>my</b> possession, i.e., the wealth Saul owed him for slaying Goliath as well as the item of lesser monetary value, the foreskins of the Philistines.

### Part 8
Saul and David had a halakhic dispute on this point: <b>Saul reasoned</b> that in the case of one who betroths a woman <b>by</b> forgiving <b>a loan and</b> giving her one <b><i>peruta</i>, his mind</b> is focused <b>on the loan</b> and not on the additional <i>peruta</i>, and therefore the betrothal is not valid. <b>And David reasoned</b> that in the case of one who betroths a woman <b>by</b> forgiving <b>a loan and</b> giving her one <b><i>peruta</i>, his mind</b> is focused <b>on the <i>peruta</i></b> and therefore the betrothal is valid.

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Everyone</b> reasons that in the case of one who betroths a woman <b>by</b> forgiving <b>a loan and</b> giving her one <b><i>peruta</i>, his mind</b> is focused <b>on the <i>peruta</i>. Saul reasoned</b> that foreskins of Philistines <b>are not fit for any</b> purpose and as such are worth not even one <i>peruta</i>, and that consequently the betrothal did not take effect. <b>And David reasoned</b> that <b>they are fit for dogs and cats</b> as food and as such are worth at least one <i>peruta</i>, and therefore the betrothal takes effect.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> who explains that David married Michal after the death of Merab, with regard to <b>this</b> verse: <b>“Deliver me my wife Michal”</b> (II Samuel 3:14), <b>what</b> does he <b>derive from it?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Sota</i> 11:8): <b>Rabbi Yosei would derive</b> meaning from <b>mixed verses</b> that seem contradictory.

### Part 11
The <i>Tosefta</i> continues. <b>It is written: “But the king took the two sons of Rizpah, daughter of Aiah, whom she bore unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth, and the five sons of Michal,</b> daughter of Saul, <b>whom she bore to Adriel,</b> son of Barzillai <b>the Meholathite”</b> (II Samuel 21:8). <b>But did</b> Saul <b>give</b> Michal <b>to Adriel? But didn’t he give her to Palti, son of Laish, as it is written: “Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Palti, son of Laish”</b> (I Samuel 25:44)?

### Part 12
The <i>Tosefta</i> continues: The first verse does not mean, then, that Michal married Adriel. <b>Rather,</b> the verse <b>compares Merab’s betrothal to Adriel to Michal’s betrothal to Palti: Just as Michal’s betrothal to Palti</b> was effected <b>in transgression,</b> according to all opinions, since she was already married to David, <b>so, too, Merab’s betrothal to Adriel</b> was effected <b>in transgression,</b> since according to <i>halakha</i> she was betrothed to David.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa as well, isn’t it written: “And the five sons of Michal, daughter of Saul,</b> whom she bore to Adriel” (II Samuel 21:8). <b>Rabbi Yehoshua</b> ben Korḥa could have <b>said to you</b> to understand it this way: <b>And did Michal give birth</b> to these children? <b>But didn’t Merab give birth</b> to them for Adriel? Rather, <b>Merab gave birth</b> to them and died, <b>and Michal raised</b> them in her house. <b>Therefore,</b> the children <b>were called by her name, to teach you that</b> with regard to <b>anyone who raises an orphan in his house, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as if he gave birth to him.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara presents <b>a mnemonic</b> for the following discussion: <b>Ḥanina called; Yoḥanan and his wife; Elazar and redemption; and Shmuel in my studies. Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> Proof for the aforementioned statement can be derived <b>from here: “And the neighbors gave him a name, saying: There is a son born to Naomi”</b> (Ruth 4:17). <b>And did Naomi give birth</b> to the son? <b>But didn’t Ruth give birth</b> to him? <b>Rather, Ruth gave birth and Naomi raised</b> him. <b>Therefore, he was called by her name:</b> “A son born to Naomi.”

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Proof for the aforementioned statement can be derived <b>from here: “And his wife Hajehudijah gave birth to Jered the father of Gedor,</b> and Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah, <b>and these are the sons of Bithiah, daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took”</b> (I Chronicles 4:18). <b>Mered is Caleb, and why was his name called Mered? Because he rebelled [<i>marad</i>] against the counsel of the spies.</b> And according to the midrash, Jered, Heber, and Jekuthiel all refer to Moses our teacher. <b>And did Bithiah give birth</b> to Moses? <b>But didn’t Jochebed give birth</b> to him? <b>Rather, Jochebed gave birth</b> to him <b>and Bithiah raised</b> him. <b>Therefore, he was called by her name</b> as though she had given birth to him.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> Proof for the aforementioned statement can be derived <b>from here: “You have with Your arm redeemed your people, the children of Jacob and Joseph, Selah”</b> (Psalms 77:16). <b>And did Joseph sire</b> all of the children of Israel? <b>But didn’t Jacob sire them? Rather, Jacob sired</b> them <b>and Joseph sustained</b> them financially. <b>Therefore, they were called by his name;</b> all of Israel were called the children of Joseph.

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: Anyone who teaches another</b> person’s <b>son Torah, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as if he sired him, as it is stated: “Now these are the generations of Aaron and Moses”</b> (Numbers 3:1), <b>and it is written</b> immediately afterward: <b>“And these are the names of the sons of Aaron:</b> Nadav the firstborn and Avihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar” (Numbers 3:2), but it does not mention the names of Moses’ children. This serves <b>to say to you</b> that <b>Aaron sired</b> his children, <b>but Moses taught</b> them Torah. <b>Therefore,</b> the children <b>were</b> also <b>called by his name.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara cites another derivation connected to child-rearing: <b>“Therefore, so says the Lord to the house of Jacob, who redeemed Abraham;</b> Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale” (Isaiah 29:22). <b>But where have we found</b> any indication <b>about Jacob that he redeemed Abraham? Rav Yehuda says:</b> It means <b>that he redeemed him from the suffering of raising children,</b> in that Abraham did not have twelve tribes and the resultant hardships involved in raising them, as Jacob did, as Jacob assumed the burden of raising the tribes of Israel. <b>And this is as it is written: “Jacob shall not now be ashamed,</b> neither shall his face now wax pale,” meaning: <b>“Jacob shall not now be ashamed” before his father,</b> and <b>“neither shall his face now wax pale” before his father’s father,</b> since he took upon himself the role that they bore as well.

### Part 19
The Gemara cites a tradition with regard to Palti, son of Laish: <b>It is written</b> in one place <b>“Palti”</b> (I Samuel 25:44), <b>and it is written</b> in another place <b>“Paltiel”</b> (II Samuel 3:15). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Palti</b> was <b>his</b> real <b>name, and why was his name called Paltiel?</b> To teach <b>that God [<i>El</i> ] saved [<i>pelato</i>] him from the sin,</b> by giving him the insight that he may not touch Michal, understanding that she was still David’s wife and therefore forbidden to him. <b>What did he do? He embedded a sword</b> in the bed <b>between him and her,</b> and <b>said: Anyone who engages in this matter,</b> i.e., sexual intercourse, <b>should be stabbed by this sword.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara challenges this: <b>But isn’t it written: “And her husband went with her,</b> weeping as he went, and followed her to Bahurim” (II Samuel 3:16), referring to Palti as Michal’s husband? The Gemara responds: This means <b>that he became like a husband for her</b> through his affection and concern for her. The Gemara counters: <b>But isn’t it written</b> in that very verse: <b>“weeping as he went”?</b> If from the outset he thought that she was David’s wife, why was he crying? The Gemara responds: He was weeping <b>about the mitzva that left him,</b> as from now on, he would receive no reward for restraining his desire. The end of the verse says that they went <b>“to Bahurim,”</b> meaning <b>that they both became like young men [<i>baḥurim</i>]</b> in <b>that they did not taste sexual intercourse</b> at all.

### Part 21
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Joseph’s power</b> is the <b>humility of Boaz,</b> as Joseph is praised for showing strength with regard to an accomplishment that was insignificant for Boaz (see Genesis, chapter 39). Likewise, <b>Boaz’s power</b> is the <b>humility of Palti, son of Laish,</b> as Palti’s capacity for restraint was greater still. <b>Joseph’s power</b> is the <b>humility of Boaz, as it is written</b> about Boaz: <b>“And it came to pass at midnight that the man was startled and turned himself,</b> and behold, a woman lay at his feet” (Ruth 3:8). <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>“and turned himself [<i>vayyilafet</i>]”? Rav says:</b> The meaning is <b>that his flesh became like the heads of turnips [<i>lefatot</i>],</b> his sexual organ hardening out of arousal, but even though Ruth was not married he refrained from engaging in intercourse with her; while Joseph had to exert more effort, despite the fact that Potiphar’s wife was married.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC