
### Part 1
<b>“Poor [<i>aniyya</i>] Anathoth”</b> (Isaiah 10:30)? <b>Jeremiah, son of Hilkiah, is destined to prophesy about</b> Nebuchadnezzar <b>from Anathoth, as it is written: “The statements of Jeremiah, son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin”</b> (Jeremiah 1:1).

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Are these</b> matters <b>comparable? There,</b> in Jeremiah, Nebuchadnezzar is called <b><i>ari</i>,</b> as the verse refers to him with the term <i>arye</i>, and <b>here,</b> in Isaiah, Nebuchadnezzar is called <b><i>laish</i>.</b> The Gemara explains that the verses are not contradictory, as <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: There are six</b> Hebrew <b>terms for the lion,</b> and <b>they are: <i>Ari</i>, <i>kefir</i>, <i>lavi</i>, <i>layish</i>, <i>shaḥal</i>, <i>shaḥatz</i>.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that this verse is unrelated to the journeys of Sennacherib, then the places listed in the verse <b>are too few,</b> as there are not ten. The Gemara explains: <b>Averu</b> and <b>Mabara</b> are in fact the names of <b>two</b> separate places.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>“This very day shall he halt at Nov”</b> (Isaiah 10:32)? <b>Rav Huna says: That</b> was the final <b>day</b> that <b>remained from</b> the punishment that the Jewish people received from <b>the sin of Nov</b> (see I Samuel, chapter 22). <b>The astrologers said to</b> Sennacherib: <b>If you go</b> and conquer them <b>now, you will overcome</b> the Jewish people; <b>and if not, you will not overcome</b> the Jewish people. The Gemara relates: <b>He walked</b> and traversed <b>in one day a road</b> upon <b>which one must walk for ten days</b> in order to traverse it.

### Part 4
<b>When they arrived in Jerusalem they cast mats [<i>bistarkei</i>] for</b> Sennacherib and piled them high <b>until he ascended and sat above the wall, to the extent that he</b> was able to <b>see the entire</b> city of <b>Jerusalem. When he saw it, it</b> seemed <b>small in his eyes</b> and <b>he said: Is this the city of Jerusalem for which I have disrupted all my camps and for which I have conquered all</b> these <b>countries? Is it smaller and weaker than all the cities of the nations that I have conquered with my might? He went up and shook his head</b> in contempt, and dismissively <b>waved his hand at the Temple Mount that is in Zion and at the courtyard that is in Jerusalem.</b>

### Part 5
His officers <b>said</b> to him: <b>Let us attack now</b> and begin the conquest of Jerusalem. Sennacherib <b>said to them: You are weary. Tomorrow, each and every one of you will bring me a piece</b> of a stone <b>from</b> the wall equivalent in size to the <b>seal [<i>gulmo harag</i>]</b> of a letter, and this will suffice to breach the wall and vanquish the city. The verse recounts that <b>immediately: “And it came to pass that night, that the angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the camp of the Assyrians one hundred and eighty-five thousand; and when men arose in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses”</b> (II Kings 19:35). <b>Rav Pappa says</b> that <b>this</b> is in accordance with the adage <b>that people say:</b> When <b>quarrel lies</b> and is delayed overnight, <b>the quarrel is nullified.</b> Since Jerusalem was not conquered that day, the decree was voided.

### Part 6
§ Apropos the massacre of Nov, the Gemara relates: <b>“And Ishbibenob, who was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass; and he was girded with new armor and planned to slay David”</b> (II Samuel 21:16). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>Ishbibenob? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> This is <b>a man [<i>ish</i>] who came</b> to punish David <b>over matters of Nov. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to David: Until when will this sin be concealed in your hand</b> without punishment? <b>Through your</b> actions the inhabitants of <b>Nov, the city of priests, were massacred, and through your</b> actions, <b>Doeg the Edomite was banished</b> from the World-to-Come, <b>and through your</b> actions <b>Saul and his three sons were killed.</b>

### Part 7
God said to David: Your arrival in Nov and your misleading Ahimelech the priest generated the chain of events, and therefore you must be punished. You may choose the punishment. <b>Is it your desire</b> that <b>your descendants will cease</b> to exist <b>or</b> that <b>you will be handed to the enemy?</b> David <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, it is preferable</b> that <b>I will be handed to the enemy and my descendants will not cease</b> to exist.

### Part 8
<b>One day</b> David <b>went to hunt</b> with <b>a falcon [<i>liskor bazzai</i>]. Satan came and appeared to him as a deer. He shot an arrow at</b> the deer, <b>and</b> the arrow <b>did not reach it.</b> Satan <b>led</b> David to follow the deer <b>until he reached the land of the Philistines. When Ishbibenob saw</b> David <b>he said: This is that</b> person <b>who killed Goliath, my brother. He bound him, doubled him over, and placed him</b> on the ground, <b>and</b> then he <b>cast him under</b> the beam <b>of an olive press</b> to crush him. <b>A miracle was performed for him, and the earth opened beneath him</b> so he was not crushed by the beam. <b>That is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “You have enlarged my steps beneath me, that my feet did not slip”</b> (Psalms 18:37).

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>That day at dusk on Shabbat eve, Abishai ben Zeruiah shampooed his hair with four jugs of water</b> in preparation for Shabbat. <b>He saw four bloodstains. There are</b> those <b>who say: A dove came and fluttered</b> its wings <b>before him.</b> Abishai <b>said: The congregation of Israel is likened to a dove, as it is stated: “You shall shine as the wings of a dove covered with silver</b> and her pinions with yellow gold” (Psalms 68:14); <b>conclude from it</b> that <b>David, king of Israel, is in a state of distress. He came to</b> David’s <b>house and did not find him.</b> Abishai <b>said</b> that <b>we learned</b> in a mishna (22a): <b>One may not ride on</b> the king’s <b>horse, and one may not sit on his throne, and one may not use his scepter. In a period of danger, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>He came</b> and <b>asked</b> in <b>the study hall</b> what the ruling is in that situation. <b>They said to him: In a period of danger</b> one may <b>well</b> do so.

### Part 10
<b>He mounted</b> the king’s <b>mule and arose and went</b> to the land of the Philistines. <b>The land</b> miraculously <b>contracted for him</b> and he arrived quickly. <b>As he was progressing he saw Orpah,</b> Ishbibenob’s <b>mother,</b> who was <b>spinning</b> thread with a spindle. <b>When she saw him, she removed her spindle and threw it at him, intending to kill</b> him. After failing to do so, <b>she said to</b> Abishai: <b>Young man, bring me</b> my <b>spindle. He threw</b> the spindle and struck her <b>at the top of her brain and killed her.</b>

### Part 11
<b>When Ishbibenob saw him, he said: Now they are two,</b> David and Abishai, <b>and they will kill me. He threw David up</b> in the air, <b>and stuck his spear</b> into the ground. <b>He said: Let</b> David <b>fall upon it and die. Abishai recited</b> a sacred <b>name</b> of God and <b>suspended David between heaven and earth</b> so that he would not fall.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> David <b>himself recite</b> the name of God and save himself. Why did he need Abishai? The Gemara answers: <b>A prisoner does not release himself from a prison</b> but requires someone else to release him. Similarly, one in danger is incapable of rescuing himself.

### Part 13
Abishai <b>said to</b> David: <b>What do you seek here</b> and why did you fall into Ishbibenob’s hands? David <b>said to him: This</b> is what <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to me, and this</b> is what <b>I responded to Him;</b> the time to submit to my enemy has arrived. Abishai <b>said to him: Reverse your prayer</b> and pray that your descendants will cease to exist rather than that you will be handed to the enemy, in accordance with the adage that people say: <b>Let your son’s son</b> be a poor peddler and <b>sell wax, and you will not suffer.</b> Do not limit your expenses to leave an inheritance for your descendants.

### Part 14
David <b>said to him: If so, help me. That is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And Abishai, son of Zeruiah, came to his aid,</b> and smote the Philistine and killed him” (II Samuel 21:17). <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> This means <b>that he came to his aid in prayer. Abishai recited</b> another sacred <b>name</b> of God <b>and caused</b> David to <b>land</b> safely after being suspended between heaven and earth, and they fled.

### Part 15
Ishbibenob <b>pursued them,</b> intending to kill them. <b>When they reached</b> the place named <b>Kuvi they said:</b> The name of the place is an abbreviation for the phrase meaning: <b>Stand</b> and battle <b>against him [<i>kum beih</i>]. When they reached</b> a place called <b>Bei Terei,</b> David and Abishai <b>said: With two [<i>bitrei</i>] cubs they killed the lion,</b> meaning they expected to be successful. <b>They said to</b> Ishbibenob: <b>Go find Orpah, your mother, in the grave. When they mentioned his mother’s name to him</b> and told him she died, <b>his strength diminished, and they killed him.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>It is</b> after this <b>that it is written: “Then David’s men took an oath to him saying: You shall not go with us to war anymore and you will not douse the lamp of Israel”</b> (II Samuel 21:17).

### Part 16
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to land contracting to shorten a journey: <b>For three</b> individuals <b>the land contracted,</b> and each one miraculously reached his destination quickly: <b>Eliezer, servant of Abraham, and Jacob our forefather, and Abishai, son of Zeruiah.</b> The Gemara elaborates: The case of <b>Abishai, son of Zeruiah,</b> is <b>that which we said.</b> The case of <b>Eliezer, servant of Abraham,</b> is <b>as it is written: “And I came that day to the well”</b> (Genesis 24:42). His intention was <b>to say</b> to the members of Rebecca’s family <b>that on that day he left</b> Canaan and on the same day he arrived, to underscore the miraculous nature of his undertaking on behalf of Abraham. The case of <b>Jacob our forefather</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC