
### Part 1
<b>You must say that the attribute of reward is greater than the attribute of punishment,</b> as <b>with regard to the attribute of reward it is written: “He commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven, and rained upon them manna to eat”</b> (Psalms 78:23–24). <b>And with regard to the attribute of punishment</b> at the time of the flood the verse <b>says: “And the windows of the heavens were opened”</b> (Genesis 7:11). To mete out punishment, God opened only windows, which are considerably smaller openings than doors, indicating that the attribute of reward is greater.

### Part 2
<b>With regard to the attribute of punishment it is written: “And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcasses of the men who have rebelled against Me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh”</b> (Isaiah 66:24). The Gemara asks: <b>Is it not so</b> that when <b>a person extends his finger into the fire in this world, he is immediately burned?</b> How, then, can one withstand the fire of Gehenna, which is never extinguished? <b>Rather, just as the Holy One, Blessed be He, provides strength to the wicked to receive their punishment, so too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, provides strength to the righteous to receive their reward,</b> His handful.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Also one who reads external literature</b> has no share in the World-to-Come. The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: This is a reference to reading <b>books of heretics. Rav Yosef says: It is also prohibited to read the book of ben Sira,</b> due to its problematic content. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>What is the reason</b> that it is prohibited to read the book of ben Sira? <b>If we say</b> that it is prohibited <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> ben Sira <b>wrote in it: Do not flay the skin of the fish from its ear, so that its skin does not go to ruin, but roast it on the fire and eat with it two loaves of bread,</b> and you believe it to be nonsense, that is not a sufficient reason.

### Part 4
<b>If</b> your difficulty is <b>from its literal</b> meaning, that does not pose a difficulty, as <b>in the Torah,</b> God <b>also wrote: “You shall not destroy its trees”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:19). It is prohibited to destroy both trees and fish skin arbitrarily. <b>If</b> your difficulty is <b>from</b> its <b>homiletic interpretation</b> as a euphemism, ben Sira <b>is teaching us proper conduct:</b> A man <b>should not engage in sexual intercourse in an atypical manner,</b> i.e., anal intercourse, with his wife, as it causes her discomfort.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the book poses a difficulty <b>because it is written</b> there: <b>A daughter is for her father false treasure; due to fear for her he will not sleep at night: During her minority, lest she be seduced; during her young womanhood lest she engage in licentiousness; once she has reached her majority, lest she not marry; once she marries, lest she have no children; once she grows old, lest she engage in witchcraft</b> (Ben Sira 42:11–14). Perhaps you believe that one should not say this to the father of daughters. <b>Didn’t the Sages also say it</b> with regard to women? They said: It is <b>impossible for the world</b> to exist <b>without males and without females;</b> nevertheless, <b>happy is one whose children are males and woe unto him whose children are females.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the book poses a difficulty <b>because it is written</b> there: <b>Do not introduce anxiety into your heart, as anxiety has killed mighty men</b> (Ben Sira 14:1; 30:29). <b>Didn’t Solomon</b> already <b>say it</b> in the verse: <b>“Anxiety in a man’s heart dejects him [<i>yashḥena</i>]”</b> (Proverbs 12:25)? <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> interpret the term homiletically and read it as <i>yesiḥenna</i>. <b>One says</b> that it means: <b>He shall remove it [<i>yesiḥenna</i>] from his mind,</b> and that will ease his anxiety. <b>And one says: He shall tell it [<i>yesiḥenna</i>] to others,</b> and that will ease his anxiety. Both agree with the statement of ben Sira.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the book poses a difficulty <b>because it is written</b> there: <b>Prevent the multitudes from inside your house, and do not bring everyone into your house</b> (Ben Sira 11:37). <b>But didn’t Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>also say it, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: A person should never have many friends inside his house, as it is stated: “There are friends that one has to his own detriment”</b> (Proverbs 18:24), as through his association with them he will become weak and be ruined.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the book poses a difficulty <b>because it is written</b> there: <b>A sparse-bearded man is clever; a thick-bearded man is a fool. One who blows on his cup is not thirsty. One who said: With what will I eat bread, take the bread from him. One who has a passage in his beard, the entire world is unable to overcome him.</b> Abaye suggests: Due to all this nonsense, it is not appropriate to read this book.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yosef says:</b> Even though there are passages in the book that are inappropriate, <b>we teach the superior matters that are in it</b> even in public. <b>A good wife is a good gift; she will be given into the bosom of a God-fearing man</b> (Ben Sira 26:3). <b>A bad wife is leprosy for her husband. What is his remedy? He shall chase her from his house and will be healed from his leprosy</b> (Ben Sira 25:30). <b>A beautiful wife, happy is her husband; the number of his days is doubled</b> (Ben Sira 26:1). Due to his happiness, it is as though his life is twice as long.

### Part 10
We also teach what it states there: <b>Avert your eyes from a woman of grace, lest you be trapped in her snare. Turn not to her husband to mix wine and strong drink with him, as many have been corrupted by the beauty of the beautiful woman, and mighty are all her fatalities</b> (Ben Sira 9:9–11). <b>Many are the wounds of a peddler</b> (Ben Sira 11:36), which in this context is referring to those <b>who accustom</b> others <b>to matters of forbidden sexual relations. Like a spark ignites a coal</b> (Ben Sira 11:43), <b>like a cage full of birds, so too, their houses are filled with deceit</b> (Ben Sira 11:36–37). <b>Prevent the multitudes from inside your house, and do not bring everyone into your house</b> (Ben Sira 11:37). <b>Let many be those who greet you; reveal your secrets to one in a thousand. From she who lies in your bosom guard the openings of your mouth,</b> i.e., do not tell her everything. <b>Grieve not about tomorrow’s trouble, because you know not what a day may bring; perhaps tomorrow you will no longer be, and one will have worried about a world that is not his.</b>

### Part 11
The verse states: <b>“All the days of the poor are terrible”</b> (Proverbs 15:15). The book of <b>ben Sira says: Also the nights</b> are terrible, as then the poor person worries. The poor person’s <b>roof is among the lowest roofs</b> in the city, <b>and in the elevation of the hills is his vineyard,</b> at the highest point, as those are of the lowest quality and consequently the least expensive places for each. <b>From the rain on the roofs</b> of the entire city, water will flow down <b>to his roof</b> and dampen it, <b>and the soil of his vineyard</b> is eroded by the rain and swept down <b>to</b> other <b>vineyards.</b>

### Part 12
§ The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the statements that follow, based primarily on those who authored those statements. <b>Zeira; Rava; Mesharshiyya; Ḥanina <i>toviyya</i>,</b> referring to Rabbi Ḥanina, who spoke of a good [<i>tova</i>] wife; <b>Yannai <i>yafe</i>,</b> referring to Rabbi Yannai, who spoke of one who is broad-minded [<i>da’ato yafe</i>]; <b>Yoḥanan <i>meraḥem</i>,</b> referring to Rabbi Yoḥanan, who spoke of one who is compassionate [<i>meraḥem</i>]; <b>Yehoshua <i>mekatzer</i>,</b> referring to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, who spoke of one who is intolerant [<i>da’ato ketzara</i>].

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Zeira says</b> that <b>Rav says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written:</b> “All the days of the poor are terrible, and for the good-hearted it is always a feast” (Proverbs 15:15)? <b>“All the days of the poor are terrible”; these are masters of the Talmud,</b> who invest constant effort in their study and encounter endless difficulties and questions. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; these are masters of the Mishna,</b> who study only halakhic conclusions and encounter no difficulties.

### Part 14
<b>Rava says</b> that <b>the opposite</b> is true; <b>and this is</b> that <b>which Rav Mesharshiyya said in the name of Rava: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “One who quarries stones shall be saddened by them</b> and he who chops wood shall be warmed by it” (Ecclesiastes 10:9)? “One who quarries stones shall be saddened by them”; <b>these are masters of the Mishna,</b> as they invest effort, but are unable to benefit from that effort, as they do not reach halakhic conclusions. <b>“And he who chops wood shall be warmed by it”; these are masters of the Talmud,</b> who invest considerable effort and benefit from it, as they reach halakhic conclusions.

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who has a bad wife. “And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to <b>one who has a good wife. Rabbi Yannai says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to one who is <b>delicate [<i>istenis</i>],</b> i.e., one who is sensitive to repulsive items. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to one who is <b>broad-minded [<i>da’ato yafe</i>],</b> i.e., he is not particular and will eat anything. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to one who is <b>compassionate [<i>meraḥem</i>],</b> as he always senses the suffering in the world and is constantly anxious. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to one who is <b>cruel</b> and indifferent to suffering in the world. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: “All the days of the poor are terrible”; this</b> is referring to

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC