
### Part 1
<b>If a snake, which kills</b> other creatures whose carcasses are impure <b>and</b> thereby <b>increases impurity</b> in the world, is itself nevertheless <b>pure,</b> as it is not included in the list of impure creeping animals, then concerning <b>a creeping animal that does not kill and</b> does not <b>increase impurity, isn’t it logical that it should be pure?</b> This argument is rejected: <b>But it is not so;</b> the logic of the <i>halakha</i> of a creeping animal is <b>just as it is</b> concerning the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to an ordinary thorn,</b> which can injure people or animals and can even kill and thereby increase impurity, but is nevertheless pure. It is therefore apparent that this consideration is not relevant to the <i>halakhot</i> of impurity.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> With regard to <b>any city that does not have</b> among its residents <b>two</b> men who are able <b>to speak</b> all seventy languages <b>and one</b> additional man who is able <b>to listen</b> to and understand statements made in all the languages, even if he cannot speak all of them, <b>they do not place</b> a lesser <b>Sanhedrin</b> there. The members of the Sanhedrin do not all need to know all of the languages, but there must be at least this minimum number. <b>And in Beitar there were three</b> individuals who were able to speak all seventy languages, <b>and in Yavne</b> there were <b>four,</b> and they were: <b>Rabbi Eliezer, and Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi Akiva, and Shimon HaTimni,</b> who was not an ordained Sage, and he would therefore <b>deliberate before</b> the other judges while seated <b>on the ground,</b> not among the rows of Sages.

### Part 3
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A third,</b> i.e., a Sanhedrin that has three individuals who can speak all seventy languages, is <b>a wise</b> Sanhedrin, and if it also has <b>a fourth</b> such person, <b>there is no</b> court <b>above it,</b> meaning that there is no need for additional language experts. Apparently the minimum requirement is three people who can speak the languages, not two. The Gemara answers: Rav <b>states</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the following <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: A Sanhedrin that has <b>a second</b> language expert <b>is wise;</b> and if it also has <b>a third, there is no</b> court <b>above it.</b>

### Part 4
§ Since the <i>baraita</i> stated that Shimon HaTimni would deliberate before them on the ground, the Gemara now lists various standard formulations used to introduce the statements of various Sages throughout the generations. If a source says: <b>It was learned from the Sages,</b> the intention is that this was a statement made by the Sage <b>Levi</b> who sat before and learned <b>from Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. If it says: They <b>deliberated before the Sages,</b> this is referring to <b>Shimon ben Azzai, and Shimon ben Zoma, and Ḥanan the Egyptian, and Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak</b> would <b>teach five</b> names for this list: <b>Shimon</b> ben Azzai, <b>Shimon</b> ben Zoma, <b>and Shimon</b> HaTimni, <b>Ḥanan</b> the Egyptian, <b>and Ḥananya</b> ben Ḥakhinai.

### Part 5
The expression: <b>Our Rabbis that are in Babylonia,</b> is referring to <b>Rav and Shmuel.</b> The expression: <b>Our Rabbis that are in Eretz Yisrael,</b> is referring to <b>Rabbi Abba.</b> The expression: <b>The judges of the Diaspora,</b> is a reference to the Sage <b>Karna.</b> The phrase: <b>The judges of Eretz Yisrael,</b> is a reference to <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi.</b> The phrase: <b>The judges of Pumbedita,</b> is referring to <b>Rav Pappa bar Shmuel,</b> who was the head of the court there, and: <b>The judges of Neharde’a,</b> is a reference to the court headed by <b>Rav Adda bar Minyumi.</b> The term: <b>The Elders of Sura,</b> is referring to <b>Rav Huna and Rav Ḥisda,</b> and: <b>The Elders of Pumbedita,</b> is referring to <b>Rav Yehuda and Rav Eina. The sharp ones of Pumbedita</b> are <b>Eifa and Avimi, the sons of Raḥava.</b> The expression: <b>The <i>amora’im</i> of Pumbedita,</b> is referring to <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef,</b> and the phrase: <b>The <i>amora’im</i> of Neharde’a,</b> is referring to <b>Rav Ḥama.</b>

### Part 6
If it says: The Sages <b>of Neharbela taught,</b> this is referring to <b>Rami bar Berabi,</b> and the statement: <b>They say</b> in <b>the school of Rav,</b> is a reference to <b>Rav Huna.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rav Huna</b> sometimes <b>say</b> with regard to a given <i>halakha</i>: <b>They say</b> in <b>the school of Rav?</b> From this, it is apparent that a statement introduced by that formula cannot be made by Rav Huna himself, as Rav Huna quotes someone else with that introduction. The Gemara responds: <b>Rather,</b> the expression: They say in the school of Rav, must be referring to <b>Rav Hamnuna.</b> The formula: <b>They say in the West,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, is referring to <b>Rabbi Yirmeya;</b> the expression: <b>They sent</b> a message <b>from there,</b> meaning from Eretz Yisrael, is referring to <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina;</b> and the statement: <b>They laughed at it in the West,</b> means that <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> did not accept a particular opinion.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> in one instance it is reported that: <b>They sent</b> a message <b>from there</b> that began: <b>According to the statement of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina.</b> This indicates that the expression: They sent from there, is not itself a reference to a statement of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina. The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, reverse</b> the statements. The phrase: <b>They sent from there,</b> is a reference to <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> and: <b>They laughed at it in the West,</b> means that <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina</b> did not accept a particular opinion.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And how many</b> men must <b>be in the city for</b> it <b>to be eligible for</b> a lesser <b>Sanhedrin?</b> The opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> is that there must be <b>120</b> men. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the relevance of</b> the number <b>120?</b> The Gemara explains that <b>23</b> are needed to <b>correspond to</b> the number of members of the <b>lesser Sanhedrin, and</b> it is necessary for there to be <b>three rows of 23</b> students who sit before the lesser Sanhedrin to learn and also to advise them; that <b>is</b> a total of <b>92</b> people. <b>And</b> since there also need to be <b>10 idlers of the synagogue,</b> people who are free from urgent work and are always sitting in the synagogue to take care of its repair and the other needs of the public, that <b>would be 102.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And</b> in addition there are <b>two scribes</b> required for the Sanhedrin, <b>and two bailiffs, and two litigants</b> who will come to be judged. <b>And</b> there are <b>two witnesses</b> for one side, <b>and two</b> witnesses who could render those witnesses <b>conspiring</b> witnesses by testifying that they were elsewhere at the time of the alleged incident, <b>and two</b> additional witnesses could testify against the witnesses who rendered the first witnesses <b>conspiring</b> witnesses, rendering the second pair <b>conspiring</b> witnesses. All of these are necessary in order for a trial to take place, as is described in Deuteronomy 19:15–21. Therefore, <b>there are</b> so far a total of <b>114</b> men who must be in the city.

### Part 10
<b>And</b> it <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A Torah scholar is not permitted to reside in any city that does not have these ten things: A court that</b> has the authority to <b>flog and punish</b> transgressors; <b>and</b> a charity <b>fund</b> for which monies <b>are collected by two</b> people <b>and distributed by three,</b> as required by <i>halakha</i>. This leads to a requirement for another three people in the city. <b>And a synagogue; and a bathhouse; and</b> a public <b>bathroom; a doctor; and a bloodletter; and a scribe</b> [<b><i>velavlar</i></b>] to write sacred scrolls and necessary documents; <b>and</b> a ritual <b>slaughterer; and a teacher of young children.</b> With these additional requirements there are a minimum of 120 men who must be residents of the city. <b>They said in the name of Rabbi Akiva:</b> The city must <b>also</b> have <b>varieties of fruit, because varieties of fruit illuminate the eyes.</b>

### Part 11
The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya says:</b> There must be 230 men in the city in order for it to be eligible for a lesser Sanhedrin, corresponding to the ministers of tens appointed in the wilderness by Moses at the suggestion of his father-in-law, Yitro (see Exodus 18:21). Each member of the Sanhedrin can be viewed as a judge with responsibility for ten men. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC