
### Part 1
<b>and change your</b> appearance so that they will not recognize you. Sennacherib asked him: <b>With what shall I change</b> it? God <b>said to him: Go bring me scissors and I will shear you</b> Myself. Sennacherib asked: <b>From where should I bring</b> the scissors? The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to him: Go to that house and bring</b> them. <b>He went</b> and <b>found ministering angels,</b> who <b>came and appeared to</b> Sennacherib <b>as men; and</b> the angels <b>were grinding date pits.</b>

### Part 2
Sennacherib <b>said to them: Give me scissors.</b> The ministering angels <b>said to him: Grind a <i>se’a</i> of pits and we will give</b> it <b>to you. He ground a <i>se’a</i> of pits and they gave him scissors. By</b> the time <b>he came</b> back with the scissors <b>it grew dark.</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to</b> Sennacherib: <b>Go</b> and <b>bring fire</b> to provide light. Sennacherib <b>went and brought fire. While he was fanning it, the fire ignited his beard</b> and <b>it spread</b> and <b>sheared his head and his beard.</b> The Sages <b>said: This is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And it shall also destroy the beard”</b> (Isaiah 7:20). <b>Rav Pappa says</b> that <b>this</b> is in accordance with the adage <b>that people say: If you scorch a gentile</b> and <b>it is pleasant for him, ignite a fire in his beard and you will never tire of ridiculing him.</b> It means that if one does not protest when others ridicule him, they will escalate the ridicule. The adage is based upon this incident involving Sennacherib.

### Part 3
Sennacherib <b>went and found a beam from Noah’s ark,</b> from which he fashioned a god. <b>He said: This</b> beam <b>is the great god who delivered Noah from the flood. He said: If that man,</b> referring to himself, <b>goes and succeeds, he will sacrifice his two sons before you. His sons heard</b> his commitment <b>and killed him. This is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god that Adrammelech and Sarezer, his sons, smote him with the sword,</b> and they fled to Ararat” (II Kings 19:37), where Noah’s ark had come to rest. The Gemara explains that this interpretation is based upon the etymological similarity between <i>neser</i>, the Hebrew term for beam, and Nisroch, the god that Sennacherib fashioned from a beam.

### Part 4
§ Apropos the war between the kings and Abraham mentioned above, the Gemara explains a verse: “And he pursued as far as Dan. <b>And he divided himself against them by night [<i>laila</i>], he and his servants, and smote them”</b> (Genesis 14:14–15). The term “by night” [<i>laila</i>] appears out of place in this verse. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: That angel that happened to</b> come and assist <b>Abraham</b> in that war, <b>Laila is his name, as it is stated: “And Laila said: A man-child is brought forth”</b> (Job 3:3), indicating that there is an angel named Laila. <b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa says:</b> God <b>performed for him an act of night,</b> i.e., the stars in heaven waged war on his behalf, <b>as it is stated: “They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera”</b> (Judges 5:20). <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> The statement of Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa, <b>the smith, is preferable to</b> the statement <b>of the son of the smith,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan.

### Part 5
With regard to the previous verse: <b>“And he pursued as far as Dan”</b> (Genesis 14:14), <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Once that righteous</b> person, Abraham, <b>came to Dan, his strength weakened. He saw</b> through the Divine Spirit <b>that his descendants were destined to worship idols in Dan, as it is stated:</b> “And he fashioned two calves of gold…<b>and he set one in Bethel, and the other one he placed in Dan”</b> (I Kings 12:28–29). <b>And even that wicked</b> person, Nebuchadnezzar, <b>did not prevail until he reached Dan, as it is stated: “From Dan the snorting of his horses is heard”</b> (Jeremiah 8:16).

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Zeira says: Even though Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira sent</b> a statement <b>from Netzivin: Be vigilant with regard to</b> treating with deference <b>an elder who forgot his studies due to circumstances beyond his control, and be vigilant with regard to</b> cutting the <b>jugular veins</b> when slaughtering an animal <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and be vigilant with regard to</b> treating with respect <b>the children of ignoramuses, as from</b> some of <b>them Torah will emerge, we inform them</b> of a message <b>like this matter.</b>

### Part 7
The verse states: <b>“Right would you be, Lord, were I to contend with You; yet will I reason with You: Why does the path of the wicked prosper; why are all who deal treacherously secure? You have planted them, they have also taken root; they grow, they also bring forth fruit”</b> (Jeremiah 12:1–2). <b>What did they respond to</b> Jeremiah from heaven? <b>“If you have run with the pedestrians, and they have wearied you, how can you contend with horses? And though in a land of peace you feel secure, how will you do in the wild country of the Jordan?”</b> (Jeremiah 12:5).

### Part 8
The Gemara interprets the verse according to its straightforward meaning. This is <b>a parable of a person who said: I can run three parasangs before the horses in the swamplands. He encountered a pedestrian</b> and <b>ran before him</b> for <b>three <i>mil</i> on dry land and wearied.</b> The people <b>said to him: And if</b> running <b>before a pedestrian</b> you grew <b>so</b> weary, then if you were to run <b>before horses, all the more so</b> would you become weary. <b>And if</b> after running <b>three <i>mil</i></b> you grew <b>so</b> weary, then if you were to run <b>three parasangs,</b> four times that distance, <b>all the more so</b> would you become weary. <b>And if</b> after running <b>on dry land</b> you grew <b>so</b> weary, then if you were to run <b>in the swamplands, all the more so</b> would you become weary.

### Part 9
The Gemara explains: <b>So too, you,</b> Jeremiah: <b>And if with regard to</b> the <b>reward</b> for <b>four paces that I compensated that wicked person,</b> Nebuchadnezzar, <b>who ran in My honor, you are astonished</b> at its magnitude, <b>when I compensate Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who ran before Me like horses</b> throughout their lives, <b>all the more so</b> will their reward be great. This teaches the potency of even a minor mitzva. <b>That is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Concerning the prophets. My heart within me is broken; all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man and like a man whom wine has overcome, due to the Lord and due to His sacred words”</b> (Jeremiah 23:9).

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>these four paces</b> of Nebuchadnezzar, <b>what is</b> the incident to which the Gemara alludes? The Gemara answers that the incident is <b>as it is written: “At that time Merodach-Baladan, son of Baladan, king of Babylonia, sent a letter</b> and a gift to Hezekiah, as he had heard that he had been ill and was recovered” (Isaiah 39:1). The Gemara asks: <b>Due to</b> the fact that <b>Hezekiah had been ill and was recovered, he sent him a letter and a gift?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> and he did so in order <b>“to inquire of the wonder that was in the land”</b> (II Chronicles 32:31). <b>As Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> On <b>that day that</b> Hezekiah’s father, <b>Ahaz, died,</b> daylight lasted <b>two hours,</b> ten hours shorter than the standard day, so that the wicked Ahaz would be buried hurriedly, without the pomp typically accorded kings.

### Part 11
<b>And when Hezekiah fell ill and recovered, the Holy One, Blessed be He, restored those ten hours to</b> Hezekiah, <b>as it is written: “Behold, I will return the shadow of the dial, which descended on the sundial of Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which it had gone down”</b> (Isaiah 38:8). Merodach <b>said to</b> his servants: <b>What is this</b> wonder that the day was extended? <b>They said to him: Hezekiah fell ill and recovered,</b> and the sun shone for him. Merodach <b>said: There is a man like that and I do not need to send him greetings?</b> The ministers of Merodach <b>wrote to</b> Hezekiah: <b>Greetings to King Hezekiah, greetings to the city of Jerusalem,</b> and <b>greetings to the great God.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Nebuchadnezzar was the scribe of Baladan,</b> and <b>at that time he was not there. When he came</b> there <b>he said to</b> the other scribes: <b>How did you write</b> the king’s message? <b>They said to him: We wrote this:</b> Greetings to King Hezekiah, greetings to the city of Jerusalem, and greetings to the great God, as we were commanded. Nebuchadnezzar <b>said to</b> the scribes: <b>You called him: The great God, and you wrote Him at the end</b> of the list of greetings? <b>He said: Rather, write this: Greetings to the great God, greetings to the city of Jerusalem,</b> and <b>greetings to King Hezekiah.</b> The scribes <b>said to</b> Nebuchadnezzar: <b>The one who reads the letter, let him be the messenger.</b> You gave the advice; you correct the text.

### Part 13
Nebuchadnezzar <b>pursued</b> the messenger to take the letter from him and revise it. <b>When he ran four paces,</b> the angel <b>Gabriel came and stopped his</b> pursuit. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: If Gabriel had not come and stopped his</b> pursuit <b>there would have been no remedy for the enemies of the Jewish people,</b> a euphemism for the Jewish people. Had Nebuchadnezzar succeeded in revising the letter, his reward would have been so great that he would have been able to destroy the Jewish people, as he desired.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: Merodach-<b>Baladan, son of Baladan?</b> If his name was Merodach it was not Baladan. The Sages <b>say: Baladan was a king, and his visage was transformed and became like that of a dog. His son was sitting on the throne</b> in his stead <b>and when he would write</b> a letter <b>he would write his name and the name of his father, King Baladan. That is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> with regard to the honor accorded by gentiles to their fathers: <b>“A son honors his father and a servant his master”</b> (Malachi 1:6).

### Part 15
The Gemara elaborates: <b>“A son honors his father”</b> is referring to <b>that which we stated</b> with regard to Baladan. <b>“And a servant his master”</b> is referring to a verse, <b>as it is written: “And in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylonia, came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, who stood before the king of Babylonia, into Jerusalem. And he burned the House of the Lord, and the house of the king”</b> (Jeremiah 52:12–13).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC