
### Part 1
<b>The daughter of</b> the emperor <b>said</b> to Rabban Gamliel: <b>Leave him, and I will respond to him</b> with a parable. She said: <b>There are two craftsmen in our city; one fashions</b> vessels <b>from water, and one fashions</b> vessels <b>from mortar. Which is more noteworthy?</b> The emperor <b>said to her:</b> It is <b>that</b> craftsman <b>that fashions</b> vessels <b>from water.</b> His daughter <b>said to him:</b> If <b>he fashions</b> a vessel <b>from the water, all the more so</b> is it <b>not</b> clear that he can fashion vessels <b>from mortar?</b> By the same token, if God was able to create the world from water, He is certainly able to resurrect people from dust.

### Part 2
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that resurrection of the dead <b><i>a fortiori</i> from glass vessels: If</b> concerning <b>glass vessels, which are fashioned by the breath of</b> those of <b>flesh and blood,</b> who blow and form the vessels, and yet if <b>they break they can be repaired,</b> as they can be melted and subsequently blown again, then with regard to those of <b>flesh and blood, whose</b> souls are a product of <b>the breath of the Holy One, Blessed be He, all the more so</b> can God restore them to life.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates that <b>a certain heretic said to Rabbi Ami: You say that the dead will live. Aren’t they dust? And does dust come to life?</b> Rabbi Ami <b>said to him: I will tell you a parable. To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a flesh-and-blood king who said to his servants: Go and construct for me a great palace [<i>palterin</i>] in a place where there is no water and earth</b> available. <b>They went and constructed it. Sometime</b> later, the palace <b>collapsed.</b> The king <b>said to them: Return</b> to your labor <b>and construct</b> the palace <b>in a place where there is earth and water</b> available. <b>They said to him: We are unable</b> to do so.

### Part 4
The king <b>became angry at them and said to them:</b> If <b>in a place where there is no water and earth</b> available <b>you constructed</b> a palace, <b>now that there is water and earth</b> available <b>all the more so</b> should you be able to do so. Similarly, concerning man, whom God created <i>ex nihilo</i>, all the more so will God be able to resurrect him from dust. <b>And if you do not believe</b> that a being can be created from dust, <b>go out to the valley and see an <i>akhbar</i>,</b> a creature <b>that today is half flesh and half earth,</b> and <b>tomorrow</b> the being will <b>develop and all of it will become flesh. Lest you say</b> that creation of living creatures is a matter that develops <b>over an extended period, ascend a mountain and see that today there is only one snail there;</b> then ascend <b>tomorrow,</b> after <b>rain</b> will <b>have fallen, and</b> see that <b>it</b> will be <b>entirely filled with snails.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates that <b>a certain heretic said to Geviha ben Pesisa: Woe unto you, the wicked, as you say: The dead will come to life.</b> The way of the world is that <b>those</b> who are <b>alive die.</b> How can you say <b>that the dead will come to life?</b> Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to him: Woe unto you, the wicked, as you say: The dead will not come to life.</b> If <b>those who were not</b> in existence <b>come to life, is it not</b> reasonable <b>all the more so</b> that <b>those who were</b> once <b>alive</b> will come to life again? The heretic <b>said to</b> Geviha ben Pesisa angrily: <b>You called me wicked? If I stand, I will kick you and flatten your hump,</b> as Geviha ben Pesisa was a hunchback. Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to him</b> jocularly: <b>If you do so, you will be called an expert doctor and will take high wages</b> for your services.

### Part 6
§ Apropos Geviha ben Pesisa and his cleverness in debate, the Gemara cites additional incidents where he represented the Jewish people in debates. <b>The Sages taught</b> in <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i>: <b>On the twenty-fourth</b> day <b>in Nisan</b> it is a joyous day, since the <b>usurpers [<i>dimusana’ei</i>] were expelled from Judea and Jerusalem. When the people of Afrikiya came to judgment with the Jewish people before</b> the emperor, <b>Alexander of Macedon, they said to him: The land of Canaan is ours, as it is written:</b> “This is the land that shall fall to you as an inheritance, <b>the land of Canaan according to its borders”</b> (Numbers 34:2). <b>And</b> the people of Afrikiya said, referring to themselves: <b>Canaan is the forefather of these people.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Geviha ben Pesisa said to the Sages: Give me permission and I will go and deliberate with them before Alexander of Macedon. If they will defeat me, say</b> to them: <b>You have defeated an ordinary</b> person <b>from among us,</b> and until you overcome our Sages, it is no victory. <b>And if I will defeat them, say to them: The Torah of Moses defeated you,</b> and attribute no significance to me. The Sages <b>gave him permission, and he went and deliberated with them.</b>

### Part 8
Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to them: From where are you citing proof</b> that the land of Canaan is yours? <b>They said to him: From the Torah.</b> Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to them: I too will cite proof to you only from the Torah, as it is stated: “And he said: Cursed will be Canaan; a slave of slaves shall he be to his brethren”</b> (Genesis 9:25). And with regard to <b>a slave who acquired property,</b> the <b>slave</b> belongs <b>to whom</b> and the <b>property</b> belongs <b>to whom?</b> The slave and his property belong to the master. <b>And moreover,</b> it is <b>several years</b> now <b>that you have not served us.</b> Therefore, not only are you not entitled to the land, there are additional debts that must be repaid, as well as a return to enslavement.

### Part 9
<b>Alexander the king said to</b> the people of Afrikiya: <b>Provide</b> Geviha ben Pesisa with <b>a response</b> to his claims. <b>They said to</b> Alexander: <b>Give us time;</b> give us <b>three days</b> to consider the matter. The emperor <b>gave them</b> the requested <b>time</b> and <b>they examined</b> the matter <b>and did not find a response</b> to the claims. <b>Immediately, they fled and abandoned their fields when they</b> were <b>sown and their vineyards when they</b> were <b>planted.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> since <b>that year was a Sabbatical</b> Year, with the accompanying restrictions on agricultural activity, this benefited the Jewish people, as they were able to consume the produce of those fields and vineyards.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: On <b>another occasion, the people of Egypt came to judgment with the Jewish people before Alexander of Macedon.</b> The Egyptian people <b>said to</b> Alexander: <b>It says</b> in the Torah: <b>“And the Lord gave the people favor in the eyes of Egypt, and they lent them”</b> (Exodus 12:36). <b>Give us the silver and gold that you took from us;</b> you claimed that you were borrowing it and you never returned it.

### Part 11
<b>Geviha ben Pesisa said to the Sages: Give me permission and I will go and deliberate with them before Alexander</b> of Macedon. <b>If they will defeat me, say</b> to them: <b>You have defeated an ordinary</b> person <b>from among us,</b> and until you overcome our Sages, it is no victory. <b>And if I will defeat them, say to them: The Torah of Moses, our teacher, defeated you,</b> and attribute no significance to me. The Sages <b>gave him permission, and he went and deliberated with them.</b>

### Part 12
Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to them: From where are you citing proof</b> that you are entitled to the silver and gold? <b>They said to him: From the Torah.</b> Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to them: I too will cite proof to you only from the Torah, as it is stated: “And the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years”</b> (Exodus 12:40), during which they were enslaved to Egypt, engaged in hard manual labor. <b>Give us the wages for the work</b> performed <b>by</b> the <b>600,000</b> men above the age of twenty (see Exodus 12:37) <b>whom you enslaved in Egypt</b> for <b>four hundred and thirty years.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Alexander of Macedon said to</b> the people of Egypt: <b>Provide</b> Geviha ben Pesisa with <b>a response</b> to his claims. <b>They said to him: Give us time;</b> give us <b>three days</b> to consider the matter. The emperor <b>gave them</b> the requested <b>time</b> and <b>they examined</b> the matter <b>and did not find a response</b> to the claims. <b>Immediately, they abandoned their fields when they</b> were <b>sown and their vineyards when they</b> were <b>planted, and fled.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And that year was a Sabbatical</b> Year.

### Part 14
The Gemara relates: <b>And</b> on <b>another occasion, the descendants of Ishmael and the descendants of Keturah came to judgment with the Jewish people before Alexander of Macedon. They said to</b> the Jewish people before Alexander: <b>The land of Canaan is</b> both <b>ours and yours, as it is written: “And these are the generations of Ishmael, son of Abraham,</b> whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s maidservant, bore unto Abraham” (Genesis 25:12), <b>and it is written: “And these are the generations of Isaac, son of Abraham”</b> (Genesis 25:19). Therefore, the land should be divided between Abraham’s heirs.

### Part 15
<b>Geviha ben Pesisa said to the Sages: Give me permission and I will go and deliberate with them before Alexander of Macedon. If they will defeat me, say</b> to them: <b>You have defeated an ordinary</b> person <b>from among us,</b> and until you overcome our Sages, it is no victory. <b>And if I will defeat them, say to them: The Torah of Moses, our teacher, defeated you,</b> and attribute no significance to me. The Sages <b>gave him permission, and he went and deliberated with them.</b>

### Part 16
Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to</b> the descendants of Ishmael: <b>From where are you citing proof</b> that the land of Canaan belongs to both you and the Jewish people? <b>They said to him: From the Torah.</b> Geviha ben Pesisa <b>said to them: I too will cite proof to you only from the Torah, as it is stated: “And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac. But to the sons of the concubines that Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts,</b> and he sent them away from his son, while he yet lived, eastward, to the east country” (Genesis 25:5–6). In the case of <b>a father who gave a document of bequest [<i>agatin</i>] to his sons during his lifetime and sent one</b> of the sons <b>away from the other, does</b> the one who was sent away <b>have any claim against the other?</b> The father himself divided his property. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> were these <b>gifts</b> that Abraham gave to the sons of the concubines? <b>Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba says:</b> This <b>teaches that</b> Abraham <b>provided them</b> with the <b>name</b> of the supernatural spirit of <b>impurity,</b> enabling them to perform witchcraft.

### Part 17
§ Apropos exchanges with prominent gentile leaders, the Gemara cites an exchange where <b>Antoninos,</b> the Roman emperor, <b>said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>The body and the soul are able to exempt themselves from judgment</b> for their sins. <b>How so? The body says: The soul sinned, as from the day</b> of my death <b>when it departed from me, I am cast like a silent stone in the grave,</b> and do not sin. <b>And the soul says: The body sinned, as from the day that I departed from it, I am flying in the air like a bird,</b> incapable of sin. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: I will tell you a parable. To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to a king of flesh and blood who had a fine orchard, and in it there were</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC