
### Part 1
one <b>who is intolerant [<i>da’ato ketzara</i>]</b> of others acting against his will. <b>“And for the good-hearted it is always a feast”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who is tolerant</b> and accepts the actions of others. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says</b> with regard to the verse <b>“All the days of the poor are terrible”: But aren’t there <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals,</b> when he rests and eats festive meals? This can be explained <b>in accordance with that</b> statement <b>of Shmuel, as Shmuel says: A change in routine</b> in terms of eating and rest causes <b>the onset of an intestinal ailment.</b> Due to the dramatic deviation on Shabbat from the poor person’s routine he suffers.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught: One who reads a verse from Song of Songs and renders it a form of</b> secular <b>song,</b> and not a sacred text, <b>and one who reads</b> any biblical <b>verse at a banquet house, not at its</b> appropriate <b>time,</b> but merely as a song, <b>introduces evil to the world, as the Torah girds</b> itself with <b>sackcloth and stands before the Holy One, Blessed be He, and says before Him: Master of the Universe, Your children have rendered me like a harp on which clowns play.</b>

### Part 3
The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>says to</b> the Torah: <b>My daughter, during the time that they are eating and drinking, in what should they be engaged?</b> The Torah <b>says before Him: Master of the Universe, if they are masters of the Bible, let them engage in</b> the study of the <b>Torah, Prophets, and Writings. If they are masters of the Mishna, let them engage in</b> the study of <b>the Mishna, in</b> the study of <b><i>halakha</i>, and in</b> the study of <b><i>aggada</i>. And if they are masters of the Talmud, let them engage in</b> the study of <b>the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover on Passover, in</b> the study of <b>the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>Shavuot</i> on <i>Shavuot</i>,</b> and <b>in</b> the study of <b>the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>Sukkot</i> on <i>Sukkot</i>.</b> They should not treat the Torah with contempt by using it for their own entertainment. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar testified in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Ḥananya: Anyone who reads a verse at its</b> appropriate <b>time</b> and in the appropriate manner <b>introduces good into the world, as it is stated: “And a word in its season, how good is it”</b> (Proverbs 15:23).

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> among those who have no share in the World-to-Come is <b>one who whispers</b> invocations <b>over a wound. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And</b> that is the case only <b>where he spits into</b> the wound while he whispers, <b>as one does not mention the name of Heaven over spittle,</b> and doing so is an act of contempt for God. <b>It was stated</b> that <b>Rav says: Even</b> the verse: “When <b>a leprous mark</b> is in a man, then he shall be brought to the priest” (Leviticus 13:9), in which there is no mention of the name of God, may not be whispered as an invocation. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: Even</b> a verse that is unrelated to the specific illness in question, for example: <b>“And He called to Moses”</b> (Leviticus 1:1), may not be whispered as an invocation.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may smear oil</b> on <b>and rub</b> the <b>intestinal</b> area <b>on Shabbat</b> to ease pain, and it is not prohibited as a form of healing. <b>One may whisper incantations of snakes and scorpions on Shabbat</b> to ease the pain of their bite. <b>And one may pass</b> a cool <b>vessel upon</b> an infected <b>eye on Shabbat,</b> to soothe the inflammation. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: In what</b> case <b>are these matters stated?</b> They are stated <b>in</b> the case of <b>a vessel that</b> may <b>be moved</b> on Shabbat. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a vessel that</b> may <b>not be moved,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to pass it upon the infected eye on Shabbat. <b>And one may not consult the words of demons on Shabbat. Rabbi Yosei says: Even during the week</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to consult demons.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>And even Rabbi Yosei did not say</b> that it is due to the Torah prohibition of witchcraft that it is prohibited during the week; <b>rather,</b> it is prohibited <b>due to danger,</b> lest the demons harm him. This could happen, <b>as</b> in <b>that</b> incident <b>concerning Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef, who</b> consulted a demon and as a result <b>was swallowed into a cedar</b> tree, <b>and a miracle was performed for him and the cedar split and expelled him.</b>

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may smear oil</b> on <b>and rub</b> the <b>intestinal</b> area <b>on Shabbat,</b> and it is not a forbidden form of healing, <b>provided that he does not do</b> so <b>in the manner in which he does during the week.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How</b> then <b>does one do</b> so on Shabbat? <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: One</b> first <b>smears oil and afterward rubs</b> the body. And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: One smears oil and rubs</b> the body <b>simultaneously.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>demons of oil and demons of eggs,</b> i.e., demons consulted by means of oil and eggs, respectively, <b>it is permitted to consult them; but</b> it is futile to do so, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that they deceive. One may whisper</b> an incantation for healing <b>over oil that is in a vessel and one may not whisper</b> an incantation <b>over oil that is in</b> one’s <b>hand. Therefore, one may smear oil</b> on his body <b>from oil that</b> is brought to him <b>in</b> another’s <b>hand,</b> and there is no concern that perhaps someone whispered over it; <b>and one may not smear oil that</b> is brought to him <b>in a vessel,</b> as perhaps someone whispered over it and it will cause him harm.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Shmuel bar Marta happened</b> to come <b>to a certain inn,</b> and <b>they brought him oil in a vessel. He rubbed it</b> on his face, <b>and boils developed on his face. He went out to the marketplace, and a certain woman saw him</b> and <b>said: I see here the</b> evil <b>spirit</b> of <b>Ḥamat</b> on your face. <b>She performed an action,</b> i.e., whispered an incantation, <b>for him, and he was healed.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Abba said to Rabba bar Mari</b> that there is an apparent contradiction in a verse. <b>It is written: “All the disease that I placed in Egypt I shall not place upon you, for I am the Lord, your Healer”</b> (Exodus 15:26). <b>And since</b> God <b>does not place</b> the disease upon the Jewish people, <b>why is healing</b> necessary? Rabba bar Mari <b>said to him</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This verse can be interpreted</b> and the contradiction resolved <b>from</b> the contents of the verse <b>itself, as it is stated: “And He said: If you will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord, your God”</b> (Exodus 15:26). <b>If you hearken</b> to God’s voice, <b>I will not place</b> the disease upon you, <b>and if you do not hearken</b> to God’s voice, <b>I will place</b> the disease upon you. <b>Nevertheless,</b> even if you do not hearken to the voice of God, and I place the disease upon you, know that I will heal you, <b>“for I am the Lord, your Healer.”</b>

### Part 11
§ <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says: When Rabbi Eliezer fell ill, his students entered to visit him.</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to them: There is intense wrath in the world,</b> and it is due to that wrath of the Holy One, Blessed be He, Who is angry at His world, that I am suffering from these afflictions. His students <b>began to cry</b> due to their teacher’s suffering, <b>and Rabbi Akiva was laughing. They said to him: Why are you laughing?</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to them: And for what</b> reason <b>are you crying? They said to him:</b> Is it <b>possible</b> that Rabbi Eliezer, who is as much an exemplar of Torah as <b>a Torah scroll, is afflicted with pain and we will not cry?</b>

### Part 12
Rabbi Akiva <b>said to them:</b> It is <b>for that</b> reason that <b>I am laughing. As long as I would see</b> for <b>my teacher that neither does his wine ferment</b> and spoil, <b>nor is his flax stricken, nor does his oil spoil, nor does his honey turn rancid, I would say</b> to myself: <b>Perhaps, Heaven forfend, my teacher</b> has already <b>received his world</b> in reward for the mitzvot that he fulfilled, and will not receive a reward in the World-to-Come. <b>But now that I see my teacher</b> overcome <b>with suffering, I am happy.</b> He is receiving punishment in this world for the few transgressions that he might have committed, ensuring that he will receive a complete reward in the World-to-Come. Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: Akiva, have I failed</b> to fulfill any portion <b>of the entire Torah?</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him, you taught us, our teacher: “For there is not a righteous man upon earth who does good and sins not”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:20).

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When Rabbi Eliezer fell ill, four Sages entered to visit him: Rabbi Tarfon, and Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya, and Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Tarfon responded</b> to the situation with words of encouragement <b>and said: You are better for the Jewish people than a drop of rain, as a drop of rain</b> provides benefit <b>in this world, and my teacher</b> provides them benefit <b>in this world and in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua responded and said: You are better for the Jewish people than the sphere of the sun, as the sphere of the sun</b> provides benefit <b>in this world, and my teacher</b> provides benefit <b>in this world and in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya responded and said: You are better for the Jewish people than a father and mother, as a father and mother</b> provide benefit <b>in this world,</b> and <b>my teacher</b> provides benefit <b>in this world and in the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Akiva responded and said: Afflictions are cherished.</b> When Rabbi Eliezer heard this <b>he said to</b> his attendants: <b>Support me</b> so I can sit <b>and hear the statement of Akiva my student, who said: Afflictions are cherished.</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: Akiva, from where do you</b> derive <b>this?</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said: I interpret a verse</b> in order to derive it. It is written: <b>“Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem…And he performed that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord”</b> (II Kings 21:1–2). <b>And it is written:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC