
### Part 1
<b>to the exclusion of</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>that is</b> impure and <b>already desecrated.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara continues in its analysis of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>A non-priest who partook of <i>teruma</i></b> is liable <b>to</b> receive <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven. <b>Rav says: A non-priest who partook of <i>teruma</i> is flogged. Rav Kahana and Rav Asi said to Rav: Let the Master say</b> that he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>as it is written:</b> “And they shall keep my charge lest they bear a sin for it and die therein if they desecrate it: I am the Lord Who sanctifies them. <b>No non-priest shall eat of the sacred,</b> a tenant of a priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the sacred” (Leviticus 22:9–10). Based on the juxtaposition between them, one should say that just as an impure priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> is punished with death at the hand of Heaven, so too a non-priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> is punished with death at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 3
Rav responded: The phrase <b>“I am the Lord Who sanctifies them” ends the matter</b> of death, so the matter of a non-priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> is not juxtaposed to it. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav from the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And these are they who</b> are liable <b>to</b> receive <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven: <b>A non-priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Are you raising a contradiction</b> from <b>a <i>baraita</i> to</b> the opinion <b>of Rav? Rav is a <i>tanna</i>, and</b> as such has the authority to <b>dispute</b> the determination of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The punishment for <b>a non-priest who performed</b> the Temple <b>service</b> is death at the hand of Heaven, <b>as it is written:</b> “You and your sons with you shall safeguard your priesthood with regard to every matter of the altar…<b>and any non-priest who approaches shall die”</b> (Numbers 18:7).

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The punishment for <b>an impure</b> priest <b>who performed</b> the Temple <b>service</b> is death at the hand of Heaven. The source for this is explained: <b>As Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin asked of Rav Yosef: From where</b> is it derived <b>that an impure</b> priest <b>who performed</b> the Temple <b>service is</b> punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven? Rav Yosef answered: It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> in the context of admonishing priests to avoid impurity: <b>“Speak to Aaron and his sons that they shall separate themselves from the sacred items of the children of Israel</b> that they sanctify to Me, <b>and they shall not desecrate My sacred name:</b> I am the Lord” (Leviticus 22:2).

### Part 6
Rav Yosef continues: <b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> the punishment by means of a verbal analogy. He derives the meaning of the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who performs the Temple service <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> (see Leviticus 22:9). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to an impure priest who performs the Temple service, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And let us derive</b> the punishment by means of a different verbal analogy: Derive the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who performs the Temple service <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to <b><i>notar</i>.</b> This would teach that <b>just as there,</b> with regard to <i>notar</i>, he is punished with <b><i>karet</i>, so too here,</b> with regard to an impure priest who performs the Temple service, he is punished with <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that it is <b>from <i>teruma</i></b> that <b>he should have derived</b> the punishment for an impure priest who performs the Temple service, <b>as</b> there are many elements common to an impure priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> and an impure priest who performs the Temple service. In both of these cases, unlike <i>notar</i>, the problem relates to the <b>body</b> of the priest; both relate to <b>impurity;</b> in both, the issue can be resolved through immersion in <b>a ritual bath;</b> and in both, the term of desecration is formulated <b>in the plural,</b> while with regard to <i>notar</i> it is formulated in the singular.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects that conclusion: <b>On the contrary,</b> it is <b>from <i>notar</i></b> that <b>he should have derived</b> the punishment for an impure priest who performs the Temple service, <b>as</b> there are elements common to <i>notar</i> and an impure priest who performs the Temple service. Unlike <i>teruma</i>, both are cases involving <b>sacrificial</b> matters; both involve acts performed <b>inside</b> the Temple; and in both cases, the disqualification of <b><i>piggul</i> and</b> the disqualification of <b><i>notar</i></b> are applicable. The Gemara explains: Although the number of elements common to an impure priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> equals the number of elements common to <i>notar</i>, deriving <b>desecration in the plural</b> by means of a verbal analogy <b>from desecration in the plural is preferable.</b>

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The punishment for a priest who was ritually impure, <b>who immersed that day</b> and is waiting for nightfall for the purification process to be completed, and <b>who performed</b> the Temple <b>service,</b> is death at the hand of Heaven. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: It is derived <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Simai says: From where</b> in the Torah is the <b>allusion with regard to</b> a priest <b>who immersed that day, that if he performed</b> the Temple <b>service he desecrated</b> that service? It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “They shall be sacred to their God and they shall not desecrate</b> the name of their God” (Leviticus 21:6).

### Part 11
<b>If</b> this verse <b>is not</b> written with regard to the <b>matter of an impure</b> priest <b>who performed</b> the Temple <b>service, as</b> that <i>halakha</i> is <b>derived for us from</b> the verse: <b>“That they shall separate themselves</b> from the sacred items of the children of Israel” (Leviticus 22:2), then <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of</b> a priest <b>who immersed that day who performed</b> the Temple <b>service.</b> Although he is no longer impure in every sense, the priest remains impure in terms of the prohibitions of partaking of <i>teruma</i> and sacrificial food, and of entering the Temple.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> the punishment by means of a verbal analogy. He derives the meaning of the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to a priest who immersed that day who performed the Temple service <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> (see Leviticus 22:9). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to an impure priest who performs the Temple service, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the punishment for a priest <b>who is lacking</b> the requisite priestly <b>vestments</b> and who performed the Temple service is death at the hand of Heaven. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that this is his punishment? <b>Rabbi Abbahu says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says, and</b> there are those who <b>determined</b> that this <i>halakha</i> is a tradition that was cited <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon:</b> It is stated: <b>“You shall gird them with a belt,</b> Aaron and his sons, and you shall wrap the headdresses upon them; and they shall have the priesthood as an eternal statute, and you shall inaugurate Aaron and his sons” (Exodus 29:9).

### Part 14
From that verse it is derived: <b>At a time when their vestments are upon them, their priesthood is upon them;</b> but when <b>their vestments are not upon them, their priesthood is not upon them.</b> Therefore, priests who are lacking the requisite priestly vestments <b>assume</b> the status of <b>non-priests</b> in this respect, <b>and the Master says</b> earlier in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>A non-priest who per-forms</b> the Temple <b>service</b> is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the punishment for a priest <b>who has not yet</b> brought <b>an atonement</b> offering to complete the purification process and who performs the Temple service is death at the hand of Heaven. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that this is his punishment? <b>Rav Huna says:</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as the verse states</b> with regard to a woman after childbirth who is obligated to bring an atonement offering: <b>“And the priest shall atone for her and she shall become purified”</b> (Leviticus 12:8). He infers: As the verse states <b>“shall become purified,” by inference,</b> one concludes <b>that</b> until the priest sacrifices her atonement offering <b>she is impure</b> to a certain extent. <b>And the Master says</b> earlier in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>An impure</b> priest <b>who performs</b> the Temple <b>service</b> is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the punishment for a priest <b>whose hands and feet are not washed</b> and who performed the Temple service is death at the hand of Heaven. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “Whenever they come to the Tent of Meeting, they shall wash with water that they shall not die”</b> (Exodus 30:20).

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the punishment for priests who performed the Temple service while <b>intoxicated with wine</b> is death at the hand of Heaven, <b>as it is written: “Drink no wine nor strong drink,</b> you and your sons with you, when you come into the Tent of Meeting, that you shall not die” (Leviticus 10:9).

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> the punishment for priests who performed the Temple service with <b>overgrown</b> hair on their <b>heads</b> is death at the hand of Heaven, <b>as it is written: “Neither shall they shave their heads nor allow their hair to grow long”</b> (Ezekiel 44:20), <b>and it is written thereafter: “Neither shall any priest drink wine</b> when they enter the inner courtyard” (Ezekiel 44:21). <b>One with overgrown</b> hair on his <b>head is juxtaposed to</b> priests <b>who are intoxicated with wine. Just as</b> priests who are <b>intoxicated with wine</b> are punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too</b> priests with <b>overgrown</b> hair on their <b>heads</b> are punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 19
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>But</b> a priest who performs the Temple service while <b>uncircumcised, or</b> as <b>an acute mourner</b> on the day that one of his close relatives dies, <b>or</b> a priest who performs the Temple service while <b>seated,</b> is not punished with death at the hand of Heaven; rather, he is liable <b>for</b> violating <b>a prohibition</b> and his punishment is lashes. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that it is prohibited for <b>an uncircumcised</b> priest to perform the Temple service? <b>Rav Ḥisda says: This matter we did not learn from the Torah of Moses our teacher.</b> It was not learned <b>until Ezekiel, son of Buzi,</b> the prophet, <b>came and taught</b> it to <b>us,</b> as it is stated: <b>“No foreigner uncircumcised in heart</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC