
### Part 1
<b>Let</b> anyone <b>who has one ox take one hide</b> and <b>let</b> anyone <b>who does not have an ox take two hides.</b> The people of Sodom <b>said to</b> the orphan: <b>What</b> is the reason for <b>this?</b> The orphan <b>said to them: The ultimate rule is parallel to the initial rule; just as the initial rule</b> is that anyone <b>who has one ox shall herd</b> the city’s animals <b>for one day</b> and anyone who <b>does not have</b> any <b>oxen shall herd</b> the city’s animals <b>for two days, so too, the ultimate rule</b> is: <b>Let</b> anyone <b>who has one ox take one</b> hide and <b>let</b> anyone <b>who does not have</b> an <b>ox take two</b> hides.

### Part 2
Furthermore, they declared in Sodom: <b>Let</b> one <b>who crosses on a ferry give one dinar</b> as payment; <b>let</b> one <b>who does not cross on a ferry,</b> but walks in the river, <b>give two</b> dinars. In addition, when there was anyone <b>who had a row of bricks, each and every one</b> of the people of Sodom <b>would</b> come and <b>take one</b> brick and <b>say to him: I am taking</b> only <b>one,</b> and you are certainly not particular about so inconsequential an item, and they would do this until none remained. And when there was anyone <b>who would cast garlic or onions</b> to dry, <b>each and every</b> one of the people of Sodom <b>would</b> come and <b>take one</b> and <b>say to him: I took</b> only <b>one</b> garlic or onion, and they would do this until none remained.

### Part 3
<b>There were four judges in Sodom</b> and they were named for their actions: <b>Shakrai,</b> meaning liar, <b>and Shakrurai,</b> habitual liar, <b>Zayfai,</b> forger, <b>and Matzlei Dina,</b> perverter of justice. These were the judgments that they rendered: In a case of <b>one who strikes the wife of another and causes her to miscarry, they would say to</b> the woman’s husband: <b>Give</b> the woman <b>to</b> the <b>one</b> who struck her, <b>so that she will be impregnated for you</b> again. In a case of one <b>who severed the ear of another’s donkey, they would say to</b> the owner of the donkey: <b>Give</b> the donkey to the one who caused the damage, <b>until</b> the ear <b>grows</b> back. In a case of one <b>who wounds another, they would say</b> to the injured party: <b>Give</b> the one who wounded you <b>a fee, as he let your blood.</b>

### Part 4
And they instituted an ordinance: One <b>who crossed</b> the river <b>on a ferry gives four dinars,</b> and one <b>who crossed</b> the river <b>in the water gives eight dinars. One time a certain launderer came</b> and <b>arrived there.</b> The people of Sodom <b>said to him: Give four dinars</b> as payment for the ferry. <b>He said to them: I crossed in the water. They said to him: If so, give eight</b> dinars, <b>as you crossed in the water. He did not give</b> the payment, and they struck him and <b>wounded him. He came before the judge</b> to seek compensation. The judge <b>said to him: Give</b> your assailant <b>a fee, as he let your blood, and eight dinars, as you crossed</b> the river <b>in the water.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Eliezer, servant of Abraham, happened</b> to come <b>there,</b> and <b>they wounded him. He came before the judge</b> to seek compensation. The judge <b>said to him: Give</b> your assailant <b>a fee, as he let your blood. He took a stone</b> and <b>he wounded the judge.</b> The judge <b>said: What</b> is <b>this?</b> Eliezer <b>said to him: The fee that is</b> to be <b>paid to me by you, give it to that</b> person who wounded me, <b>and my money will remain where it remains.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara continues to discuss the sins of the people of Sodom: <b>They had beds on which they would lay their guests; when</b> a guest <b>was longer</b> than the bed <b>they</b> would <b>cut him,</b> and <b>when</b> a guest <b>was shorter</b> than the bed <b>they would stretch him. Eliezer, servant of Abraham, happened</b> to come <b>there. They said to him: Come lie on the bed. He said to them: I took a vow</b> that <b>since the day my mother died I do not lie on a bed.</b>

### Part 7
<b>When a poor person would happen</b> to come <b>to</b> Sodom, <b>each and every</b> person <b>would give him a dinar, and the name of</b> the giver <b>was written on</b> each dinar. <b>And they would not give</b> or sell <b>him bread,</b> so that he could not spend the money and would die of hunger. <b>When he would die, each and every person would come and take his</b> dinar.

### Part 8
<b>This</b> is what the people of Sodom <b>stipulated among themselves: Whoever invites a man to a wedding, his cloak will be removed. There was this wedding,</b> and <b>Eliezer,</b> servant of Abraham, <b>arrived there and they did not give him bread. When he sought to dine, Eliezer came and sat at the end,</b> behind <b>everyone. They said to him: Who invited you to here? He said to the one sitting</b> next to him: <b>You invited me.</b> That man <b>said</b> to himself: <b>Perhaps they will hear that I invited him and they will remove the garment of that man,</b> referring to himself. <b>The one who sat next to him took his cloak and ran outside. And likewise,</b> Eliezer <b>did</b> the same <b>for all of them until they all left, and he ate the meal.</b>

### Part 9
<b>There was a young woman who would take bread out to the poor people in a pitcher</b> so the people of Sodom would not see it. <b>The matter was revealed,</b> and <b>they smeared her with honey and positioned her on the wall</b> of the city, and <b>the hornets came and consumed her. And that is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And the Lord said: Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great [<i>rabba</i>]”</b> (Genesis 18:20). <b>And Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> <i>Rabba</i> is an allusion to the <b>matter of the young woman [<i>riva</i>]</b> who was killed for her act of kindness. It is due to that sin that the fate of the people of Sodom was sealed.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The spies</b> who spread an evil report of their visit to Canaan <b>have no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And those men who spread the evil report about the land died by plague</b> before the Lord” (Numbers 14:37). <b>“And…died”</b> indicates <b>in this world,</b> and <b>“by plague”</b> indicates <b>for the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 11
The members of <b>the assembly of Korah have no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And the earth closed upon them”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in this world,</b> and also: <b>“And they perished from among the assembly”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in the World-to-Come;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Eliezer says: About</b> the assembly of Korah, <b>the verse states: “The Lord kills and makes alive; He lowers to the grave, and raises”</b> (I Samuel 2:6), indicating that the assembly of Korah has a share in the World-to-Come.

### Part 12
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 13:9): The members of <b>the assembly of Korah have no share in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “And the earth closed upon them”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in this world,</b> and also: <b>“And they perished from among the assembly”</b> (Numbers 16:33), meaning <b>in the World-to-Come;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says:</b> Although it says that they perished, <b>they are like a lost item that is sought,</b> ultimately found, and rehabilitated, <b>as it is stated: “I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek out your servant, for I do not forget your mitzvot”</b> (Psalms 119:176).

### Part 13
Apropos Korah, the Gemara proceeds to interpret the verses written concerning him. <b>“And Korah,</b> son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, <b>took [<i>vayikkaḥ</i>]”</b> (Numbers 16:1), <b>Reish Lakish says: He purchased [<i>lakaḥ</i>] a bad acquisition for himself,</b> as through his actions he drove himself from the world. <b>“Korah”</b> alludes to the fact <b>that</b> because of him <b>a void [<i>korḥa</i>] was created in</b> the children of <b>Israel. “Son of Izhar,”</b> is referring to <b>a son who incited the wrath of the entire world upon him like</b> the heat of <b>the afternoon [<i>tzohorayim</i>]. “Son of Kohath,”</b> is referring to <b>a son who blunted [<i>hik’ha</i>] the teeth of his parents,</b> i.e., he shamed them with his conduct. <b>“Son of Levi,”</b> is referring to <b>a son who became an escort [<i>levaya</i>] in Gehenna.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if Korah’s lineage is being interpreted disparagingly, why not <b>let</b> the Torah <b>also include: Son of Jacob [<i>Ya’akov</i>],</b> and interpret it: <b>A son who contorted [<i>she’akav</i>] himself</b> until he reached <b>Gehenna? Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak says: Jacob prayed for mercy for himself</b> that his name would not be included in the lineage of Korah, <b>as it is stated: “Let my soul not come into their council; to their assembly let my honor not be united”</b> (Genesis 49:6). <b>“Let my soul not come into their council”; these are</b> the <b>spies.</b> Jacob prayed that his name would not be mentioned in their regard. <b>“To their assembly let my honor not be united”; this</b> is referring to <b>the assembly of Korah.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara proceeds to interpret the names of Korah’s cohorts: “Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben” (Numbers 16:1). <b>“Dathan”</b> is one <b>who violated the precepts [<i>dat</i>] of God. “Abiram”</b> is one <b>who braced [<i>iber</i>] himself from repenting. “And On”</b> indicates one <b>who sat in acute mourning [<i>aninut</i>]</b> over the sin that he committed, and he repented and was spared. <b>“Peleth”</b> is one <b>for whom wonders [<i>pelaot</i>] were performed. Son of Reuben [<i>Reuven</i>],</b> is <b>a son who saw and understood [<i>ra’a vehevin</i>]</b> the nature of what was transpiring and repented.

### Part 16
<b>Rav says: On, son of Peleth,</b> did not repent on his own; rather, <b>his wife saved him. She said to him: What is the difference to you? If</b> this <b>Master,</b> Moses, is <b>the great</b> one, <b>you</b> are <b>the student. And if</b> this <b>Master,</b> Korah, is <b>the great</b> one, <b>you</b> are <b>the student.</b> Why are you involving yourself in this matter? On <b>said to her: What shall I do? I was</b> one of those <b>who took counsel and I took an oath with them</b> that I would be with them. <b>She said to him: I know that the entire assembly is holy, as it is written: “For all the assembly is holy”</b> (Numbers 16:3), and they observe the restrictions of modesty. <b>She said to him: Sit, for I will save you. She gave him wine to drink and caused him to become drunk and laid him</b> on a bed <b>inside</b> their tent. <b>She sat at the entrance</b> of the tent

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC