
### Part 1
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda? As the verse states: “But one witness shall not testify against any person that he die.”</b> One can infer: <b>That he die is</b> the matter concerning <b>which he does not testify, but he does testify to acquit.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what is the reasoning of <b>the Rabbis? Reish Lakish says:</b> A witness cannot offer any statements beyond his testimony <b>because it appears as though he is biased in his testimony.</b> If the court finds the accused liable based on the witness’s testimony, the witness could later be accused of being a conspiring witness. Therefore, it is to his advantage to have the court acquit the accused.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the Rabbis,</b> in <b>what</b> manner do <b>they interpret this</b> term: <b>“That he die”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They establish it</b> as teaching the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to one of the students. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one of the witnesses said: I have</b> the ability <b>to teach</b> a reason to <b>acquit him, from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the court <b>does not listen to him? The verse states: “One witness shall not testify.” From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> if there is <b>one of the students who said: I have</b> the ability <b>to teach</b> a reason to deem <b>him liable, from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the court <b>does not listen to him? The verse states:</b> “But <b>one</b> witness <b>shall not testify against any person that he die.”</b>

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: In cases of <b>capital law, one who</b> initially <b>teaches</b> a reason to deem the accused liable may then teach a reason to acquit, but one who initially teaches a reason to acquit him may not return and teach a reason to deem him liable. <b>Rav says: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only with regard to the time of</b> the <b>deliberations</b> of the court, <b>but at the time of</b> the <b>verdict,</b> one who initially <b>teaches</b> a reason to <b>acquit may return and teach</b> a reason to deem him <b>liable.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna (40a): <b>The following day,</b> i.e., the day after the initial deliberations, the judges would <b>arise early and come</b> to court. <b>One who</b> yesterday was of the opinion to <b>acquit says: I</b> said to <b>acquit, and I acquit in my place,</b> i.e., I stand by my statement to acquit. <b>And one who</b> yesterday was of the opinion to <b>deem</b> him <b>liable says: I</b> said to <b>deem</b> him <b>liable, and I deem</b> him <b>liable in my place. One who</b> yesterday <b>taught</b> a reason to deem him <b>liable may</b> then <b>teach</b> a reason to <b>acquit, but one who</b> yesterday <b>taught</b> a reason to <b>acquit may not</b> then <b>teach</b> a reason to deem him <b>liable.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the objection: <b>But the following day is</b> at the time of <b>the verdict,</b> and the mishna rules that a judge who had said to acquit may not change his opinion. The Gemara questions this reading of the mishna: <b>And according to your reasoning, are there no deliberations on the following day?</b> The deliberations may resume on the next day. Therefore, one can say that <b>when</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that the judge may not change his opinion, it is <b>with regard to the time of</b> the <b>deliberations.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the continuation of that mishna, which teaches that if the number of judges who deem him liable is one more than the number of judges who acquit, <b>they</b> continue to <b>deliberate</b> the matter, <b>these</b> judges <b>against those</b> judges, <b>until one of those who deems</b> him <b>liable sees</b> the validity of <b>the statements of those who acquit</b> and changes his position, as the court does not condemn someone to death by a majority of one judge. The Gemara states its proof: <b>And if it is so</b> that one who initially <b>teaches</b> a reason <b>to acquit may return and teach</b> a reason to deem him <b>liable, let</b> the mishna <b>also teach the opposite</b> possibility. The Gemara explains: <b>The <i>tanna</i> is searching for</b> scenarios of <b>acquittal,</b> he <b>is not searching for</b> scenarios of <b>liability.</b> It may be that the <i>halakha</i> is the same in the opposite case, but the <i>tanna</i> prefers to employ an example of acquittal.

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>As Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina says:</b> In a case where there was <b>one of the students who</b> argued to <b>acquit and</b> then <b>died,</b> the court <b>views him as if</b> he were <b>alive and standing in his place</b> and voting to acquit. The Gemara asks: <b>But why?</b> According to the opinion of Rav, that a judge may change his opinion at the time of the verdict, <b>let us say:</b> Perhaps <b>if</b> that student <b>were alive,</b> he would <b>retract</b> his opinion and find the accused liable. The Gemara explains: <b>Now, in any event,</b> he <b>did not retract from</b> his opinion. The assumption is that he would not have changed his opinion, although one can do so.

### Part 8
The Gemara questions this explanation: <b>But</b> the Sages <b>sent</b> a statement <b>from there,</b> Eretz Yisrael: <b>According to</b> this version of <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina,</b> he engages in <b>a dispute with our teacher,</b> i.e., Rav. Apparently, the previous explanation, which reconciles their opinions, is incorrect. The Gemara answers: That tradition was not accurate, and it <b>was stated</b> that he does <b>not</b> engage in <b>a dispute</b> with Rav.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i>: After the initial deliberations, <b>two judges’ scribes stand before</b> the court, <b>one on the right, and one on the left, and they write the statements of those who acquit</b> the accused <b>and the statements of those who find</b> him <b>liable.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara explains the proof: <b>Granted,</b> they write the <b>statements of those who find</b> the accused <b>liable</b> even though they may not change their opinions, as <b>on the following day they</b> may <b>see another reason</b> to find the accused liable, not the reason they gave the day before. <b>And</b> once this new reason is given, the court <b>is required to perform a suspension of the trial</b> until the following day, as they may not issue a verdict in cases of capital law on the same day as the deliberations. <b>But what is the reason</b> the scribes write <b>the statements of those who acquit</b> the accused? Is it <b>not because</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>if</b> the judges would <b>see another reason to</b> find the accused <b>liable, we do not pay heed to them,</b> and in order to ensure that the judges do not change their opinions, the scribes write their statements?

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the reason they write their statements is <b>so that two</b> of the judges <b>should not say one explanation</b> to acquit <b>from two</b> different <b>verses.</b> If two judges each say the same reason to acquit, but derive their reason from different verses, they are not counted as two votes. <b>As Rabbi Asi asked of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> If <b>two</b> of the judges <b>say one explanation</b> to acquit <b>from two</b> different <b>verses, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to him: We count them only as one,</b> as it is clear that one of the derivations is in error.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara discusses the ruling of Rabbi Yoḥanan: <b>From where is this matter</b> derived? <b>Abaye says: As the verse states: “God has spoken once, twice I have heard this; that strength belongs to God”</b> (Psalms 62:12). Abaye explains: <b>One verse</b> is stated by God and from it <b>emerge several explanations, but one explanation does not emerge from several verses.</b> Alternatively, <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that the verse states: “Is not My word like as fire? says the Lord; <b>and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces”</b> (Jeremiah 23:29). <b>Just as this hammer breaks</b> a stone <b>into several fragments, so too, one verse</b> is stated by God <b>and</b> from it <b>emerge several explanations.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is considered one explanation from two</b> different <b>verses? Rav Zevid says: As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Zevaḥim</i> 83a): With regard to certain items that are disqualified from being sacrificed <i>ab initio</i>, once they have been placed on the altar they are nevertheless sacrificed, but <b>the altar sanctifies</b> only items <b>that are suited for it,</b> as the Gemara will explain. The <i>tanna’im</i> disagree as to what is considered suited for the altar.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: Any</b> item <b>that is suited to</b> be consumed by <b>the fire</b> on the altar, e.g., burnt-offerings and the portions of other offerings burned on the altar, <b>if it ascended</b> upon the altar, even if it is disqualified from being sacrificed <i>ab initio</i>, <b>it shall not descend.</b> Since it was sanctified by its ascent upon the altar, it is sacrificed upon it, <b>as it is stated:</b> “It is <b>the burnt-offering on the pyre</b> upon the altar” (Leviticus 6:2), from which it is derived: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>a burnt-offering that is suited to</b> be consumed by <b>the fire</b> on the altar, <b>if it ascended, it shall not descend, so too</b> with regard to <b>any</b> item <b>that is suited to</b> be consumed by <b>the fire</b> on the altar, <b>if it ascended, it shall not descend.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabban Gamliel says:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> item <b>that is suited to</b> ascend upon <b>the altar,</b> even if it is not typically consumed, <b>if it ascended, it shall not descend,</b> even if it is disqualified from being sacrificed <i>ab initio</i>, <b>as it is stated: “It is the burnt-offering on the pyre upon the altar,”</b> from which it is derived: <b>Just as a burnt-offering that is fit for the altar, if it ascended, it shall not descend, so too any</b> item <b>that is fit for the altar, if it ascended, it shall not descend.</b>

### Part 16
Rav Zevid explains: <b>And what do the two of them include</b> by means of these explanations? <b>Disqualified</b> offerings, teaching that if they ascend they do not descend. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua, <b>brings</b> proof for <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the term <b>“on the pyre,” and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabban Gamliel, <b>brings</b> proof to <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the term “upon the <b>altar.”</b> This is an example of one explanation from two different verses.

### Part 17
The Gemara questions this example: <b>But there,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabban Gamliel <b>disagree,</b> and their explanations cannot therefore be identical. <b>As the latter clause</b> of that mishna <b>teaches: The difference between the statement of Rabban Gamliel and the statement of Rabbi Yehoshua is only</b> with regard to disqualified <b>blood and libations,</b> which are not consumed by the fire, but do ascend onto the altar, <b>as Rabban Gamliel says: They shall not descend,</b> as they are fit to ascend on the altar, <b>and Rabbi Yehoshua says: They shall descend,</b> as they are not burned on the altar.

### Part 18
<b>Rather, Rav Pappa says:</b> An example of one explanation from two different verses is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: From the fact that it is stated:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC