
### Part 1
<b>as it is stated: “Behold, it is the bed of Solomon; sixty mighty men are around it, of the mighty men of Israel. They all handle the sword, and are expert in war; every man has his sword upon his thigh due to dread in the night”</b> (Song of Songs 3:7–8). The words “due to dread in the night” mean <b>due to the dread of Gehenna, which is similar to the night.</b> Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani interprets this verse as referring to judges, who are called: Mighty men of Israel, as they preside in the Temple, which is termed: The bed of God. In this verse, God is referred to as: Solomon [<i>Shlomo</i>], the King to Whom peace [<i>shalom</i>] belongs.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yoshiya, and some say Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak, interpreted</b> a verse <b>homiletically. What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “House of David, so says the Lord: Execute justice in the morning, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor”</b> (Jeremiah 21:12)? <b>And</b> is it <b>so</b> that a court <b>may judge in the morning, and all</b> the rest of <b>the day</b> a court <b>may not judge?</b> Why does the verse specifically relate to judging in the morning? <b>Rather,</b> the meaning is: <b>If the matter is as clear to you as the morning, state</b> the verdict; <b>and if not, do not state it. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan</b> says this principle may be derived <b>from here: “Say to wisdom: You are my sister”</b> (Proverbs 7:4). <b>If the matter is</b> as <b>clear to you as</b> the fact <b>that your sister is forbidden to you, state it, and if not, do not state it.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> If <b>ten</b> judges <b>are sitting in judgment,</b> a prisoner’s <b>collar [<i>kolar</i>],</b> referring to responsibility for the consequences of an incorrect verdict, <b>hangs around all of their necks.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that all of the judges bear joint responsibility for the verdict? The Gemara answers: It <b>is necessary only</b> in order <b>to</b> include <b>a student who is sitting in front of his teacher</b> in the court, and notices that his teacher erred. Although he is not formally part of the court, he nevertheless bears responsibility if he remains silent.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates concerning <b>Rav Huna</b> that <b>when</b> a case <b>would come before him</b> for <b>judgment,</b> he would <b>gather and bring ten rabbis from Rav’s study hall.</b> He <b>would say:</b> I do this <b>so that</b> only a small part of the responsibility, comparable to <b>a splinter from a beam, will reach</b> each of <b>us.</b> The greater the number of judges, the less responsibility each one assumes for the verdict. Similarly, with <b>Rav Ashi, when</b> a person <b>would come before him</b> with meat suspected to be from <b>an animal with a wound that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifta</i>],</b> he <b>would gather and bring</b> together <b>all the butchers of Mata Meḥasya</b> and consult with them before ruling on the status of the meat. He <b>would say</b> to them: I do this <b>so that</b> only a small part of the responsibility, comparable to <b>a splinter from a beam, will reach</b> each of <b>us.</b>

### Part 5
<b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael, he <b>said: Rav Naḥman bar Kohen interpreted</b> a verse <b>homiletically: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The king by justice establishes the land; but he who exacts gifts [<i>terumot</i>] overthrows it”</b> (Proverbs 29:4)? This teaches that <b>if the judge</b> is <b>like a king</b> in <b>that he does not need anything</b> and is not dependent on anyone, he <b>establishes the land,</b> i.e., he can serve as a judge. <b>But if he is like a priest who seeks out</b> his <i>terumot</i> <b>from</b> various <b>granaries,</b> as he is dependent on others, he <b>overthrows</b> the land.

### Part 6
<b>In the house of the <i>Nasi</i>, they appointed a judge who was not learned.</b> This judge <b>said to Yehuda bar Naḥmani,</b> who was the <b>interpreter of Reish Lakish</b> and whose role was to repeat and explain the Sage’s lectures: <b>Stand over</b> me <b>as an interpreter,</b> and I will lecture. Yehuda bar Naḥmani <b>arose</b> and <b>bent over him</b> in the conventional manner, to hear the judge’s words. <b>And,</b> being ignorant, the judge <b>did not say anything to him.</b>

### Part 7
The interpreter <b>began and said:</b> The verse states: <b>“Woe to him who says to the wood: Awake, to the dumb stone: Arise. Can this teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it”</b> (Habakkuk 2:19). So is this judge, appointed to teach the public for gold, i.e., for payment, but no more qualified than wood and stone. <b>And</b> in the <b>future, the Holy One, Blessed be He, will punish those who appoint</b> such judges, <b>as it is stated</b> in the next verse: <b>“But the Lord is in His holy Sanctuary; let all the earth be silent before Him”</b> (Habakkuk 2:20). God, Who is above everything, will judge those responsible for such appointments.

### Part 8
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who appoints over the community a judge who is not fit,</b> it is <b>as though</b> he <b>plants a tree</b> used as part of idolatrous rites <b>[<i>ashera</i>] among the Jewish people, as it is stated: “You shall make judges and officers for yourself”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:18), <b>and juxtaposed to it,</b> it is written: <b>“You shall not plant yourself an <i>ashera</i> of any kind of tree”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:21). By implication, appointing unfit judges is akin to planting a tree for idolatry. <b>Rav Ashi says: And in a place where there are Torah scholars,</b> it is <b>as though</b> he <b>planted</b> the tree <b>next to the altar, as it is stated:</b> “You shall not plant yourself an <i>ashera</i>…<b>beside the altar of the Lord your God.”</b>

### Part 9
It is <b>written: “You shall not make with Me gods of [<i>elohei</i>] silver and gods of gold”</b> (Exodus 20:20). The Gemara asks: It is <b>gods of silver and gods of gold that</b> you may <b>not make, but</b> are gods <b>of wood permitted?</b> Rather, <b>Rav Ashi says:</b> This verse discusses <b>a judge,</b> called <i>elohim</i>, <b>who comes,</b> i.e., is appointed, <b>due to</b> payment of <b>silver, and a judge who comes due to</b> payment of <b>gold.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav, when he would come to court</b> to judge a case, <b>would say this</b> about himself: <b>By his own will</b> he <b>goes out to</b> danger of <b>death,</b> as a judge who misjudges a case is liable to receive the punishment of death at the hand of Heaven; <b>and he does not do</b> what is necessary to provide for <b>the needs of his house, and he enters his home empty-handed,</b> because a judge does not receive a salary. He said: <b>If only</b> it should be so that his <b>entry</b> into his home <b>will be</b> the same <b>as</b> his <b>departure,</b> without sin or transgression.

### Part 11
In a similar demonstration of humility, <b>when</b> Rav <b>would see a convoy [<i>ambuha</i>] of scribes</b> following <b>after him</b> to honor him, he <b>would say: “Though his excellency mount up to the heavens</b> and his head reach the clouds, <b>yet he shall perish forever like his own dung;</b> they who have seen him shall say: Where is he?” (Job 20:6–7). It is said of <b>Mar Zutra the Pious</b> that <b>when</b> the people <b>would carry him</b> to his lectures <b>on their shoulders during Shabbat of the Festival,</b> he would <b>say this</b> to avoid becoming arrogant: <b>“For power is not forever, and does the crown endure for all generations?”</b> (Proverbs 27:24).

### Part 12
<b>Bar Kappara taught,</b> based on a homiletical interpretation of a verse: <b>From where is this matter that the Sages stated</b> derived: <b>Be temperate in judgment</b> (<i>Avot</i> 1:1)? <b>As it is written: “Neither shall you go up by steps</b> onto My altar” (Exodus 20:23), i.e., do not ascend hurriedly, <b>and juxtaposed to it,</b> it is written: <b>“Now these are the ordinances</b> that you shall set before them” (Exodus 21:1). <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a judge may not step over the heads of the sacred nation,</b> walking among those assembled for the lecture, who would sit upon the floor, in such a manner that he has the appearance of stepping on them? It is derived from that <b>which is stated: “Neither shall you go up by steps,” and juxtaposed to it</b> is an introduction to civil laws and courtroom regulations: <b>“Now these are the ordinances.”</b> This indicates that the prohibition against ascending upon steps applies to judges.

### Part 13
The Gemara interprets the second part of the verse cited above: “Now these are the ordinances <b>that you shall set</b> before them.” The verse <b>should have</b> stated: <b>That you shall teach them.</b> What is indicated by the phrase: “Set before them”? <b>Rabbi Yirmeya, and some say Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, says: These are the judges’ tools.</b> To illustrate this, the Gemara relates that <b>Rav Huna, when he would go out to a judgment, would say this: Take out for me tools from my shop: A rod and strap,</b> with which to flog transgressors; <b>and a shofar,</b> necessary in the event that someone must be excommunicated; <b>and a sandal,</b> necessary in the event of <i>ḥalitza</i>, the procedure by which a levirate marriage is rejected.

### Part 14
The Gemara interprets other verses related to the topic of adjudicating cases. <b>“And I charged your judges at that time,</b> saying: Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between a man and his brother, and the stranger who is with him” (Deuteronomy 1:16). Understanding that the word “charged” indicates alacrity, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Moses urged the judges: <b>With regard to the rod and the strap, be vigilant.</b> With regard to the clause <b>“Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge,” Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> This is <b>a warning to a court that</b> it <b>may not hear the statement of</b> one <b>litigant before the other litigant comes, and</b> it is <b>a warning to a litigant that</b> he <b>may not explain his statement to the judge before the other litigant comes. Read into</b> the phrase in the verse: <b>“Hear the causes between your brethren,”</b> that it is <b>also concerning</b> the litigant. Although he is not the judge, he is also required to assure that the case is conducted in the presence of both parties.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Kahana says</b> the litigant’s responsibility may be derived <b>from here: From “you shall not bear [<i>tissa</i>]</b> a false report” (Exodus 23:1). Although conjugated in this manner the verb would seem to be addressed to the judges, commanding them not to lend credence to a false report, the term may also be read as: <b>You shall not deliver [<i>tassi</i>]</b> a false report, conjugated so that it addresses the litigants and the witnesses.

### Part 16
The Gemara returns to the verse in Deuteronomy cited above: “And I charged your judges at that time, saying: Hear the causes between your brethren, <b>and judge righteously.” Reish Lakish says: Verify the judgment</b> by meticulously examining the particulars of the case, <b>and</b> only <b>afterward, implement it.</b> The verse continues: <b>“Between a man and his brother, and the stranger who is with him.” Rav Yehuda says:</b> The judge must distinguish <b>even between</b> the merits of <b>a house and the upper story</b> when dividing a two-floor property among inheriting brothers.

### Part 17
With regard to the clause in the verse: <b>“And the stranger who is with him [<i>gero</i>],”</b> the word <i>gero</i> resembles the word: Dwell [<i>gur</i>], and <b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> This word teaches that the judge must distinguish <b>even between</b> the merits of <b>an oven and a stove.</b> The judge must carefully weigh how to divide even these domestic items in a case of inheritance, to ensure that the distribution of property is absolutely equitable.

### Part 18
The next verse states: <b>“You shall not respect [<i>takiru</i>] people in judgment;</b> you shall hear the small and the great alike; you shall not be afraid before any man, for the judgment is God’s; and the cause that is too hard for you, you shall bring to me, and I will hear it” (Deuteronomy 1:17). <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Do not recognize him [<i>takirehu</i>],</b> i.e., do not acknowledge the litigant as a friend in your role as a judge. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> Even if he is your opponent, <b>do not estrange him [<i>tenakerehu</i>]</b> in such a way as to prejudge him as liable, but treat him as though you do not know him at all.

### Part 19
<b>Rav’s host [<i>ushpizekhaneih</i>],</b> with whom he would stay occasionally, <b>came before him for a judgment.</b> Rav <b>said to</b> the host: <b>Are you not my host?</b> He <b>said to him: Yes,</b> I am. The host then <b>said to him: I have</b> a dispute with another that needs <b>a judgment.</b> Rav <b>said to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC