
### Part 1
<b>walking, leaning on his</b> walking <b>stick,</b> the shaft of the spear. <b>And once he reached the tribe of Simeon he said: Where did we find that the tribe of Levi is greater than that of Simeon?</b> If all the members of your tribe submit to the temptation of the women of Moab, I may do so as well. After hearing that statement, the members of the tribe of Simeon <b>said: Allow him</b> to enter; like us, <b>he too is entering to attend to his needs</b> and engage in intercourse with the Moabite women. They rejoiced and said: Apparently, <b>the pious</b> and God-fearing <b>have permitted</b> this <b>matter,</b> as Pinehas is one of them.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Six miracles were performed for Pinehas</b> when he killed Zimri. <b>One</b> is <b>that Zimri should have separated himself</b>  from Cozbi, <b>and he did not separate himself.</b> Had he done so, it would have been prohibited for Pinehas to kill him. <b>And one</b> is <b>that</b> Zimri <b>should have spoken</b> and alerted the members of his tribe to come to his assistance, <b>and he did not speak. And one</b> is <b>that</b> Pinehas <b>directed</b> the spear precisely <b>to the male genitals of</b> Zimri <b>and to the female genitals of</b> Cozbi so that the reason that he killed them would be evident. <b>And one</b> is <b>that</b> Zimri and Cozbi <b>did not fall from the spear. And one</b> is <b>that an angel came and raised the lintel</b> of that chamber so that Pinehas could emerge holding them aloft on the spear. <b>And one</b> is <b>that an angel came and caused destruction among the people,</b> distracting them from interfering with the actions of Pinehas.

### Part 3
Pinehas <b>came and slammed them</b> on the ground <b>before the Omnipresent</b> and <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, will twenty-four thousand</b> of the children <b>of Israel fall due to these</b> sinners? <b>As it is stated: “And those that died in the plague were twenty-four thousand”</b> (Numbers 25:9). <b>And that is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And Pinehas stood and wrought judgment</b> and the plague was stayed” (Psalms 106:30).

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> It <b>is not stated</b> in the verse: <b>And prayed [<i>vayitpallel</i>]; rather,</b> it is stated <b><i>vayefalel</i>.</b> This <b>teaches that</b> Pinehas, <b>as it were, wrought judgment [<i>pelilut</i>] with his Creator. The ministering angels sought to push him</b> away because he spoke harshly to God. The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to them: Leave him be; he is a zealot, son of a zealot,</b> from the tribe of Levi, who was zealous in avenging the violation of his sister Dinah; <b>he is an alleviator of wrath, son of an alleviator of wrath,</b> a descendant of Aaron, who alleviated the wrath of God during the plague that followed the assembly of Korah.

### Part 5
<b>The tribes began to demean</b> Pinehas: <b>Did you see this son of Puti,</b> so-called because his mother was one of the daughters of Putiel (see Exodus 6:25), and they interpreted homiletically: <b>As</b> Yitro, <b>the father of his mother,</b> according to one rabbinic tradition, <b>fattened [<i>shepittem</i>] calves for idol worship, and he</b> impudently <b>killed the prince of a tribe of Israel</b> without a trial. In response, <b>the verse comes and provides his lineage</b> as <b>“Pinehas, son of Elazar, son of Aaron the priest”</b> (Numbers 25:11). It is due to that lineage that he zealously executed Zimri.

### Part 6
<b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Be the first to</b> greet Pinehas with a blessing of <b>peace,</b> to honor him before the people, <b>as it is stated: “Therefore say: I hereby give to him My covenant of peace”</b> (Numbers 25:12), and it is stated: “And it shall be unto him and to his descendants after him a covenant of eternal priesthood, because he was zealous for his God and he atoned for the children of Israel” (Numbers 25:13), <b>and this atonement</b> that he facilitated <b>is worthy of continuing to atone forever.</b>

### Part 7
§ With regard to the same matter, <b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rav says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The thigh-belted greyhound [<i>zarzir</i>], or the he-goat, and the king against whom none can rise”</b> (Proverbs 30:31)? <b>That wicked</b> Zimri <b>engaged in four hundred and twenty-four,</b> the numerical value of the word <i>zarzir</i>, <b>acts of intercourse</b> with Cozbi <b>that day. And Pinehas waited until his strength waned</b> from all that activity. <b>And</b> Pinehas <b>did not know that</b> it was not necessary to wait that long because <b>the king against whom none can rise,</b> a reference to the Holy One, Blessed be He, was <b>with him.</b>

### Part 8
<b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> Zimri engaged in intercourse <b>sixty</b> times <b>until</b> he <b>became like an addled egg</b> whose contents are a muddled and non-differentiated fluid, <b>and</b> Cozbi <b>was like a garden bed full of water. Rav Kahana said</b> to underscore her disgrace resulting from her extensive sexual activity: <b>And her seat</b> was as wide as the <b>area required for sowing one <i>se’a</i> of seed [<i>beit se’a</i>]. Rav Yosef taught: The opening of her womb</b> was <b>a cubit.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rav Sheshet says: Cozbi was not her</b> given <b>name; rather, Shevilnai, daughter of Zur, was her</b> real <b>name. And why was she called Cozbi? Because</b> through her actions, <b>she distorted [<i>shekizzeva</i>]</b> the instructions <b>of her father.</b> He told her to submit only to the greatest of the children of Israel, and she submitted to the leader of a tribe. <b>Alternatively:</b> She was called <b>Cozbi because she said to her father: Slaughter [<i>kos</i>] this people through me [<i>bi</i>],</b> as I will seduce them to engage in licentiousness.

### Part 10
Her name was Shevilnai; <b>and this is as people say</b> in reference to a famous prostitute: <b>Between reeds and willows, what does Shevilnai seek?</b> Clearly, she seeks licentiousness. There is another adage: <b>Among the peels of the reeds, what does Shevilnai seek?</b> Clearly, she seeks licentiousness. <b>She prostituted her mother.</b> Apparently, Shevilnai became a name popularly used to connote a prostitute. Since everyone refers to her as prostitute, daughter of prostitute, she has implicated her mother with her licentiousness.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Zimri <b>has five names: Zimri; and son of Salu; and Saul; and son of the Canaanite woman; and Shelumiel, son of Zuri Shaddai.</b> He was called <b>Zimri because of</b> the fact <b>that he became like an addled [<i>hamuzeret</i>] egg</b> as a result of engaging in multiple acts of intercourse. He was called <b>son of Salu because</b> of the fact <b>that he evoked [<i>shehisli</i>] the sins of his family.</b> He was called <b>Saul [<i>Shaul</i>] because</b> of the fact <b>that he lent [<i>shehishil</i>] himself to sinful matters.</b> He was called <b>son of the Canaanite woman because</b> of the fact <b>that he performed an act of Canaan,</b> as the Canaanites are renowned for their licentiousness. <b>And what is his</b> given <b>name? Shelumiel, son of Zuri Shaddai, is his name,</b> the leader of the tribe of Simeon (Numbers 1:6).

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: In the case of <b>a priest who performed</b> the Temple <b>service in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> the young of the priesthood kill him. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Huna raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> In the case of <b>a priest who performed</b> the Temple <b>service in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> is he <b>liable</b> to receive <b>death at the hand of Heaven or</b> is he <b>not liable</b> to receive <b>death at the hand of Heaven?</b>

### Part 13
Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: You learned</b> the resolution of that dilemma from the mishna itself, as we learned: In the case of <b>a priest who performed</b> the Temple <b>service in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity, his priestly brethren do not bring him to court</b> for judgment; <b>rather, the young of the priesthood remove him from the Temple courtyard and pierce his skull with pieces of wood. And if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b>he is liable</b> to receive death <b>at the hand of Heaven, let</b> the young of the priesthood <b>leave him, so that he will be killed at the hand of Heaven. Rather, what</b> must one say? <b>He is not liable</b> to receive death at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 14
Rav Aḥa bar Huna rejects that proof: <b>Is there any act</b> for which <b>the Torah absolves him of</b> the death penalty <b>and we shall arise and execute him?</b> Rav Sheshet said to him: <b>And</b> are there <b>not</b> cases where one is executed even though the Torah absolves him? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>One who was flogged</b> for violating a prohibition <b>and</b> then <b>repeated</b> the violation, the <b>court places him into the vaulted chamber?</b> There too, <b>the Merciful One absolves him</b> of the death penalty <b>and we execute him.</b> Rav Aḥa bar Huna rejects that proof: <b>Doesn’t Rabbi Yirmeya say</b> that <b>Reish Lakish says: We are dealing with lashes</b> administered for violations of prohibitions punishable <b>by <i>karet</i>? As</b> in that case, <b>the man is</b> essentially <b>liable to</b> be punished with <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 15
Rav Sheshet said to him: <b>But isn’t</b> there the case of one who <b>steals a <i>kasva</i>,</b> who is exempt from punishment by Torah law, and the mishna says that zealots strike him? Rav Aḥa bar Huna rejects that proof: <b>But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say: We are dealing with a service vessel</b> utilized in the Temple, <b>and</b> the fact that one who steals a service vessel is liable to be killed by zealots <b>is intimated</b> in the verse: <b>“But they shall not come to see the sacred items as they are being covered, lest they die”</b> (Numbers 4:20).

### Part 16
Rav Sheshet said to him: <b>But isn’t</b> there the case of <b>one who curses the sorcerer,</b> who is exempt from punishment by Torah law, and the mishna says that zealots strike him? Rav Aḥa bar Huna rejects that proof: <b>But didn’t Rav Yosef teach</b> that the reference is to a case where one says: <b>Let the sorcerer strike his sorcerer, which appears</b> to be <b>like</b> one who is <b>blessing,</b> a euphemism for cursing, <b>the name</b> of God, and he is liable to be executed for desecration of the name of God.

### Part 17
Rav Sheshet said to him: <b>But isn’t</b> there the case of one who <b>engages in intercourse with an Aramean woman,</b> who is exempt from punishment by Torah law, and the mishna says that zealots strike him? Rav Aḥa bar Huna rejects that proof: <b>Didn’t they read</b> a verse <b>to Rav Kahana in his dream and</b> when he related his dream to Rav, <b>Rav remembered</b> that which he learned through <b>tradition</b> that God will excise the soul of one who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman?

### Part 18
Rav Aḥa bar Huna <b>raises an objection to</b> the opinion of Rav Sheshet that a priest who performs the Temple service in a state of ritual impurity is not liable to receive death at the hand of Heaven. A <i>baraita</i> teaches: With regard to a priest <b>who pours</b> oil onto a meal-offering, <b>and one who mixes</b> the oil into the meal-offering, <b>and one who breaks</b> a baked meal-offering into pieces, and <b>one who salts</b> the meal-offering, and <b>one who waves</b> it toward the altar, and <b>one who brings</b> the meal-offering to the altar, <b>and one who arranges the Table</b> of the shewbread, and <b>one who removes the ashes</b> from <b>the lamps</b> of the Candelabrum, <b>and one who removes the handful</b> from the meal-offering, <b>and one who collects the blood</b> after the slaughter of one of the offerings; if the priest performs any of these sacrificial rites <b>outside</b> the Temple, although there are severe prohibitions with regard to performing the Temple service outside the Temple, he is <b>exempt</b> from <i>karet</i>.

### Part 19
<b>And one is not liable for their</b> performance,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC