
### Part 1
<b>but</b> they <b>do not bring</b> him <b>back</b> to be judged with a claim <b>to find</b> him <b>liable.</b> When the mishna says: The court <b>brings</b> the accused <b>back to acquit</b> him, this is <b>an acquittal alone</b> and is not to anyone’s liability. When it says: <b>But</b> they <b>do not bring</b> him <b>back</b> to be judged with a claim <b>to find</b> him <b>liable,</b> this is <b>an acquittal that is</b> also <b>a liability.</b> The court does not bring the accused back to acquit him if this entails a liability to another.

### Part 2
The Gemara clarifies: <b>A liability for whom?</b> There is no other litigant in cases of capital law. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> this is to <b>the liability,</b> i.e., the detriment, <b>of the blood redeemer,</b> as he desires that the murderer be killed, and he will no longer be allowed to kill him. The Gemara questions this explanation: Is it reasonable that <b>due to the liability of the blood redeemer, we kill this one</b> and do not reverse the verdict to acquit him even when there is a reason to do so? <b>And further, what</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>Whether</b> with a claim to exempt the accused, or <b>whether</b> with a claim to find him liable? It is clear that this is referring to two separate matters, not to two types of acquittal. The Gemara comments: This is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara cites another explanation of how one can find a judge giving the item from one to another with regard to the clause of: He exempts a liable party. <b>Ravina said:</b> It is possible in a case <b>where</b> the one who lodged the claim <b>had in his possession</b> an item belonging to the other litigant that functioned as <b>collateral</b> for a debt, <b>and</b> when the judge issued a verdict in favor of the other he <b>took</b> the collateral <b>from him,</b> thereby physically transferring it to the wrong party.

### Part 4
In the case from the mishna in tractate <i>Bekhorot</i>: He <b>ruled</b> that <b>a pure</b> item is <b>impure,</b> how could he cause a loss with his own hands? It is <b>where</b> he <b>had</b> the litigant’s ritually pure item <b>touch a creeping animal</b> to emphasize that he believes it was already impure, and he thereby imparted impurity to it. In that mishna’s case of: He <b>ruled</b> that <b>an impure</b> item is <b>pure,</b> how could he cause a loss with his own hands? It is <b>where</b> he <b>mixed</b> this impure produce of the litigant’s <b>with</b> the litigant’s ritually pure <b>produce,</b> and he thereby caused all of the produce to be considered impure.

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches that in cases of <b>capital law,</b> the court brings the accused back to be judged again with a claim to acquit him, but does not bring him back to be judged with a claim to find him liable. To explain the terms “innocent” and “righteous” in the verse: “And the innocent and the righteous you shall not slay” (Exodus 23:7), <b>the Sages taught: From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> with regard to one who is <b>leaving the court</b> having been found <b>liable, and someone said: I have</b> the ability <b>to teach</b> a reason to <b>acquit him, from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the court <b>brings</b> the accused <b>back</b> to be judged again? <b>The verse states: The innocent you shall not slay,</b> and the accused may in fact be innocent.

### Part 6
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> with regard to one who is <b>leaving the court,</b> having been <b>acquitted, and someone says: I have</b> the ability <b>to teach</b> a reason to find <b>him liable, from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the court <b>does not bring</b> the accused <b>back</b> to be judged again? <b>The verse states: “The righteous you shall not slay,”</b> and the accused was found righteous in his trial.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi says: And the opposite of this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to one who entices</b> others to engage in idol worship, <b>as it is written</b> concerning him: <b>“Neither shall you spare, neither shall you conceal him”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:9). He is brought back to court to find him liable, but not to acquit him. <b>Rav Kahana teaches</b> this last <i>halakha</i> citing a different verse concerning the enticer: <b>“But you shall kill him [<i>harog tahargennu</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:10). The repetition of the verb indicates that he is killed even in circumstances where transgressors of other prohibitions would not be.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Zeira asked Rav Sheshet: From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>those liable</b> to be <b>exiled</b> to a city of refuge for killing unintentionally is the same with regard to retrying a court case as the <i>halakha</i> concerning one who killed intentionally, who is found liable to receive court-imposed capital punishment? Rav Sheshet answered: It is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy employing the term <b>“murderer”</b> stated with regard to one who kills intentionally (see Numbers 35:16) and the term <b>“murderer”</b> stated with regard to one who kills unintentionally (see Numbers 35:19).

### Part 9
Rabbi Zeira asked Rav Sheshet: <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>those liable</b> to receive forty <b>lashes</b> is the same with regard to retrying a court case as the <i>halakha</i> concerning one who killed intentionally, who is found liable to receive court-imposed capital punishment? Rav Sheshet answered: It is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy employing the term <b>“wicked”</b> stated with regard to one who kills intentionally (see Numbers 35:31) and the term <b>“wicked”</b> stated with regard to those liable to receive lashes (see Deuteronomy 25:2).

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 7:3): <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>those liable</b> to be <b>exiled</b> for killing unintentionally is the same with regard to retrying a court case as the <i>halakha</i> concerning one who killed intentionally, who is found liable to receive court-imposed capital punishment? It is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy employing the term <b>“murderer”</b> stated with regard to one who kills intentionally and the term <b>“murderer”</b> stated with regard to one who kills unintentionally. <b>From where</b> is it derived that the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>those liable</b> to receive forty <b>lashes</b> is the same with regard to retrying a court case as the <i>halakha</i> concerning one who killed intentionally, who is found liable to receive court-imposed capital punishment? It is <b>derived</b> from a verbal analogy employing the term <b>“wicked”</b> stated with regard to one who kills intentionally and the term <b>“wicked”</b> stated with regard to those liable to receive lashes.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches concerning cases of capital law: <b>But</b> the court <b>does not bring</b> him <b>back</b> to be judged with a claim <b>to find</b> him <b>liable. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: And this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only in a case <b>where</b> the judge <b>erred with regard to a matter</b> for <b>which the Sadducees do not admit to its</b> validity, i.e., he erred in a matter learned from tradition or established by the Sages. <b>But</b> if the judge <b>erred in a matter</b> for <b>which the Sadducees admit to its</b> validity, i.e., a matter that is written explicitly in the Torah, <b>it is</b> a topic that you could <b>go learn in a children’s school,</b> and such an error negates the verdict and is reversed.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba asked of Rabbi Yoḥanan: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the case of a judge who <b>erred with regard to</b> the judgment of <b>an adulterer and adulteress,</b> by ruling that only the man is liable but not the woman? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: While your fire is burning, cut your squash and roast it,</b> i.e., seize the opportunity to add this case to the principle I taught you earlier. It <b>was also stated: Rabbi Ami says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Concerning a judge who <b>erred with regard to an adulterer,</b> the court <b>revokes</b> the verdict.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what are the circumstances</b> where the court <b>does not revoke</b> the acquittal? <b>Rabbi Abbahu says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> In a case <b>where he erred</b> and acquitted the adulterer who engaged in sexual intercourse <b>in an atypical manner,</b> i.e., anal intercourse. The <i>halakha</i> that this is considered sexual intercourse is not explicit in a verse. Therefore, if a court acquits one so accused, the verdict is not revoked.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that in cases of <b>monetary law, all</b> those present at the trial may teach a reason to exempt a litigant or to find him liable. In cases of capital law, all those present at the trial may teach a reason to acquit the accused, but not all present may teach a reason to find him liable. The Gemara asks: In capital cases, may <b>all</b> those present teach a reason to acquit, <b>and even witnesses?</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>the mishna</b> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara explains: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“But one witness shall not testify against any person</b> that he die” (Numbers 35:30). A witness cannot state anything other than his testimony, <b>whether</b> to provide a reason <b>to acquit</b> the accused <b>or</b> to provide a reason <b>to</b> find him <b>liable;</b> this is the opinion of the Rabbis. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> A witness <b>may answer</b> to provide a reason <b>to acquit, but</b> a witness <b>may not answer</b> to provide a reason <b>to</b> find the accused <b>liable.</b> The mishna here seems to be in accordance with the minority opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Pappa says:</b> When the mishna refers to all those present at the trial, it is not referring to the witnesses but <b>to one of the students</b> sitting before the court, <b>and</b> therefore <b>all agree</b> with the ruling of the mishna.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC