
### Part 1
<b>or uncircumcised in flesh may enter My Temple”</b> (Ezekiel 44:9).

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that it is prohibited for <b>an acute mourner</b> priest to perform the Temple service? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to a High Priest whose mother or father died: <b>“And from the Temple he shall not emerge and he shall not desecrate the Temple of his God”</b> (Leviticus 21:12), from which it may be inferred <b>that another,</b> who is not a High Priest but an ordinary priest, <b>who did not emerge</b> from the Temple and who continued to perform the service, <b>has desecrated</b> the service.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Adda said to Rava: And let us derive</b> it by means of a verbal analogy: Derive the meaning of the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an acute mourner who performs the Temple service <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i>. Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to an acute mourner who performs the Temple service, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 4
Rava answers: <b>Is</b> desecration <b>written with regard to</b> the matter of a priest who performs the Temple service as an acute mourner <b>itself? It is derived from</b> that which is written with regard to the High Priest, <b>by inference.</b> Therefore, <b>it is a matter that emerges from an inference,</b> and the principle is: <b>Any matter that emerges from an inference cannot be derived by means of a verbal analogy.</b> A verbal analogy can be derived only when the matter is written explicitly.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive <b>that</b> it is prohibited for a priest who is <b>seated</b> to perform the Temple service? <b>Rava says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says: The verse states: “For him has the Lord chosen from among all your tribes, to stand and minister</b> in the name of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 18:5). God states in the verse that <b>I chose him for</b> service while he is <b>standing, but not for</b> service while <b>seated.</b>

### Part 6
§ The <i>baraita</i> continues: With regard to <b>a blemished</b> priest who performs the Temple service, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> He is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>and the Rabbis say:</b> He is liable only <b>for</b> violating <b>a prohibition.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? It is <b>as it is written: “But he shall not come into the curtain</b> and he shall not approach the altar as he has a blemish, that he desecrate not My sacred places” (Leviticus 21:23). <b>And</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>derives</b> the punishment by means of a verbal analogy: The meaning of the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to a blemished priest who performs the Temple service is derived <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to an impure priest who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i>. Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to a blemished priest who performs the Temple service, he is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let us derive</b> the punishment by means of a different verbal analogy: Derive the meaning of the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to a blemished priest who performs the Temple service <b>from</b> the term of <b>desecration</b> written with regard to <b><i>notar</i>. Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>notar</i>, he is punished <b>with <i>karet</i>, so too here,</b> with regard to a blemished priest who performs the Temple service, he is punished <b>with <i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that <b>he should have derived</b> the punishment for a blemished priest who performs the Temple service <b>from <i>teruma</i>, as</b> the <i>tanna</i> derives <b>the bodily disqualification</b> of a blemished priest <b>from the bodily disqualification</b> of the impure priest. The Gemara challenges: <b>On the contrary, he should have derived</b> the punishment for a blemished priest who performs the Temple service <b>from <i>notar</i>,</b> as there are elements common to <i>notar</i> and a blemished priest who performs the Temple service. Unlike <i>teruma</i>, both are cases involving <b>sacrificial</b> matters; both involve matters performed <b>inside</b> the Temple; and in both cases, the disqualification of <b><i>piggul</i> and</b> the disqualification of <b><i>notar</i></b> are applicable.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of a blemished priest who performed the Temple service <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an impure</b> priest <b>who performed</b> the Temple <b>service,</b> due to the elements common to both. He derives <b>the bodily disqualification</b> of a blemished priest <b>from the bodily disqualification</b> of an impure priest who performs the Temple service, and he derives the case of a blemished priest, whose case involves <b>sacrificial</b> matters, matters performed <b>inside</b> the Temple, and the relevance of both <b><i>piggul</i> and <i>notar</i>, from</b> the case of an impure priest, whose case involves <b>sacrificial</b> matters, matters performed <b>inside</b> the Temple, and the relevance of both <b><i>piggul</i> and <i>notar</i>.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> what is the reason that they hold that he is liable only for violating a prohibition? It is as <b>the verse states:</b> “And die <b>because of it</b> if they desecrate it; I am the Lord Who sanctifies them” (Leviticus 22:9), from which it is derived: <b>“Because of it”</b> they receive death at the hand of Heaven, <b>but not</b> in the case of <b>a blemished</b> priest.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: With regard to one who <b>intentionally performed</b> an action of <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> He is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>and the Rabbis say:</b> He is liable only <b>for</b> violating <b>a prohibition.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? <b>Rabbi Abbahu says: He derives</b> a verbal analogy: The meaning of the term of <b>sin</b> written with regard to one who intentionally misuses consecrated property (see Leviticus 5:15) is derived <b>from</b> the term of <b>sin</b> written with regard to an impure priest who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> (see Leviticus 22:9). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, the priest is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>so too here,</b> one who intentionally misuses consecrated property is punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 12
The Gemara explains: <b>And the Rabbis say</b> that <b>the verse states</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>: <b>“Because of it”</b> they receive death at the hand of Heaven, <b>but not in</b> the case of the intentional <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property.

### Part 13
The Gemara cites a dispute between the Sages with regard to the punishment of <b>a non-priest who performed</b> the Temple <b>service. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael says: It is stated here:</b> “You and your sons with you shall keep your priesthood in everything that pertains to the altar<b>…and any non-priest who approaches shall be put to death [<i>yumat</i>]”</b> (Numbers 18:7), <b>and it is stated there: “Anyone who approaches the Tabernacle of the Lord shall die [<i>yamut</i>]”</b> (Numbers 17:28). <b>Just as there,</b> the reference is to death <b>at the hand of Heaven; so too here,</b> in the case of a non-priest who performs the Temple service, the reference is to death <b>at the hand of Heaven.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Akiva says</b> that <b>it is stated here: “And any non-priest who approaches shall be put to death [<i>yumat</i>]” and it is stated there: “And that prophet or that dreamer of a dream shall be put to death [<i>yumat</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:6). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the prophet, he is executed <b>by stoning, so too here,</b> a non-priest who performs the Temple service is executed <b>by stoning. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says: Just as there,</b> with regard to the prophet, he is executed <b>by strangulation, so too here,</b> a non-priest who performs the Temple service is executed <b>by strangulation.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Akiva disagree?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Akiva holds:</b> In the verbal analogy, <b>one derives <i>yumat</i> from <i>yumat</i> and one does not derive <i>yumat</i> from <i>yamut</i>. And Rabbi Yishmael holds:</b> Although the terms are not identical, <b>one derives</b> by means of a verbal analogy the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an ordinary</b> person <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an ordinary</b> person <b>and one does not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an ordinary</b> person <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a prophet.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> hold? <b>Once</b> the prophet <b>incited</b> others to idol worship, <b>you have no greater</b> example of <b>an ordinary</b> person <b>than that,</b> i.e., he no longer has the status of a prophet.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri disagree?</b> The Gemara answers: They disagree <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute of Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A prophet who incited</b> others to idol worship is executed <b>by stoning. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> He is executed <b>by strangulation.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna with regard to a prophet who incites others to idol worship that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> He is executed <b>by strangulation,</b> contrary to Rabbi Akiva’s opinion cited in the <i>baraita</i>?

### Part 17
The Gemara answers: These are <b>two <i>tanna’im</i> and</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva. The mishna,</b> which cites the opinion that Rabbi Akiva holds that a prophet who incited others to idol worship is executed by strangulation, is citing the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva.</b> Rabbi Shimon was his preeminent disciple. <b>The <i>baraita</i>,</b> which cites the opinion that Rabbi Akiva holds that a prophet who incited others to idol worship is executed by stoning, is citing the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Shimon, <b>and</b> they too hold <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC