
### Part 1
<b>clearly</b> close <b>to the city,</b> so that there is no need to measure in order to determine the closest city, nevertheless they <b>must involve</b> themselves <b>with</b> the <b>measurement.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> With regard to the breaking of the neck of the heifer, the verse states: <b>“And your elders and your judges shall go out”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:2). <b>“Your elders,” this</b> is referring to the <b>Sanhedrin; “and your judges,” this</b> is referring to the <b>king and</b> the <b>High Priest.</b> The <i>baraita</i> explains the assertion that the <b>king</b> is called a judge, <b>as it is written: “The king by justice establishes the land”</b> (Proverbs 29:4), and the <b>High Priest</b> is also called a judge, <b>as it is written: “And you shall come to the priests the Levites, and to the judge</b> that will be in those days” (Deuteronomy 17:9), referring to the High Priest.

### Part 3
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>Does Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov disagree</b> with the <i>tanna’im</i> of the mishna only <b>with regard to one</b> matter, <b>or does he disagree with regard to two</b> matters? Does <b>he disagree</b> only <b>with regard to</b> the requirement for the <b>king and</b> the <b>High Priest</b> to participate in the measurement, <b>but with regard to the Sanhedrin</b> he holds <b>either in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda or in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon? Or perhaps he disagrees with regard to</b> the <b>Sanhedrin, too, as he says we require all of the</b> members of the <b>Sanhedrin</b> to participate in the measurement.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution to this dilemma from a <i>baraita</i> discussing the case of a rebellious elder, a Sage who publicly teaches a <i>halakha</i> against the ruling of the Great Sanhedrin: If the rebellious elder <b>found</b> the members of the Sanhedrin <b>in Beit Pagei</b> outside of Jerusalem <b>and rebelled against them</b> by rejecting their decision, one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>his rebellion</b> is deemed <b>a rebellion</b> and he will be liable to receive the death penalty if he instructs the public to follow his opinion. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall arise and go up to the place</b> that the Lord your God shall choose” (Deuteronomy 17:8), and this <b>teaches that the location determines</b> the authority of the Sanhedrin; to a certain extent this authority exists only when the Sanhedrin is situated in the Chamber of Hewn Stone, adjacent to the Temple.

### Part 5
The Gemara clarifies: In the case discussed in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>how many</b> members of the Sanhedrin <b>went out</b> to Beit Pagei? <b>If we say</b> that only <b>some of them</b> went out, there is no significance in such a ruling issued by the rebellious elder, as <b>perhaps those who are inside</b> the Chamber of Hewn Stone are the majority and <b>hold in accordance with his</b> opinion; in which case he certainly would not be deemed a rebellious elder. <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious that they all went out.</b> And <b>for what</b> reason did they go out? <b>If we say</b> that they did so <b>for an optional matter, may they go out? But isn’t it written: “Your navel is like a round goblet wherein no blended wine is lacking”</b> (Song of Songs 7:3), from which it is inferred that the Sanhedrin sit in a half-circle, and there must never be more than two-thirds of them lacking, as this is the measure of wine blended in water. <b>Rather,</b> since the Sanhedrin may not leave the chamber unnecessarily, it is <b>obvious</b> that they went out <b>for a matter</b> relating to <b>a mitzva.</b>

### Part 6
<b>What are the circumstances?</b> Is it <b>not</b> that they went out <b>to measure</b> the distance between a murder victim and the nearest city, in order to perform the ritual of the breaking of the neck of the <b>heifer, and it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> from which it can be deduced <b>that he says: We require all of the Sanhedrin</b> to participate? <b>Abaye said to him: No,</b> that cannot be proven from here, as perhaps it is a case <b>where they went out to extend the city</b> of Jerusalem <b>or the courtyards</b> of the Temple, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>They may extend the city or the courtyards</b> of the Temple <b>only in</b> accordance with the ruling of <b>a court of seventy-one</b> judges.

### Part 7
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Yosef:</b> If <b>he found them in Beit Pagei and rebelled against them, such as</b> in a situation <b>where they went out to measure</b> the distance between a murder victim and the nearest city, in order to perform the ceremony of the breaking of the neck of the <b>heifer or to extend the city or the courtyards,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought <b>that his rebellion is</b> deemed <b>a rebellion.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall arise and go up to the place,”</b> which <b>teaches that the location determines</b> the authority of the Sanhedrin. This proves that there is a <i>tanna</i> who maintains that all of the members of the Sanhedrin must participate in the measurement.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: Valuations of the fruits of <b>a fourth-year sapling or second-tithe</b> produce in cases <b>where their value is not known</b> is performed <b>by three</b> judges. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is the second tithe whose value is not known</b> and requires a special court to assess it? This is <b>fruit that has decomposed, and wine that has developed a film, and coins that have become rusted</b> and cannot be traded at full value. Therefore, there is a need for expert assessment. <b>The Sages taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: <b>The second tithe whose value is not known may be redeemed by three purchasers,</b> i.e., experts in trade, <b>but not by three</b> ordinary people <b>who are not purchasers.</b> This may be done <b>even</b> if <b>one of them is a gentile,</b> and <b>even</b> if <b>one of them</b> is the <b>owner.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya asks:</b> Concerning <b>three</b> people who <b>deposit</b> their funds <b>into one</b> single <b>purse,</b> meaning they are partners in expenses and profits, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? With regard to valuations, are they considered as three people or as one? The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a solution to the matter from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A man and his two wives may redeem</b> produce of the <b>second tithe where its value is unknown.</b> It is apparent that three partners are considered a court for this matter. The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> this was a case of a marriage with special arrangements, <b>such as</b> that between <b>Rav Pappa and</b> his wife, <b>the daughter of Abba of Sura.</b> Rav Pappa and his wife handled their finances independently; she had her own property and was responsible for her own expenses.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that the valuation of <b>consecrated</b> property is performed <b>by three</b> judges. The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: Even</b> a simple item such as <b>a small fork of consecrated property requires</b> a valuation by <b>ten people</b> in order <b>to redeem it.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: Granted,</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> can be understood, <b>since</b> what <b>he says</b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel. As Shmuel says: Ten priests are written in</b> this Torah <b>portion,</b> meaning the word “priest” appears ten times in the passage discussing consecrated property and redeeming consecrated property (Leviticus, chapter 27). For each time the word “priest” is stated, a judge is added to the court that must endorse the calculation of the redemption, leading to a total of ten judges. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, from where do they</b> derive a requirement for <b>three</b> judges?

### Part 12
<b>And if you would say that</b> the word “priest” <b>is written with regard to them,</b> i.e., with regard to the specific <i>halakha</i> of redeeming a consecrated animal, which can be generalized to any case of movable property, only <b>three</b> times (Leviticus 27:11–12), then in a case of redeeming <b>land, with regard to which</b> the word “priest,” <b>is written four</b> times (Leviticus 27:14, 18, 23), <b>it should be enough</b> to perform the valuation <b>in</b> a court of <b>four</b> judges. <b>And if you would say: Indeed</b> that is the case, <b>why did we learn</b> in the mishna that <b>the</b> valuation of consecrated <b>land</b> is performed by <b>nine</b> judges <b>and</b> one <b>priest?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather, what</b> would you say? <b>That</b> the count of <b>ten</b> instances of the word “priest” written in the section <b>is completed with these,</b> meaning that there is a cumulative calculation of all mentions of the word since the beginning of the passage? If so, concerning <b>consecrated items</b> such as animals, given <b>that</b> a similar cumulative count of <b>six is completed with them,</b> they <b>should require six</b> judges to perform the valuation. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, the matter is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches that <b>the valuations</b> that are movable property are performed by three judges. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Valuations that are movable property?</b> The term: Valuations, generally is referring to a unique type of calculation in which one vows to contribute the value of a person, according to the set amounts explicitly stated in the Torah (see Leviticus 27:1–8). This type of calculation does not apply to property, so to what does the mishna refer? <b>Rav Giddel says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The mishna was discussing a case <b>where one says: The valuation of this utensil</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to contribute. <b>As Rav Giddel says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC