
### Part 1
<b>What</b> is the meaning of the term <b>amen? Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> It is an acronym of the words: <b>God, faithful King [<i>El Melekh ne’eman</i>].</b>

### Part 2
§ With regard to the verse: <b>“Therefore, the netherworld has enlarged itself and opened its mouth without measure [<i>livli ḥok</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 5:14), <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> It is referring to <b>one who leaves even one statute [<i>ḥok</i>]</b> unfulfilled; the netherworld expands for him. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: It is not satisfactory to</b> God, <b>their Master, that you said this about them,</b> as according to Reish Lakish’s opinion most of the Jewish people would be doomed to Gehenna. <b>Rather, even if one learned only one statute,</b> he has a share in the World-to-Come, and “<i>livli ḥok</i>” means one who has learned no statutes at all.

### Part 3
With regard to <b>that</b> which <b>is stated: “And it shall come to pass that in all the land, says the Lord, two parts shall be excised and die, but the third shall remain in it”</b> (Zechariah 13:8), <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> “The third” means that only <b>one-third</b> of the descendants <b>of Shem,</b> son of Noah, will remain, and everyone else will die. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>It is not satisfactory to</b> God, <b>their Master, that you said this about them,</b> that the overwhelming majority of the world will be destroyed. <b>Rather, even</b> as many as <b>one-third</b> of the descendants <b>of Noah,</b> one-third of the population of the world, will remain.

### Part 4
With regard to the verse: <b>“For I have taken you to Myself: And I will take out one of a city, and two of a family”</b> (Jeremiah 3:14), <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> The meaning of this <b>statement</b> is <b>as it is written,</b> that only individuals will be spared and the rest will be destroyed. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to him: It is not satisfactory to</b> God, <b>their Master, that you said this about them. Rather,</b> the merit of <b>one from the city causes the entire city</b> to <b>benefit, and</b> the merit of <b>two from a family causes the entire family</b> to <b>benefit</b> and be redeemed. Likewise, the Gemara relates that <b>Rav Kahana sat before Rav, and sat and said:</b> The meaning of <b>this statement</b> is <b>as it is written. Rav said to him: It is not satisfactory to</b> God, <b>their Master, that you said this about them. Rather,</b> the merit of <b>one from the city causes the entire city</b> to <b>benefit, and</b> the merit of <b>two from a family causes the entire family</b> to <b>benefit</b> and be redeemed.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates that Rav <b>saw that</b> Rav Kahana <b>was washing</b> the hair on <b>his head and</b> then <b>arose and sat before Rav.</b> Rav <b>said to</b> Rav Kahana: <b>“Nor shall it be found in the land of the living [<i>haḥayyim</i>]”</b> (Job 28:13). Rav Kahana thought that Rav addressed that verse to him and <b>he said to</b> Rav: <b>Are you cursing me?</b> Rav <b>said to him:</b> It is <b>a verse</b> that <b>I am saying</b> to remind you that <b>Torah will not be found in one who sustains [<i>meḥayye</i>] himself</b> in an indulgent manner <b>in its</b> study; rather, Torah is acquired through suffering and difficulty.

### Part 6
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the few that are destined to be redeemed: <b>Rav Simai says</b> that <b>it is stated: “And I will take you to Me as a people”</b> (Exodus 6:7), <b>and</b> juxtaposed to that verse <b>it is stated: “And I will bring you</b> into the land” (Exodus 6:8). The Torah <b>compares their exodus from Egypt to their entry into the land; just as</b> during <b>their entry into the land</b> only <b>two of six hundred thousand</b> entered the land, as they all died in the wilderness except for Caleb and Joshua, <b>so too,</b> during <b>their exodus from Egypt,</b> in terms of the ratio, <b>only two of six hundred thousand</b> left Egypt and the rest died there. <b>Rava says: And likewise,</b> that will be situation <b>in the messianic era, as it is stated: “And she shall respond there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt”</b> (Hosea 2:17). The ultimate redemption and the exodus from Egypt are juxtaposed, indicating that in the messianic era too, only few will survive.

### Part 7
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Yosei, says: One time I entered Alexandria of Egypt. I found one old man and he said to me: Come and I will show you what my ancestors,</b> the Egyptians, <b>did to your ancestors,</b> the Jewish people. Some <b>of them they drowned in the sea,</b> some <b>of them they killed with the sword,</b> and <b>some of them they crushed in the buildings. And</b> it is <b>over this matter,</b> Moses’ protest of the afflictions suffered by the Jewish people, that <b>Moses, our teacher, was punished, as it is stated: “For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in Your name, he has done evil to this people,</b> neither have You delivered Your people at all” (Exodus 5:23).

### Part 8
<b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to</b> Moses: <b>Woe over those who are gone and are no</b> longer <b>found; as several times I revealed Myself to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as God Almighty [<i>El Shaddai</i>] and they did not question My attributes, and did not say to Me: What is Your name? I said to Abraham: “Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for unto you I will give it”</b> (Genesis 13:17). Ultimately, <b>he sought a place to bury Sarah and did not find</b> one <b>until he purchased</b> it <b>for four hundred silver shekels, and he did not question My attributes</b> and did not protest that I failed to fulfill My promise to give him the land.

### Part 9
<b>I said to Isaac: “Sojourn in this land, and I will be with you and will bless you”</b> (Genesis 26:3). <b>His servants sought water to drink and they did not find</b> it <b>until they started a quarrel, as it is stated: “And the herdsmen of Gerar quarreled with Isaac’s herdsmen saying: The water is ours”</b> (Genesis 26:20), <b>and he did not question My attributes.</b>

### Part 10
<b>I said to Jacob: “The land upon which you lie, to you I will give it”</b> (Genesis 28:13). <b>He sought a place to pitch his tent and he did not find</b> one <b>until he purchased</b> it <b>for one hundred coins, and he did not question My attributes, and did not say to Me: What is Your name? And you,</b> Moses, <b>ask Me: What is Your name, initially,</b> after witnessing My greatness more than they ever did. <b>And now you say to Me: “Neither have You delivered Your people”</b> (Exodus 5:23). The verse then states: <b>“Now shall you see what I will do to Pharaoh”</b> (Exodus 6:1). One can infer: <b>The war with Pharaoh</b> and his downfall <b>you</b> shall <b>see, but you will not see the war with the thirty-one kings</b> in Eretz Yisrael, as you will not be privileged to conquer Eretz Yisrael for the Jewish people.

### Part 11
§ With regard to the verse: “And the Lord passed before him and proclaimed: The Lord, the Lord, compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in loving-kindness and truth, extending loving-kindness to thousands of generations…<b>and Moses made haste and bowed his head toward the earth and prostrated himself”</b> (Exodus 34:6–8), the Gemara asks: <b>What did Moses see</b> in these attributes that caused him to hastily prostrate himself?

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamla says: He saw</b> the attribute of <b>slow to anger; and the Rabbis say: He saw</b> the attribute of <b>truth. It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the one who said: He saw</b> the attribute of <b>slow to anger, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When Moses ascended on high, he discovered the Holy One, Blessed be He, sitting and writing: Slow to anger.</b> Moses <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe,</b> is Your attribute of <b>slow to anger</b> only to be used <b>for the righteous?</b> God <b>said to him:</b> It is an attribute <b>even for the wicked.</b> Moses <b>said to Him: Let the wicked be doomed.</b> God <b>said to him: Now, you</b> will <b>see that you will need</b> this, as ultimately you will reconsider that statement.

### Part 13
<b>When the Jewish people sinned</b> in the sin of the spies and Moses asked God to forgive them, the Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>said to</b> Moses: <b>Didn’t you say to Me</b> that the attribute of <b>slow to anger</b> is <b>for the righteous</b> alone? They are not worthy of atonement.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC