
### Part 1
<b>the laws of fines would have ceased</b> to be implemented <b>from</b> among <b>the Jewish people,</b> as they would not have been able to adjudicate cases involving these laws due to a lack of ordained judges. This is <b>because</b> at <b>one time the wicked kingdom</b> of Rome <b>issued decrees of religious persecution against the Jewish people</b> with the aim of abolishing the chain of ordination and the authority of the Sages. They said <b>that anyone who ordains</b> judges <b>will be killed, and anyone who is ordained will be killed, and the city in which they ordain</b> the judges <b>will be destroyed, and</b> the signs identifying <b>the boundaries</b> of the city <b>in which they ordain</b> judges <b>will be uprooted.</b> These measures were intended to discourage the Sages from performing or receiving ordination due to fear for the welfare of the local population.

### Part 2
<b>What did</b> Rabbi <b>Yehuda ben Bava do? He went and sat between two large mountains, between two large cities, and between two Shabbat boundaries: Between Usha and Shefaram,</b> i.e., in a desolate place that was not associated with any particular city so that he not endanger anyone not directly involved, <b>and there he ordained five elders. And they were: Rabbi Meir, and Rabbi Yehuda, and Rabbi Shimon, and Rabbi Yosei, and Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua. Rav Avya adds</b> that <b>Rabbi Neḥemya</b> was <b>also</b> among those ordained. This incident indicates that ordination can be performed by a single Sage.

### Part 3
<b>When their enemies discovered them,</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava <b>said to</b> the newly ordained Sages: <b>My sons, run</b> for your lives. <b>They said to him: My teacher, what will be with you?</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava was elderly and unable to run. He <b>said to them:</b> In any case, <b>I am cast before them like a stone that cannot be overturned;</b> even if you attempt to assist me I will not be able to escape due to my frailty, but if you do not escape without me you will also be killed. People <b>say</b> about this incident: The Roman soldiers <b>did not move from there until they had inserted three hundred iron spears</b> [<b><i>lunkhiyot</i></b>] <b>into him, making him</b> appear <b>like a sieve</b> pierced with many holes.

### Part 4
This proof is refuted: There may <b>have been other</b> Sages performing the ordination <b>with Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava,</b> who were added in order to reach the quota of three Sages, <b>and this</b> fact <b>that they were not mentioned is due to the honor of Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava,</b> who was the greatest among them. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> did <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava</b> actually <b>ordain him? But doesn’t Rabba bar bar Ḥana say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Anyone who says that Rabbi Akiva did not ordain Rabbi Meir is nothing other than mistaken.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> in fact <b>ordained</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>but</b> the people <b>did not accept</b> the appointment, as Rabbi Meir was still very young. Therefore, some time later, <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava ordained him</b> a second time, <b>and they accepted it.</b>

### Part 5
§ <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: There is no ordination outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>There is no ordination? If we say that they may not adjudicate</b> cases involving <b>laws of fines at all outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, that is difficult: <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Makkot</i> 7a): The <b>Sanhedrin</b> and its authority <b>functions both in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael? <b>Rather,</b> the intention is <b>that we do not ordain</b> judges <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: It is <b>obvious</b> that if <b>those ordaining</b> the new judges were <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>and those being ordained</b> were <b>inside Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>we say that</b> they may <b>not</b> perform the ordination. <b>But</b> if <b>those ordaining</b> the new judges were <b>inside Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>and those being ordained</b> were <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? May ordination be conferred from a distance in this situation?

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to the dilemma from the fact <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan was distressed concerning Rav Shemen bar Abba, as</b> the latter <b>was not with</b> the other Sages at the time they received the consent of the <i>Nasi</i> <b>so that</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>could ordain him.</b> In addition, concerning <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Zeirud and one who was with him,</b> the Gemara interjects: <b>And who is he? Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Akhmai. And some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Akhmai and one who was with him;</b> the Gemara interjects: <b>And who is he? Rabbi Shimon ben Zeirud.</b> The Gemara continues: Although these two Sages were equal in stature, the Sages <b>ordained</b> only the <b>one who was with them</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>and they did not ordain</b> the other <b>one, who was not with them.</b> This indicates that ordination can be granted only in Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates several other incidents with regard to ordination. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan persistently tried to ordain Rabbi Ḥanina and Rabbi Hoshaya,</b> as they were scholars and righteous people. But <b>he was not successful</b> with regard to <b>the matter,</b> as various incidents repeatedly interfered with his plan, and <b>he was very distressed</b> about this. <b>They said to him: Do not be distressed,</b> our <b>Master, as we come from,</b> i.e., are descendants of, <b>the house of</b> the High Priest <b>Eli.</b>

### Part 9
<b>As Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: From where</b> is it known <b>that there</b> are <b>not</b> to be <b>ordained</b> Sages <b>from the house of Eli? As it is stated</b> with regard to the house of Eli: <b>“And there shall not be an elder in your house forever”</b> (I Samuel 2:32). The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>“elder”</b> in this verse? <b>If we say</b> it means <b>an actual elder,</b> meaning an old person, <b>but isn’t it</b> already <b>written: “And all those raised in your house shall die young men”</b> (I Samuel 2:33)? <b>Rather,</b> the term “elder” is an honorary term for a Sage, and it means that <b>ordination</b> will not be granted to descendants of the House of Eli.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Zeira would</b> habitually <b>hide</b> himself <b>so</b> that <b>they would</b> not <b>ordain him.</b> He did this due to the fact <b>that Rabbi Elazar said: Always be obscure and</b> remain <b>alive,</b> meaning the more humble and unknown you make yourself, the longer you will live. <b>When he heard that</b> which <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> also <b>said: A person does not rise to greatness unless all his sins are forgiven,</b> he understood that there are also benefits to greatness, and <b>he presented himself</b> to the <i>Nasi</i> in order that he would ordain him.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>When they ordained Rabbi Zeira</b> the Sages who were present at the ceremony <b>sang to him this</b> paean of praise traditionally sung to a bride at her wedding: She wears <b>no blue eye shadow and no rouge</b> on her face <b>and no hair dye, and</b> nevertheless <b>she radiates grace.</b> The bride is described as so beautiful that she does not need any cosmetics or adornments, and metaphorically Rabbi Zeira is praised as exceptionally and recognizably qualified for his appointment. Similarly, <b>when they ordained Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi, they sang to them this</b> paean of praise: <b>Anyone like these, anyone like these, ordain for us,</b> as they epitomized the ideal candidate for ordination. But <b>do not ordain for us</b> those counted <b>among the rags [<i>misarmitin</i>] or among the distorters [<i>misarmisin</i>]. And some say</b> that they said: Do <b>not</b> ordain for us those counted <b>among the robbers [<i>meḥamisin</i>] or among the tramplers [<i>miturmisin</i>].</b>

### Part 12
Since the songs composed for various Sages were mentioned, the Gemara also recounts that <b>when Rabbi Abbahu would come from the yeshiva to the house of the emperor, the ladies from the emperor’s house would go out and sing before him: O great one of his people, leader of his nation, illuminating candle, may your arrival be blessed in peace.</b>

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches that <b>the breaking of the heifer’s neck</b> is performed <b>in</b> front of a panel of <b>three</b> judges, and that Rabbi Yehuda says there must be five judges. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And your elders and your judges shall go out</b> and they shall measure to the cities that are around the corpse” (Deuteronomy 21:2). <b>“Your elders”</b> is in the plural, which indicates a minimum of <b>two,</b> and <b>“your judges”</b> is also plural, indicating another <b>two, and</b> as <b>a court may not</b> be composed of <b>an even</b> number of judges, <b>they add an additional one to them,</b> so <b>there are five</b> judges <b>here;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Shimon says: “Your elders,”</b> indicate <b>two, and</b> as <b>a court may not</b> be composed of <b>an even</b> number of judges, <b>they add an additional one to them,</b> so <b>there are three</b> judges <b>here.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to <b>Rabbi Shimon, what does he do with this</b> extra expression: <b>“Your judges”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He requires it to</b> teach that these judges must be of <b>the unique ones among your judges,</b> meaning that they must be members of the Sanhedrin. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> that the judges must be members of the Sanhedrin? He <b>derives</b> it <b>from</b> the fact that the verse did not merely state: <b>“Elders,”</b> but rather: <b>“Your elders,”</b> which indicates the elders that are unique to all of the Jewish people, meaning the Sages of the Sanhedrin.

### Part 15
<b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> respond to this claim? He holds that <b>had</b> the verse written only: <b>“Elders,” I would say</b> that the verse is referring to any <b>elders</b> in <b>the marketplace</b> who are not members of the Sanhedrin. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “Your elders.” And if it was written: “Your elders,” I would say</b> that it is referring to members of <b>a lesser Sanhedrin.</b> Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “And your judges,”</b> to indicate that they must be of <b>the unique ones among your judges. And</b> how would <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> respond to this claim? <b>He learns</b> it by means of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the word <b>“elders”</b> written in this verse and the word <b>“elders”</b> written in the verse: <b>“And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands</b> on the head of the bull” (Leviticus 4:15). <b>Just as there</b> it is referring to <b>the unique ones of the congregation, so too here,</b> it is referring to <b>the unique ones among your elders.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>If he learns</b> this verbal analogy, <b>he should learn all of it,</b> i.e., the entire <i>halakha</i>, including the number of judges as well as their rank, <b>from there,</b> i.e., the verse in Leviticus, and if so <b>why do I</b> need the extra expressions: <b>“Your elders”</b> and: <b>“And your judges”? Rather,</b> certainly he does not accept this verbal analogy. Rather, he holds that the additional letter <b><i>vav</i>,</b> corresponding to the word “and” in the expression: <b>“And your judges,”</b> is there <b>for the tally,</b> meaning that the expression “your judges” teaches that they must be members of the Great Sanhedrin, and the additional <i>vav</i> serves to add an additional two to the number of judges. <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> respond to that? <b>He does not expound</b> the additional letter <b><i>vav</i>.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> if the verbs in the plural form are each understood as adding an additional two judges, then the expression: <b>“And they shall go out,”</b> in the continuation of the verse (Deuteronomy 21:2) indicates another <b>two,</b> and the expression: <b>“And they shall measure,”</b> adds another <b>two,</b> meaning that according <b>to Rabbi Yehuda there</b> should be <b>nine</b> judges, and according <b>to Rabbi Shimon, seven.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He needs this</b> exposition <b>for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And they shall go out,”</b> to emphasize that <b>they</b> must go out, <b>and not their agents,</b> and the verse states: <b>“And they shall measure,”</b> to teach that this measurement is itself a mitzva, such <b>that even</b> if the corpse <b>is found</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC