
### Part 1
<b>You</b> therefore <b>say</b> in response: The <b>vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative,</b> and the verse prohibits cooking the young goat in its mother’s milk.

### Part 2
<b>Rather, everyone</b> agrees that the <b>vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative. But</b> in actuality, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and the Rabbis disagree with regard to this: Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that the phrase <b>“the court shall condemn”</b> is referring to <b>other</b> judges, in addition to the three that were derived from the earlier verse, leading to a total of five, whereas <b>the Rabbis hold</b> that the term <b>“shall condemn”</b> means <b>these</b> judges, i.e., <b>those</b> who have already been mentioned, and therefore there are only three.

### Part 3
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Roetz,</b> who applied the principle: The vocalization of the Torah is authoritative, to the question of the duration of the ritual impurity of a woman who gave birth to a female, it can be explained that <b>the Rabbis do not disagree with him,</b> as everyone agrees that the vocalization of the Torah is authoritative.

### Part 4
With regard to <b>Beit Hillel,</b> who hold that a single presentation of blood is sufficient to atone even when bringing a sin-offering, this is not because they hold the traditional consonantal text is authoritative. Rather, their opinion is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to the sin-offering brought by a ruler: <b>“And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement</b> for him” (Leviticus 4:26), and with regard to a sin-offering of a goat brought by an ordinary person: “And the priest <b>shall make atonement</b> for him” (Leviticus 4:31), and with regard to a sin-offering of a lamb brought by an ordinary person: <b>“And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement</b> for him” (Leviticus 4:35), repeating this term three times. This repetition is <b>due to the</b> following <b>logical inference:</b>

### Part 5
<b>Could this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference?</b> There <b>is stated</b> a term of <b>blood below,</b> in the verse written with regard to a bird brought as a sin-offering (see Leviticus 5:9), <b>and</b> there <b>is stated</b> a term of <b>blood above,</b> in the verse written with regard to an animal brought as a sin-offering (see Leviticus 4:25, 31, 35). <b>Just as</b> with regard to the <b>blood that is stated below, when it is presented with one presentation it has effected atonement, so too</b> with regard to the <b>blood that is stated above, when it is presented with one presentation it has effected atonement.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Or</b> perhaps <b>go this way,</b> offering a different explanation: There <b>is stated</b> a term of <b>blood</b> in the verse written <b>with regard to the external</b> altar, i.e., in the verse written with regard to a sin-offering of an ordinary person that is brought on the external altar in the courtyard (see Leviticus 4:25), <b>and</b> there <b>is stated</b> a term of <b>blood</b> in the verse written <b>with regard to</b> the <b>inner</b> altar, i.e., with regard to a sin-offering of the community or the High Priest, the blood of which is sprinkled on the incense altar inside the Sanctuary (see Leviticus 4:7, 18). <b>Just as</b> with regard to the <b>blood that was stated concerning</b> the <b>inner</b> altar, i.e., if <b>one of the presentations is lacking it has not accomplished anything</b> and the offering is not valid, <b>so too,</b> with regard to the <b>blood that was stated concerning the external</b> altar, if one <b>of the presentations is lacking it has accomplished nothing.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara analyzes the two possibilities: <b>Let us see to which</b> of the two comparisons <b>this is</b> more <b>similar.</b> It can be claimed: <b>We derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to the <b>external</b> altar <b>from</b> a <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to the <b>external</b> altar, <b>but we do not derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to the <b>external</b> altar <b>from</b> a <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to the <b>inner</b> altar.

### Part 8
<b>Or go this way: We derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to a <b>sin-offering</b> whose blood is to be sprinkled on the <b>four corners</b> of the altar <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> stated with regard to <b>a sin-offering</b> whose blood is to be sprinkled on the <b>four corners</b> of the altar, <b>and this</b> sin-offering consisting of a bird, <b>which is not a sin-offering</b> of the type whose blood is to be sprinkled on the <b>four corners</b> of the altar, <b>cannot prove</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is similar with regard to a sin-offering whose blood is to be sprinkled on the four corners of the altar.

### Part 9
Since there are two legitimate inferences, the <i>halakha</i> cannot be decided through a logical inference. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement,” “And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement,” “And</b> the priest <b>shall make atonement,”</b> three times, <b>due to the logical inference.</b> The verses are interpreted as follows: “The priest <b>shall make atonement,” even though he presented only three</b> presentations, and then a second verse repeats: “The priest <b>shall make atonement,” even though he presented only two</b> presentations, and then a third verse repeats: “The priest <b>shall make atonement,” even though he presented only one</b> presentation. This interpretation is the source of Beit Hillel’s opinion.

### Part 10
<b>And</b> concerning <b>Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis,</b> who disagreed with regard to the number of walls required in a <i>sukka</i>, it is <b>with regard to this</b> that <b>they disagree: Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that <b>the</b> basic requirement of placing <b>roofing [<i>sekhakha</i>]</b> on the <i>sukka</i> <b>does not need a verse</b> to teach that it is required, as it is implied by the word <i>sukka</i>. Consequently, the word <i>sukkot</i> appears two times in the text beyond the initial mitzva, teaching a requirement for four walls, and there is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai that reduces the minimum size of one of the walls to a handbreadth. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that the requirement of placing <b>roofing does need a verse.</b> Therefore, one of the four derivations is used to teach that requirement, and only three walls remain, one of which is reduced to a handbreadth.

### Part 11
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>Rabbi Akiva and the Rabbis,</b> who disagreed about the issue of a quarter<i>-log</i> of blood that emanated from two corpses, it is <b>with regard to this</b> that <b>they disagree: Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that <b>“bodies”</b> in plural <b>indicates two.</b> Consequently, a quarter<i>-log</i> of blood that emanated from two corpses also renders one impure. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>“bodies”</b> in plural <b>indicates</b> a <b>general</b> <i>halakha</i>, and no derivation can be made with regard to blood that emanated from two corpses. Both opinions, however, agree that the vocalized text of the Torah is authoritative.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And does everyone</b> actually hold that the <b>vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the number of compartments in the phylacteries of the head, the verse states: “It shall be for a sign upon your hand, and <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (Exodus 13:16), with the word <i>totafot</i> spelled deficient, without a second <i>vav</i>, in a way that can be read as singular; and again: “They shall be <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (Deuteronomy 6:8), spelled as a singular word; and again: “They shall be <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (11:18), this time spelled plene, with a second <i>vav</i>, in a manner that must be plural? <b>There are four</b> mentions of <i>totafot</i> <b>here,</b> as the third one is written in the plural and therefore counts as two. Consequently, it is derived that the phylacteries of the head must have four compartments. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Akiva says: There is no need</b> for this proof, as the requirement of four compartments can be derived from the word <i>totafot</i> itself: The word <b><i>tat</i> in</b> the language of the <b><i>Katfei</i></b> means <b>two,</b> and the word <b><i>pat</i> in</b> the language of <b><i>Afriki</i></b> also means <b>two,</b> and therefore <i>totafot</i> can be understood as a compound word meaning: Four. The <i>baraita</i> therefore indicates that Rabbi Yishmael holds that not the vocalization but rather the tradition of the manner in which the verses in the Torah are written is authoritative.

### Part 14
<b>Rather,</b> the explanation that everyone holds that the vocalization of the Torah is authoritative must be rejected, and it must be explained that the Sages <b>actually</b> do <b>disagree</b> whether it is the vocalization of the Torah or the tradition of the manner in which the verses in the Torah are written that is authoritative. <b>And</b> in order to explain the unresolved problem with regard to the <i>baraita</i> about the prohibition of cooking a young goat in its mother’s milk, the explanation is that <b>this statement, that they disagree</b> as to whether the vocalization or the tradition is authoritative, applies <b>where the vocalization</b> of the word <b>differs from the tradition</b> of the manner in which the word is written. <b>But</b> in <b>this</b> case the words <b>milk [<i>ḥalev</i>] and fat [<i>ḥelev</i>] are</b> written in <b>an identical</b> manner, as there is no difference in the writing at all, only in the way they are vocalized. Therefore, all agree that the <b>vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> the words: <b>“Shall see”</b> and <b>“shall appear” are</b> written in <b>an identical</b> matter, <b>and</b> nevertheless the Sages <b>disagree</b> about which reading is authoritative. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Yoḥanan ben Dahavai says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima: One who is blind in one of his eyes is exempt from the</b> mitzva of <b>appearance,</b> i.e., the obligation to appear in the Temple and to sacrifice an offering on the three pilgrimage Festivals, <b>as it is stated:</b> “Three times in the year all your males shall appear [<i>yera’eh</i>] before the Lord God” (Exodus 23:17). According to the way in which the verse is written, without vocalization, it can be read as <b><i>yireh</i>,</b> meaning: <b>Shall see,</b> instead of <b><i>yera’eh</i>,</b> meaning: <b>Shall appear.</b> This teaches that <b>in the</b> same <b>manner that one comes to see, so he comes to appear,</b> i.e., to be seen: <b>Just as</b> the usual way <b>to see</b> is <b>with both of one’s eyes, so too,</b> the obligation <b>to appear</b> applies only to one who comes <b>with</b> the sight of <b>both his eyes.</b>

### Part 16
It is therefore apparent that even when there is no difference in the way the words are written, some say that the tradition, not the vocalization, is authoritative. <b>Rather, Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, said:</b> The reason all agree that there is a prohibition to cook a young goat in its mother’s milk and not in its mother’s fat is that <b>the verse states: “You shall not cook a young goat”</b> (Exodus 23:19). The verse teaches that the action <b>the Torah prohibited</b> is in <b>the manner of cooking,</b> which is generally done in a liquid such as milk and not in a solid substance such as fat.

### Part 17
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Cases of <b>monetary law</b> are adjudicated <b>by three</b> judges.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC