
### Part 1
<b>and exposed her hair</b> as though she were bathing. <b>Anyone who came</b> and <b>saw her</b> stepped <b>back. In the meantime</b> the assembly of Korah <b>was swallowed</b> into the ground, and On, son of Peleth, was spared.

### Part 2
<b>Korah’s wife said to him: See what Moses is doing. He is the king, he appointed his brother High Priest,</b> and <b>he appointed his brother’s sons deputy priests. If <i>teruma</i> comes, he says: Let it be for the priest; if</b> the first <b>tithe comes, which you</b> as Levites <b>take, he says: Give one tenth to the priest. And furthermore, he shears your hair and waves you</b> as if you are as insignificant <b>as excrement</b> (see Numbers 8:5–11), as though <b>he set</b> his <b>sights on your hair</b> and wishes you to be shaven and unsightly. Korah <b>said to her: But didn’t he also do so;</b> he shaved his hair like the rest of the Levites? <b>She said to him: Since it is all</b> done <b>for his own prominence, he also said</b> metaphorically: <b>“Let me die with the Philistines”</b> (Judges 16:30); he was willing to humiliate himself in order to humiliate you.

### Part 3
She said to him: <b>And furthermore,</b> with regard to that <b>which he said to you, to prepare sky-blue dye</b> for your ritual fringes, one could respond to him: <b>If it enters your mind,</b> Moses, that using <b>sky-blue dye is considered a mitzva, take out robes</b> that are made entirely <b>of</b> material colored with <b>sky-blue dye, and dress all</b> the students <b>of your academy</b> in sky-blue robes without ritual fringes; why could one not fulfill the mitzva in that manner? Clearly, Moses is fabricating all this. <b>This is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The wisdom of women builds her house”</b> (Proverbs 14:1); <b>this</b> is referring to <b>the wife of On, son of Peleth.</b> And: <b>“Folly plucks it down with her hands”</b> (Proverbs 14:1); <b>this</b> is referring to <b>the wife of Korah.</b>

### Part 4
It is written: <b>“And they arose before Moses, with men from the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty</b> princes of the congregation, the elect men of the assembly, men of renown” (Numbers 16:2). These men were <b>the distinctive people of the assembly. “The elect men of the assembly [<i>keri’ei moed</i>]”</b> is referring to those <b>who knew</b> how <b>to intercalate the years and establish the months</b> in order to determine the time for each Festival [<i>moed</i>]. <b>“Men of renown [<i>shem</i>],”</b> is referring to those <b>who had a reputation [<i>shem</i>] throughout the world.</b>

### Part 5
With regard to the verse: <b>“And Moses heard and he fell on his face”</b> (Numbers 16:4), the Gemara asks: <b>What report did he hear</b> that elicited that reaction? <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says:</b> He heard <b>that they suspected him</b> of adultery <b>with a married woman, as it is stated: “And they were jealous of Moses in the camp”</b> (Psalms 106:16). <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzḥak says:</b> This <b>teaches that each and every</b> man <b>warned his wife</b> to distance herself <b>from Moses</b> and not enter into seclusion with him, <b>as it is stated: “And Moses would take the tent and pitch it outside the camp”</b> (Exodus 33:7). It was due to this slander that he withdrew from the camp.

### Part 6
§ With regard to the verse: <b>“And Moses arose and went to Dathan and Abiram”</b> (Numbers 16:25), <b>Reish Lakish says: From here</b> we derive <b>that one may not perpetuate a dispute, as Rav says: Anyone who perpetuates a dispute violates a prohibition, as it is stated: “And he will not be like Korah and his assembly,</b> as the Lord spoke by the hand of Moses to him” (Numbers 17:5). Even the aggrieved party must seek to end the dispute. Dathan and Abiram accused Moses and by right should have initiated the reconciliation. Nevertheless, Moses was not insistent on this; he went to them.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Ashi says:</b> One who perpetuates a dispute <b>is fit to be afflicted with leprosy. It is written here: “By the hand of Moses to him,” and it is written there: “And the Lord said furthermore to him: Put now your hand into your bosom.</b> And he put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as white as snow” (Exodus 4:6). Based on the verbal analogy based on the term “to him” written in both verses, it is derived that the punishment for perpetuating a dispute is leprosy.

### Part 8
Apropos the prohibition of perpetuating a dispute, <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who disputes the reign of the house of David, it is fitting for a snake to bite him.</b> As <b>it is written here: “And Adonijah slaughtered sheep and cattle and fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth”</b> (I Kings 1:9); <b>and it is written there: “With the poison of crawling things [<i>zoḥalei</i>] of the dust”</b> (Deuteronomy 32:24). Adonijah, who rebelled against his father, King David, was fit to be bitten by a snake.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥisda says: Anyone who disagrees with his teacher is like one who disagrees with the Divine Presence, as it is stated</b> with regard to Dathan and Abiram: <b>“When they strove against the Lord”</b> (Numbers 26:9), although their dispute was with Moses. <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: Anyone who initiates a quarrel [<i>meriva</i>] with his teacher is like one who initiates a quarrel with the Divine Presence, as it is stated: “These are the waters of Meribah, where the children of Israel quarreled with the Lord”</b> (Numbers 20:13), although their quarrel was with Moses.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa says: Anyone who expresses resentment against his teacher</b> for wronging him, <b>it is as though he is expressing resentment against the Divine Presence, as it is stated: “Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord”</b> (Exodus 16:8). <b>Rabbi Abbahu says: Anyone who suspects his teacher</b> of wrongdoing, <b>it is as though he suspects the Divine Presence, as it is stated: “And the people spoke against God, and against Moses”</b> (Numbers 21:5). The verse likens God and Moses with regard to this matter.

### Part 11
§ With regard to the verse: <b>“Wealth is kept for the owner to his detriment”</b> (Ecclesiastes 5:12), <b>Reish Lakish says: This</b> is referring to <b>the wealth of Korah,</b> which was of no use to him. The fact that Korah was wealthy is derived from the verse: <b>“And all the substance that was at their feet”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:6), as <b>Rabbi Elazar says: This</b> is referring to <b>a person’s property, which stands him on his feet. And Rabbi Levi says: The keys</b> alone <b>to Korah’s treasury were a burden</b> requiring <b>three hundred white mules</b> to transport them, <b>and</b> moreover, <b>all the keys [<i>aklidei</i>] and locks were of leather.</b> This conveys the vastness of his wealth.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: Joseph concealed three buried treasures in Egypt</b> that he accumulated from the sale of grain during the years of famine. The location of <b>one was revealed to Korah, and</b> the location of <b>one was revealed to Antoninus, son of Asveirus,</b> emperor of Rome, <b>and one</b> remains <b>hidden for the righteous in the future,</b> i.e., in the messianic era.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Korah was neither among the swallowed nor among the burned;</b> he died in a plague. He was <b>neither among the swallowed, as it is written:</b> “And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them and their houses <b>and all the men who were with Korah”</b> (Numbers 16:32), from which it is inferred: <b>But not Korah</b> himself. <b>Nor</b> was he <b>among the burned, as it is written: “When the fire consumed two hundred and fifty men”</b> (Numbers 26:10), <b>but not Korah.</b>

### Part 14
It <b>was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: Korah was</b> both <b>among the burned and among the swallowed.</b> He was <b>among the swallowed, as it is written:</b> “And the earth opened its mouth <b>and swallowed them with Korah”</b> (Numbers 26:10). He was <b>among the burned, as it is written: “And fire came forth from the Lord, and devoured the two hundred and fifty men</b> that burned the incense” (Numbers 16:35), <b>and Korah was with them.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rava says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The sun and moon stand still in their habitation [<i>zevula</i>], at the light of Your arrows as they go”</b> (Habakkuk 3:11)? This <b>teaches that the sun and moon ascended to <i>zevul</i>,</b> one of the seven firmaments, in which the upper Temple stands. <b>They said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, if You perform justice for</b> Moses, <b>the son of Amram,</b> and prove his righteousness, <b>we will emerge</b> and illuminate the world. <b>And if not, we will not emerge.</b> They did not emerge <b>until</b> God <b>fired arrows at them</b> and <b>said to them: You did not protest with regard to My honor,</b> as people would see the sun and the moon each day and worship them, but <b>you protested for the honor of flesh and blood? And today,</b> the sun and the moon <b>do not emerge until they are struck,</b> as in deference to God they hesitate to emerge.

### Part 16
<b>Rava taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “But if the Lord creates a new creation and the earth opens its mouth”</b> (Numbers 16:30)? <b>Moses said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: If Gehenna is</b> already <b>created, good, but if not, God should create</b> it now. The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> was Moses asking? <b>If we say</b> that his request was for God <b>to actually create</b> Gehenna, <b>but isn’t</b> it written: <b>“There is nothing new under the sun”</b> (Ecclesiastes 1:9)? There are no new creations after the six days of Creation. <b>Rather,</b> Moses asked God <b>to bring the opening</b> of Gehenna <b>close</b> to there, so that the assembly of Korah would be buried alive.

### Part 17
With regard to the verse: <b>“And the sons of Korah did not die”</b> (Numbers 26:11), it is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>in the name of our teacher,</b> the Sages <b>said: A place was fortified for them in Gehenna and they sat upon it and recited songs</b> of praise. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: One time I was walking on the path,</b> and <b>a certain Arab said to me: Come and I will show you those</b> from the assembly <b>of Korah</b> who were <b>swallowed. I went</b> and <b>I saw two fissures</b> in the ground <b>from which smoke was emerging.</b> That Arab <b>took a woolen fleece</b> and <b>dampened it with water and placed it on the tip of his spear and passed</b> it over the fissures <b>there.</b> The fleece <b>was singed,</b> indicating the level of heat there. <b>He said to me: Listen; what do you hear? And I heard that this</b> is what <b>they were saying: Moses and his Torah are truth, and they,</b> referring to themselves, <b>are liars.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC