
### Part 1
<b>Let</b> the court <b>strike him</b> with <b>twenty-one</b> lashes, <b>and if he dies with this</b> last <b>one, let him die.</b> According to the medical evaluation, he will still be alive after the twentieth lash. There would be no concern of flogging a dead man, <b>as when</b> the court <b>strikes</b> him with the twenty-first lash, it is <b>upon the back of a living man</b> that the court <b>is striking.</b> If so, why should he not receive the last blow? Rav Ashi <b>said to him: The verse states: “Then your brother will be dishonored before your eyes.”</b> The verse means: Even <b>after he is hit, I need</b> him to remain <b>your brother; and</b> if he dies, he <b>is no</b> longer your brother.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: The <b>intercalation of the month</b> is performed <b>by</b> a panel of <b>three</b> judges. The Gemara extrapolates: The <i>tanna</i> <b>does not teach:</b> The <b>calculation</b> to determine if the month must be extended is performed by three judges, and he <b>does not teach:</b> The <b>sanctification</b> of the new month is performed by three judges; <b>rather,</b> he teaches: The <b>intercalation</b> of the month, referring to the decision to extend the month by an extra day and begin the following month on the thirty-first day instead of the thirtieth, is performed by a panel of three judges. The Gemara asks: Why are judges necessary to extend the month? Simply <b>do not sanctify</b> the new month, <b>and</b> let the previous month <b>be intercalated by itself.</b> When the thirtieth day of any month is not declared the first day of the new month, the earlier month is extended by default. Why, then, does the mishna specify: Intercalation?

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said:</b> Emend the text of the mishna and <b>teach: The sanctification of the</b> new <b>month</b> is performed by three judges. <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:1): <b>The sanctification of the</b> new <b>month and the intercalation of the year</b> is performed <b>by three</b> judges; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rava said</b> in objection to Abaye’s explanation: <b>But</b> the mishna <b>teaches: Intercalation,</b> not sanctification. <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> Explain the mishna this way: If there will be <b>sanctification</b> of the new month <b>on the</b> thirtieth day of the first month, which is the <b>day</b> that would otherwise be the <b>intercalation,</b> this is done <b>by three</b> judges. But <b>after</b> the day of the <b>intercalation,</b> i.e., if the month is sanctified on the thirty-first day, <b>there is no</b> active <b>sanctification</b> necessary.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Tzadok, as it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Rosh HaShana</i> 24a): <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Tzadok says: If</b> the new moon <b>was not seen at its</b> anticipated <b>time,</b> the court <b>does not</b> formally <b>sanctify</b> the New Moon on the following day, <b>as</b> the celestial court <b>in Heaven has already sanctified it,</b> precluding the need for the additional sanctification by the earthly court.

### Part 5
Taking the opposite opinion, <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> In the instance of <b>sanctification</b> of the new moon <b>after</b> the <b>intercalation</b> of the month through the addition of a thirtieth day to the previous month, the sanctification is performed <b>by three</b> judges. But if the New Moon is declared <b>on the day of the intercalation,</b> so that the previous month is left with only twenty-nine days, <b>there is no</b> active <b>sanctification.</b> This is the standard time for the New Moon, and no intervention is necessary. <b>And</b> in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Peleimu, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Peleimu says:</b> If the new moon was reported <b>at its</b> anticipated <b>time,</b> the court <b>does not sanctify</b> the New Moon. But if the new moon was reported <b>not at its</b> anticipated <b>time,</b> the court <b>sanctifies</b> the New Moon.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi said: Actually,</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> that three judges are necessary for the <b>calculation</b> to determine when the New Moon should be declared. <b>And what</b> is the term: <b>Intercalation,</b> that is mentioned in the mishna? It is <b>the calculation of the intercalation. And</b> although the wording of the mishna is imprecise, it is written this way for a reason: <b>Since</b> the mishna <b>needed to teach</b> the number of judges necessary for <b>the intercalation of the year,</b> the mishna <b>also taught: The intercalation of the month,</b> so as to describe the similar processes of adding to the year and adding to the month with the same verb.

### Part 7
The Gemara notes: With regard to <b>the calculation of the month, yes,</b> this requires three judges. But with regard to the <b>sanctification of month,</b> this does <b>not</b> require three judges. In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Whether</b> it was reported <b>in its</b> anticipated <b>time</b> or <b>whether</b> it was reported <b>not in its</b> anticipated <b>time, we do not sanctify</b> the New Moon formally, <b>as it is stated: “And you shall sanctify the fiftieth year”</b> (Leviticus 25:10), which teaches: <b>You</b> must formally <b>sanctify years, but you do not</b> formally <b>sanctify months,</b> as they are sanctified automatically. In any case, calculation, when necessary, is performed by three judges.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says</b> that intercalation is performed in stages: The deliberations begin <b>with three</b> judges, they debate the matter with five judges, and they conclude the matter with seven judges. The Gemara elaborates: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:1): <b>How does Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel say</b> the intercalation is to be conducted? The court <b>begins</b> the deliberation <b>with three</b> judges, <b>and</b> they <b>debate</b> the matter <b>with five, and</b> they <b>conclude with seven.</b> At first, three judges convene for a preliminary discussion with regard to the necessity of adding a month to the year. If <b>one says</b> it is necessary <b>to sit</b> and deliberate the question of intercalation <b>and two say that</b> there is <b>not</b> a need <b>to sit</b> and continue, <b>the single</b> opinion in favor of intercalation <b>is negated in its minority,</b> i.e., it is the minority opinion, and the process ends.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: If <b>two say to sit and one says not to sit,</b> the majority decision causes the process to move to the next stage, and the court then <b>adds another two</b> judges <b>to them and</b> all five <b>debate the matter.</b> If <b>two say:</b> The year <b>needs</b> the extra month, <b>and three say:</b> It <b>does not need</b> it, the opinions of <b>the two are negated in their minority.</b> If <b>three say:</b> The year <b>needs</b> it, <b>and two say:</b> It <b>does not need</b> it, the court <b>adds to them another two</b> judges, <b>as the quorum</b> for declaring an intercalation may <b>not</b> be <b>fewer than seven.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Corresponding to what</b> was it determined that the intercalation procedure should incorporate <b>these</b> numbers of <b>three, five, and seven</b> judges? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Naḥmani and one</b> other Sage <b>who was with him disagree about this. And who is</b> that other scholar? <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi. And some say</b> that this was a matter of dispute between <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi and one</b> other scholar <b>who was with him. And who is</b> that other scholar? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Naḥmani. One said:</b> These numbers <b>correspond to</b> the number of Hebrew words in each of the three verses of <b>the priestly benediction</b> (see Numbers 6:24–26). <b>And one said: Three corresponds to the</b> three <b>guards of the door</b> (see II Kings 25:18), five corresponds to <b>five of</b> the officers who <b>saw the king’s face</b> (see II Kings 25:19), and seven corresponds to <b>seven</b> officers who <b>saw the king’s face</b> (see Jeremiah 52:25). Since these numbers represent appointments of distinction, the Rabbis saw fit to employ them in the composition of the court as well.

### Part 11
Similarly, <b>Rav Yosef taught</b> a <i>baraita</i>: <b>These</b> numbers: <b>Three, five, and seven</b> members of the court for intercalation, are adopted from different numbers of the king’s servants. <b>Three corresponds to: Guards of the door; five</b> corresponds to: <b>Of</b> those officers <b>who saw the king’s face,</b> mentioned in the book of II Kings; and <b>seven</b> corresponds to: Officers <b>who saw the king’s face,</b> mentioned in the book of Jeremiah. When Rav Yosef taught this, <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: What is the reason</b> that <b>until now the Master did not explain</b> the matter <b>to us this way,</b> although you have taught this material before? Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye and the others with him: <b>I did not know that you needed</b> this information, as I thought that you were already familiar with the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Have you</b> ever <b>asked me something and I did not tell you?</b>

### Part 12
§ The Gemara presents <b>a mnemonic</b> device for several other sources cited with regard to the intercalation of the year: <b><i>Zeman</i>, <i>Nasi</i>, <i>tzarikh</i>, <i>gedi</i>. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The year</b> may be <b>intercalated only</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC