
### Part 1
<b>about seclusion,</b> that a man should not be secluded with women who are forbidden to him, <b>and about a single woman.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara objects: <b>Seclusion</b> with a woman forbidden by familial ties <b>is</b> prohibited <b>by Torah</b> law, and was not a rabbinic decree issued in the time of David. <b>As Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzadak: From where</b> is there <b>an allusion to</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>seclusion</b> is forbidden <b>by Torah</b> law? <b>As it is stated: “If your brother, the son of your mother, entices you”</b> (Deuteronomy 13:7). One can ask: <b>But does the son of a mother entice, and does the son of a father not entice?</b> Why mention only the son of a mother? <b>Rather,</b> this verse serves <b>to tell you</b> that only <b>a son</b> may <b>be secluded with his mother.</b> Sons are frequently with their mother, and two half-brothers of one mother consequently have the opportunity to grow close to one another. <b>But another</b> individual <b>may not be secluded with those with whom relations are forbidden by the Torah,</b> including a stepmother. Therefore, half-brothers of one father spend less time together.

### Part 3
Since seclusion, then, is prohibited by Torah law, how did Rav say that it was prohibited by a decree issued in King David’s time? <b>Rather, say</b> that <b>they decreed against seclusion</b> of a man <b>with a single woman,</b> to prevent occurrences like that of Amnon and Tamar.

### Part 4
Apropos Amnon, the Gemara cites traditions about another son of David: <b>“Now Adonijah, son of Haggith, exalted himself, saying: I will be king”</b> (I Kings 1:5). <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The term “exalted himself” <b>teaches that he sought</b> for the monarchy <b>to fit him, but it did not fit him.</b>

### Part 5
The verse continues: <b>“And he prepared for himself chariots and riders and fifty people to run before him”</b> (I Kings 1:5). The Gemara asks: <b>What is the novelty</b> of these actions, since other wealthy people do the same, even if they are not the sons of kings, with designs on the throne? <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> What was unique was that the runners <b>all had</b> their <b>spleens removed and had the soles of their feet hollowed,</b> removing the flesh of their feet, and these two procedures enhanced their speed.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The king <b>“shall not accumulate many horses for himself”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:16), but <b>only</b> enough <b>for his chariot</b> in war and in peace. <b>“Neither shall he greatly accumulate silver and gold for himself”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:17), but <b>only enough to provide</b> his <b>soldiers’ sustenance [<i>aspanya</i>]. And</b> the king <b>writes himself a Torah scroll for his sake,</b> as stipulated in Deuteronomy 17:18. When <b>he goes out to war, he brings it out with him.</b> When <b>he comes in</b> from war, <b>he brings it in with him.</b> When <b>he sits in judgment, it is with him.</b> When <b>he reclines</b> to eat, <b>it is opposite him, as it is stated: “And it shall be with him and he shall read it all the days of his life”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:19).

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: <b>“He shall not accumulate many horses [<i>susim</i>] for himself</b> nor return the people to Egypt for the sake of accumulating horses [<i>sus</i>]” (Deuteronomy 17:16): One <b>might</b> have thought that he shall not have <b>even</b> enough horses <b>for his chariot and riders.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “For himself,”</b> teaching that only if the horses are <b>for himself,</b> for personal pleasure, <b>he shall not accumulate</b> them, <b>but he may accumulate</b> horses <b>for his chariot and riders. How, then, do I realize</b> the meaning of <b>“horses [<i>susim</i>]”</b> in the verse? It is referring to <b>idle horses,</b> which serve no purpose other than glorifying the king. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that even</b> if the king has <b>one horse that is idle, that he</b> transgresses <b>“he shall not accumulate”? The verse states: “For the sake of accumulating horses [<i>sus</i>],”</b> with the term for horses written in the singular.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But once</b> the verse taught <b>that even one horse that is idle stands</b> to be included in the prohibition of <b>“he shall not accumulate,” why do I</b> need the plural form <b>“horses”</b> in the first clause of the verse? The Gemara responds: Its purpose is <b>to</b> teach that a king would <b>transgress</b> the <b>prohibition</b> an additional time <b>for each and every</b> idle <b>horse.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara questions this ruling: The specific <b>reason</b> for limiting the prohibition to idle horses is <b>that the Merciful One writes:</b> “He shall not accumulate <b>for himself,”</b> which indicates, <b>consequently,</b> that if the Torah had <b>not</b> written <b>this, I would say</b> that <b>even</b> enough horses <b>for his chariot and riders</b> are <b>not</b> permitted; and this is unreasonable, since the king needs an army. The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the term “for himself” is <b>necessary</b> to teach that it is permitted for the king <b>to add</b> a reasonable number of horses beyond the necessary minimum, and it is only strictly personal use that is prohibited.

### Part 10
The mishna teaches: <b>“Neither shall he greatly accumulate silver and gold for himself”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:17), but <b>only enough to provide</b> his <b>soldiers’ sustenance. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: From the command <b>“neither shall he greatly accumulate silver and gold for himself,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that he should not have <b>even enough to provide</b> his <b>soldiers’ sustenance.</b> To counter this, <b>the verse states: “For himself,”</b> teaching that only if the silver and gold is <b>for himself,</b> for personal pleasure, <b>he shall not accumulate</b> it, <b>but he may accumulate enough</b> silver and gold <b>to provide</b> his <b>soldiers’ sustenance.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara questions this ruling: The specific <b>reason</b> for limiting the prohibition to personal wealth accumulation is <b>that the Merciful One writes:</b> “Neither shall he greatly accumulate silver and gold <b>for himself,”</b> which indicates, <b>consequently,</b> that if the Torah had <b>not</b> written <b>this, I would say</b> that it <b>is not</b> permitted for the king to accumulate <b>even enough</b> silver and gold <b>to provide</b> his <b>soldiers’ sustenance;</b> this is unreasonable, since the king needs an army. The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the term “for himself” is <b>necessary</b> to teach that the king is permitted <b>to</b> allow for <b>a liberal appropriation</b> to the military budget, so that the army has a comfortable financial cushion.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Now that you have said</b> that the term <b>“for himself”</b> in the verse is stated <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>a derivation</b> for practical <i>halakha</i>, which limits and narrows the verse’s scope, <b>what do you derive from</b> the next phrase in the verse: <b>“He shall not add many wives for himself”?</b> The Gemara answers: That usage of “for himself” serves <b>to exclude ordinary</b> people, to specify that only the king is restricted from having many wives, but a civilian may marry as many women as he wants, provided he can support them financially.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rav Yehuda raises a contradiction: It is written</b> in one verse: <b>“And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots”</b> (I Kings 5:6), <b>and it is written</b> in another verse: <b>“And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses</b> and chariots” (II Chronicles 9:25). <b>How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? <b>If there were forty thousand large stables [<i>itztablaot</i>], each and every one</b> of them <b>had in it four thousand stalls,</b> or rows, <b>for horses. And</b> alternatively, <b>if there were four thousand large stables, each and every one had in it forty thousand stalls for horses.</b> Therefore the two verses are reconciled.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak raises a contradiction: It is written</b> in one verse: <b>“Silver was not worth anything in the days of Solomon”</b> (II Chronicles 9:20), <b>and it is written</b> in another verse: <b>“And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones”</b> (I Kings 10:27), i.e., gems. The Gemara responds: It is <b>not difficult: Here,</b> where silver was worthless, this was <b>before Solomon</b> sinfully <b>married Pharaoh’s daughter. There,</b> where the silver was valuable, this was <b>after Solomon married Pharaoh’s daughter.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: When Solomon married Pharaoh’s daughter,</b> the angel <b>Gabriel descended</b> from Heaven <b>and implanted a pole in the sea. And</b> it gradually <b>raised up a sandbar [<i>sirton</i>]</b> around it, creating new, dry land, <b>and on it the great city of Rome was built.</b> This shows that the beginning of the Jewish people’s downfall to Rome came with Solomon’s marriage to Pharaoh’s daughter.

### Part 16
<b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak says: For what</b> reason <b>were the rationales of Torah</b> commandments <b>not revealed?</b> It was <b>because the rationales of two verses were revealed,</b> and <b>the greatest in the world,</b> King Solomon, <b>failed in</b> those matters. <b>It is written</b> with regard to a king: <b>“He shall not add many wives for himself,</b> that his heart should not turn away” (Deuteronomy 17:17). <b>Solomon said: I will add many, but I will not turn away,</b> as he thought that it is permitted to have many wives if one is otherwise meticulous not to stray. <b>And</b> later, <b>it is written: “For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart</b> after other gods” (I Kings 11:4).

### Part 17
<b>And it is</b> also <b>written:</b> “Only <b>he shall not accumulate many horses for himself</b> nor return the people to Egypt for the sake of accumulating horses” (Deuteronomy 17:16), <b>and Solomon said: I will accumulate many, but I will not return. And it is written: “And a chariot</b> came up <b>and went out of Egypt for six</b> hundred shekels of silver” (I Kings 10:29), teaching that not only did Solomon violate the Torah, but he also failed in applying the rationale given for its commandments. This demonstrates the wisdom in the Torah’s usual silence as to the rationale for its mitzvot, as individuals will not mistakenly rely on their own wisdom to reason that the mitzvot are inapplicable in some circumstances.

### Part 18
§ The mishna teaches that the king <b>writes a Torah scroll for his sake.</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 4:4): The king fulfills the mitzva <b>provided that he does not beautify himself with</b> the Torah scroll <b>of his ancestors</b> for this purpose, i.e., he must write his own scroll.

### Part 19
<b>Rava says:</b> With regard to the mitzva for every Jew to write himself a Torah scroll, <b>even if a person’s ancestors left him a Torah scroll,</b> it is <b>a mitzva to write</b> a scroll <b>of one’s own, as it is stated: “Now, therefore, write for yourselves</b> this <b>song</b> and teach it to the children of Israel” (Deuteronomy 31:19). <b>Abaye raised an objection to him</b> from a <i>baraita</i> concerning the king’s Torah scroll: <b>And he writes himself a Torah scroll for his sake, so that he does not beautify himself with</b> the Torah scroll <b>of others.</b> Read precisely, this indicates that <b>a king, yes,</b> he is included in the <i>halakha</i> not to have a scroll inherited from his ancestors suffice, but <b>an ordinary</b> person is <b>not.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara dismisses Abaye’s objection: <b>No,</b> the ruling of that <i>baraita</i> is <b>necessary</b> to teach that the king is commanded to write <b>two Torah</b> scrolls; he writes one scroll as does any Jew, and he writes an additional scroll because he is king. <b>And</b> this is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“That he shall write for himself a second</b> Torah in a scroll, out of that which is before the priests the Levites” (Deuteronomy 17:18). This teaches that <b>he writes for his sake two Torah</b> scrolls, <b>one that goes out and comes in with him</b> at all times, <b>and one that is placed in his treasury.</b>

### Part 21
The <i>baraita</i> continues: With regard to <b>the one that goes out and comes in with him, he makes it</b> very small, <b>like an amulet, and he hangs</b> it <b>on his arm, as it is stated: “I have set the Lord always before me; He is at my right hand, that I shall not be moved”</b> (Psalms 16:8). This alludes to the small Torah scroll that is always on his right hand. <b>He does not go into the bathhouse with it, nor into the bathroom, as it is stated: “And it shall be with him and he shall read from it”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:19), meaning, it shall remain in <b>a place that is appropriate for reading from it.</b>

### Part 22
§ <b>Mar Zutra says, and some say</b> that it is <b>Mar Ukva</b> who says: <b>Initially,</b> the <b>Torah was given to the Jewish people in <i>Ivrit</i> script,</b> the original form of the written language, <b>and the sacred tongue,</b> Hebrew. <b>It was given to them again in the days of Ezra in <i>Ashurit</i> script and</b> the <b>Aramaic tongue. The Jewish people selected <i>Ashurit</i> script and the sacred tongue</b> for the Torah scroll <b>and left <i>Ivrit</i> script and</b> the <b>Aramaic tongue for the commoners.</b>

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>Who are</b> these <b>commoners? Rav Ḥisda said: The Samaritans [<i>Kutim</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is <i>Ivrit</i> script? Rav Ḥisda says: <i>Libona’a</i> script.</b>

### Part 24
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 4:5): <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Ezra was suitable,</b> given his greatness, <b>for</b> the <b>Torah to be given by him to the Jewish people, had Moses not come first</b> and received the Torah already. <b>With regard to Moses</b> the verse <b>states: “And Moses went up to God”</b> (Exodus 19:3), and <b>with regard to Ezra</b> the verse <b>states: “This Ezra went up from Babylon</b> and he was a ready scribe in the Torah of Moses, which the Lord, the God of Israel, had given” (Ezra 7:6). <b>Just as</b> the <b>going up stated here,</b> with regard to Moses, is for the <b>Torah,</b> which he received from God and transmitted to the Jewish people, <b>so too,</b> the <b>going up stated there,</b> with regard to Ezra, is for the <b>Torah,</b> as he taught Torah to the Jewish people and was suitable to have originally merited to give it.

### Part 25
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>With regard to Moses</b> the verse <b>states: “And the Lord commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and ordinances”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:14), and <b>with regard to Ezra</b> the verse <b>states: “For Ezra had set his heart to seek the Torah of the Lord his God and to do it and to teach in Israel statutes and ordinances”</b> (Ezra 7:10). <b>And even though</b> the <b>Torah was not given</b> literally <b>by him, the script</b> of the Torah <b>was changed by him, as it is stated:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC