
### Part 1
<b>If zealots did not strike him, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav forgot</b> that which he learned through <b>tradition</b> concerning this matter. <b>They read</b> this verse <b>to Rav Kahana in his dream: “Judah has dealt treacherously and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem, as Judah has profaned the sacred of the Lord, which he loves, and has engaged in intercourse with the daughter of a strange god”</b> (Malachi 2:11). Rav Kahana <b>came and said</b> to Rav: <b>This is what they read to me</b> in my dream.

### Part 2
<b>Rav</b> then <b>remembered</b> that which he learned through <b>tradition</b> and said: <b>“Judah has dealt treacherously,” this</b> is a reference to the sin of <b>idol worship. And likewise it says:</b> But as a wife who treacherously departs her husband, <b>you have dealt treacherously with Me, house of Israel, says the Lord</b> (Jeremiah 3:20). <b>“And an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem,” this</b> is a reference to <b>male homosexual intercourse, and likewise it says: “You shall not lie with a man as one lies with a woman; it is an abomination”</b> (Leviticus 18:22). <b>“As Judah has profaned the sacred [<i>kodesh</i>] of the Lord,” this</b> is a reference to <b>a prostitute, and likewise it says: “There shall be no harlot [<i>kedesha</i>] of the daughters of Israel”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:18). <b>“And has engaged in intercourse with the daughter of a strange god,” this</b> is a reference to <b>one who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And it is written thereafter</b> with regard to those enumerated in the verse: <b>“May the Lord excise the man who does this, who calls and who answers from the tents of Jacob, and he who sacrifices a meal-offering to the Lord of hosts”</b> (Malachi 2:12). The Gemara interprets the verse: <b>If he is a Torah scholar, he will have neither one</b> among his descendants <b>who calls</b> and initiates discourse <b>among the Sages, nor one who answers among the students,</b> i.e., one who is capable of answering questions posed by the Sages. <b>If he is a priest, he will not have</b> among his descendants <b>a son who sacrifices a meal-offering to the Lord of hosts.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avuya says:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman it is as though he married</b> the object of <b>idol worship</b> itself, <b>as it is written: “And has engaged in intercourse with the daughter of a strange god.” Does a strange god have a daughter? Rather, this</b> is a reference to <b>one who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman</b> who is an adherent of a strange god.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara cites another of Rav Ḥiyya bar Avuya’s statements. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avuya says:</b> It was <b>written on the skull of Jehoiakim</b> king of Judea: <b>This and yet another,</b> indicating that he will suffer a punishment in addition to the punishment that he already received. The Gemara relates: <b>The grandfather of Rabbi Perida,</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avuya, <b>found a skull that was cast at the gates of Jerusalem, and upon it was written: This and yet another. He buried it, and it then emerged [<i>navug</i>]</b> from beneath the soil. <b>He buried it and it then emerged</b> from beneath the soil again. <b>He said: This is the skull of Jehoiakim, as it is written in his regard: “With the burial of a donkey he shall be buried, drawn and cast beyond the gates of Jerusalem”</b> (Jeremiah 22:19). He will find no rest in a grave.

### Part 6
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avuya <b>said: He is a king and</b> it is <b>not proper conduct to treat him contemptuously. He took</b> the skull, <b>wrapped it in silk [<i>beshira’ei</i>] and placed it in a chest [<i>besifta</i>]. His wife came</b> and <b>saw</b> the skull, <b>went out</b> and <b>told her neighbors</b> and asked them what it was. The neighbors <b>said to her: This is the skull of the first wife</b> to whom he was married, <b>as he has not forgotten her</b> and he keeps her skull in her memory. That angered his wife, and <b>she kindled the oven and burned</b> the skull. <b>When</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya son of Avuya <b>came</b> and learned what she had done, <b>he said: That is</b> the fulfillment of that <b>which is written about him: This and yet another.</b> Having his remains cast beyond the gates of Jerusalem did not complete the punishment of Jehoiakim. He suffered the additional indignity of having his remains burned.

### Part 7
§ <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said: The court of the Hasmoneans issued a decree</b> that one <b>who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman is liable due to</b> his violation of prohibitions represented by the letters: <i>Nun</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>alef</i>. He is liable for engaging in intercourse with <b>a menstruating woman [<i>nidda</i>]</b> who did not immerse in a ritual bath and remains impure. Although by Torah law there is no impurity of menstruation with regard to gentiles, it has been decreed that one must distance himself from them as he does from a menstruating woman. He is liable for engaging in intercourse with a Canaanite <b>maidservant [<i>shifḥa</i>],</b> as relative to a Jewish woman, the status of a gentile woman is that of a maidservant. He is liable for engaging in intercourse with <b>a gentile woman [<i>goya</i>]</b> and with <b>a married woman [<i>eshet ish</i>].</b>

### Part 8
<b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said:</b> He is liable <b>due to</b> his violation of prohibitions represented by the letters: <b><i>Nun</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>zayin</i>.</b> Ravin agreed with Rav Dimi that the Hasmoneans decreed that one who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman is liable for engaging in intercourse with <b>a menstruating woman, a maidservant,</b> and <b>a gentile woman.</b> He adds that the individual is liable for engaging in intercourse with <b>a <i>zona</i>. But</b> he disagrees with Rav Dimi and holds that one is <b>not</b> liable <b>due to</b> the violation of the prohibition involving <b>matrimony,</b> i.e., of engaging in intercourse with a married woman, because the halakhic framework of matrimony does not exist among gentiles. Their relationships are fundamentally temporary. <b>And the other</b> <i>amora</i>, Rav Dimi, holds that gentiles <b>certainly do not forsake their wives;</b> therefore, the status of the wife of a gentile is that of a married woman.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥisda says:</b> Concerning <b>one who comes to consult</b> with the court when he sees a Jewish man engaging in intercourse with a gentile woman, the court <b>does not instruct him</b> that it is permitted to kill the transgressor. <b>It was also stated</b> that <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Concerning <b>one who comes to consult</b> with the court, the court <b>does not instruct him</b> that it is permitted to kill the Jewish man engaging in intercourse with a gentile woman.

### Part 10
<b>Moreover, if Zimri</b> son of Salu (see Numbers 25:1–9) <b>had separated</b> himself from the woman <b>and</b> only then <b>Pinehas killed him,</b> Pinehas would <b>have been executed for</b> killing <b>him,</b> because it is permitted for zealots to kill only while the transgressor is engaged in the act of intercourse. Furthermore, if <b>Zimri would have turned and killed Pinehas</b> in self-defense, he would <b>not have been executed for</b> killing <b>him, as</b> Pinehas <b>was a pursuer.</b> One is allowed to kill a pursuer in self-defense, provided that the pursued is not liable to be executed by the court.

### Part 11
It is stated: <b>“And Moses said to the judges of Israel:</b> Each of you shall slay his men who have adhered unto Ba’al-Peor” (Numbers 25:5). <b>The tribe of Simeon went to Zimri, son of Salu,</b> their leader, and <b>said to him: They are judging</b> cases of <b>capital law</b> and executing us <b>and you are sitting and are silent? What did</b> Zimri <b>do? He arose and gathered twenty-four thousand</b> people <b>from</b> the children of <b>Israel, and went to Cozbi,</b> daughter of Zur, princess of Midian, and <b>said to her: Submit to me</b> and engage in intercourse with me. <b>She said to him: I am the daughter of a king, and this</b> is what <b>my father commanded me: Submit only to the greatest of them.</b> Zimri <b>said to her: He, too,</b> referring to himself, <b>is the head of a tribe; moreover, he is greater than</b> Moses, <b>as he is the second of the womb,</b> as he descends from Simeon, the second son of Jacob, <b>and</b> Moses <b>is the third of the womb,</b> as he descends from Levi, the third son of Jacob.

### Part 12
<b>He seized her by her forelock and brought her before Moses.</b> Zimri <b>said to</b> Moses: <b>Son of Amram, is this</b> woman <b>forbidden or permitted? And if you say</b> that she <b>is forbidden,</b> as for <b>the daughter of Yitro</b> to whom you are married, <b>who permitted her to you? The <i>halakha</i></b> with regard to the proper course of action when encountering a Jewish man engaging in intercourse with a gentile woman <b>eluded</b> Moses. <b>All</b> of the members of the Sanhedrin <b>bawled in</b> their <b>weeping, and that is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And they are crying at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting”</b> (Numbers 25:6). <b>And it is written</b> thereafter: <b>“And Pinehas, son of Elazar,</b> son of Aaron the priest, <b>saw</b> and arose from the midst of the congregation and took a spear in his hand” (Numbers 25:7).

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What did</b> Pinehas <b>see</b> that led him to arise and take action? <b>Rav says: He saw the incident</b> taking place before him <b>and he remembered the <i>halakha</i>. He said to</b> Moses: <b>Brother of the father of my father,</b> as Moses was the brother of his grandfather Aaron, <b>did you not teach me this during your descent from Mount Sinai: One who engages in intercourse with a gentile woman, zealots strike him?</b> Moses <b>said to him: Let the one who reads the letter be the agent [<i>parvanka</i>]</b> to fulfill its contents.

### Part 14
<b>And Shmuel says:</b> Pinehas <b>saw</b> and considered the meaning of the verse: <b>“There is neither wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the Lord”</b> (Proverbs 21:30), which the Sages interpreted to mean: <b>Anywhere that there is desecration of the Lord’s name, one does not show respect to the teacher.</b> In those situations, one need not consult his teacher, but must immediately proceed to right the wrong that is transpiring. Therefore, he took the spear and took immediate action. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak</b> says that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: He saw that an angel came and destroyed among the people</b> in punishment for the sin of Zimri, and he realized that he must take immediate action to ameliorate the situation.

### Part 15
It is written with regard to Pinehas: <b>“He arose from amidst the assembly and he took a spear in his hand”</b> (Numbers 25:7). <b>From here,</b> where it is written that he took the spear only after he arose from the assembly, it is derived <b>that one does not enter the study hall with a weapon.</b> The assembly in this context is referring to the seat of the Sanhedrin. Pinehas <b>removed the blade of</b> the spear <b>and placed it in his garment [<i>be’unkalo</i>]</b> and held the shaft of the spear like a walking stick, <b>and he was</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC