
### Part 1
Therefore, a greater number of cities of refuge per capita were required there, <b>as it is written: “Gilead is a city of those who work iniquity; it is covered [<i>akuba</i>] with blood”</b> (Hosea 6:8). <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Covered [<i>akuba</i>] with blood? Rabbi Elazar says:</b> It means <b>that they would set an ambush [<i>okevin</i>] to kill people.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is different</b> about the cities of refuge closest to the border on <b>this</b> southern <b>side</b> of the country <b>and from</b> the border on <b>that</b> northern <b>side</b> of the country, <b>that are distanced</b> one-quarter of the length of Eretz Yisrael from the border, <b>and what is different</b> about the city of refuge in the <b>middle</b> of the country, <b>which is</b> relatively <b>close</b> to any potential murderers? The maximum distance that one would need to travel to reach the middle city is one-half the distance from the northern and southern borders to their respective cities of refuge.

### Part 3
<b>Abaye said: Murderers are also common in Shechem, as it is written: “And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so does the band of priests; they murder in the way toward Shechem,</b> yes, they commit enormity” (Hosea 6:9). <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>“the band of priests”? Rabbi Elazar says:</b> It means <b>that</b> the people <b>would band together to kill people, like those priests who band together to distribute <i>teruma</i></b> among themselves <b>in the granaries.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And are there no more</b> cities of refuge beyond these six? <b>But isn’t it written:</b> “And the cities that you shall give to the Levites: The six cities of refuge you shall give for the murderer to flee there, <b>and beyond them you shall give forty-two cities”</b> (Numbers 35:6), indicating that the status of all the Levite cities is that of cities of refuge? <b>Abaye said:</b> With regard to <b>these</b> six cities designated specifically for this purpose, unintentional murderers in need of refuge are <b>admitted</b> there <b>whether</b> they entered the cities <b>deliberately,</b> aware that they are cities of refuge, or <b>whether</b> they entered <b>inadvertently.</b> By contrast, with regard to <b>those</b> forty-two Levite cities, unintentional murderers are <b>admitted</b> only if they entered the cities <b>deliberately,</b> but if they entered the cities <b>inadvertently,</b> they are <b>not admitted</b> to the cities.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And is Hebron a city of refuge? But isn’t it written: “And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had spoken”</b> (Judges 1:20)? This indicates that Hebron belonged to Caleb from the tribe of Judah, and it was not a Levite city. <b>Abaye said: Its suburbs [<i>parvadaha</i>]</b> were given to Caleb; the city itself was a city of priests, <b>as it is written</b> in the context of the distribution of the Levite cities: “And they gave them Kiryat Arba…which is Hebron…<b>and the field of the city and its courtyards they gave to Caleb, son of Jephunneh”</b> (Joshua 21:11–12).

### Part 6
The Gemara further asks: <b>And is Kadesh a city of refuge? But isn’t it written: “And the fortified cities were Ziddim Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth…and Kedesh and Edrei and En Hazor”</b> (Joshua 19:35–37), <b>and it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>these cities</b> of refuge, <b>one does not establish them</b> in <b>small settlements [<i>tirin</i>] or</b> in <b>large cities; rather,</b> one establishes them in <b>intermediate</b>-sized <b>towns?</b> Apparently, Kadesh was a large, fortified city. <b>Rav Yosef said: There were two</b> cities named <b>Kedesh,</b> and the one listed among the fortified cities in the book of Joshua is not the one that was a city of refuge. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The listing of Kadesh among the fortified cities is not difficult, as it is <b>similar to</b> the two adjacent yet separate cities of <b>Selikum and the fortification [<i>ve’akra</i>] of Selikum.</b> Likewise, there was the fortified city of Kadesh, mentioned in Joshua, and the city itself, which was an intermediate city that served as city of refuge.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara discusses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself,</b> and it cites the complete <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>these cities</b> of refuge, <b>one does not establish them</b> in <b>small settlements or</b> in <b>large cities; rather,</b> one establishes them in <b>intermediate-</b>sized <b>towns. And one establishes them only in a place</b> where <b>water</b> is available, <b>and if there is no water</b> available <b>there,</b> as there is no spring accessible from the city, <b>one brings them water</b> by digging a canal. <b>And one establishes them only in a place</b> where there are <b>markets, and one establishes them only in a populated place,</b> where there are many people who regularly frequent the town. If the <b>population</b> of the surrounding areas <b>diminishes, one adds to it.</b> If the number of <b>residents</b> in the city of refuge itself <b>diminishes, one brings</b> new residents to the city, among them <b>priests, Levites, and Israelites.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And one may not sell weapons or hunting tools</b> in the cities of refuge, to prevent the blood redeemer from gaining access to means that he could exploit to kill the unintentional murderer who fled to the city of refuge; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Neḥemya. And the Rabbis permit</b> selling weapons and hunting tools. <b>And</b> Rabbi Neḥemya and the Rabbis <b>agree that one may not spread nets in</b> the cities of refuge, <b>nor may they braid [<i>mafshilin</i>] ropes in</b> those cities, <b>so that the foot of the blood redeemer will not be found there.</b> If the blood redeemer were to enter the city of refuge to purchase nets or ropes, he is apt to encounter the murderer and kill him.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: What is the verse</b> from which these matters are derived? It is written: <b>“And he shall flee to one of these cities and live”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:42), meaning: <b>Perform some</b> actions <b>for</b> the unintentional murderer so <b>that</b> life in the city of refuge <b>will be</b> conducive to <b>living for him.</b> All these steps are taken to facilitate that objective.

### Part 10
The Sages <b>taught:</b> In the case of <b>a student who was exiled, his teacher is exiled</b> to the city of refuge <b>with him,</b> so that the student can continue studying Torah with him there, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And he shall flee to one of these cities <b>and live,”</b> from which it is derived: <b>Perform some</b> actions <b>for</b> the unintentional murderer so <b>that</b> life in the city <b>will be</b> conducive to <b>living for him.</b> Since Torah study is an integral component of his life, arrangements must be made to ensure continuity in that facet of his existence. <b>Rabbi Zeira says: From here</b> one learns <b>that a person should not teach a student who is not fit,</b> as that may result in the teacher following the student into exile.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> In the case of <b>a teacher</b> of Torah <b>who was exiled, his school is exiled with him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so</b> that a teacher of Torah is exiled? <b>But doesn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> himself <b>say: From where</b> is it derived <b>that matters of Torah provide refuge,</b> i.e., that the blood redeemer may not harm one who is engaged in Torah? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “Bezer in the wilderness,</b> in the flatlands, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites” (Deuteronomy 4:43), in the list of cities of refuge designated by Moses, <b>and it is written thereafter: “And this is the Torah”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:44). Based on that juxtaposition it is derived that the status of Torah is like that of a city of refuge.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this</b> statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan, that the status of Torah is like that of a city of refuge, is referring to Torah <b>at the time that one is engaged in its</b> study, and <b>that</b> statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan, that the teacher of Torah must take his school to the city of refuge, is referring to the teacher of Torah <b>at the time that he is not engaged in its</b> study. His mere presence in a city of refuge provides him with continuous protection.

### Part 13
<b>And if you wish, say: What</b> is the meaning of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement that matters of Torah <b>provide refuge?</b> It means protection, but not for an unintentional murderer from the blood redeemer; rather, it means protection <b>from the Angel of Death.</b> This is <b>as</b> it was in <b>this</b> incident <b>where Rav Ḥisda was sitting and studying in the study hall of Rav and the agent of the Angel of Death was unable to approach him</b> and take his life <b>because his mouth was not silent from his study</b> for even a moment. The agent <b>ascended and sat on the cedar</b> tree <b>of the study hall of Rav. The cedar</b> tree <b>broke and Rav Ḥisda was</b> momentarily <b>silent,</b> startled by the sudden noise, <b>and</b> the agent of the Angel of Death <b>overcame him.</b> Apparently, matters of Torah provide protection from the Angel of Death only when one is actively engaged in their study.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rabbi Tanḥum bar Ḥanilai says: For what</b> reason <b>was Reuben privileged to be enumerated first in the rescue,</b> as the first city of refuge listed is Bezer (see Deuteronomy 4:43), which is located in the tribal portion of Reuben? It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he began the rescue</b> of Joseph <b>first, as it is stated: “And Reuben heard and delivered him from their hands”</b> (Genesis 37:21).

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Simlai taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Then Moses separated three cities beyond the Jordan, to the east of the sun [<i>mizreḥa shamesh</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 4:41)? <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Shine the sun [<i>hazraḥ shemesh</i>] for murderers,</b> i.e., provide them with the hope of rescue. <b>Some say</b> that God <b>said to</b> Moses: In designating these cities of refuge <b>you have shined the sun for murderers.</b>

### Part 16
On a related note, <b>Rabbi Simai taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He who loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he who loves abundance with increase”</b> (Ecclesiastes 5:9)? <b>“He who loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver”; this</b> is a reference to <b>Moses our teacher,</b> whose love of mitzvot was so great <b>that</b> although <b>he knew that</b> an unintentional murderer <b>would not be admitted to the three cities</b> of refuge <b>that were in</b> the east <b>bank of the Jordan until</b> the <b>three</b> cities of refuge <b>that</b> were <b>in the land of Canaan were selected, and</b> that his designation of cities of refuge would have no practical ramifications in his lifetime, <b>he</b> nevertheless <b>said:</b> When there is <b>a mitzva that has come my way, I will fulfill it.</b>

### Part 17
The next phrase in that verse: <b>“Nor he who loves abundance with increase,”</b> is also interpreted as referring to Torah: <b>For whom is it fitting to teach an abundance</b> of people? <b>One</b> for <b>whom all</b> its <b>increase belongs to him,</b> i.e., one who knows all the content of the Torah is worthy of teaching it in public. <b>And that is</b> identical to that <b>which Rabbi Elazar says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Who can express the mighty acts of God, or make all His praise heard”</b> (Psalms 106:2)? <b>For whom is it fitting to express the mighty acts of God?</b> It is <b>one who can make all His praise heard.</b> One who knows only part of it is unfit to teach the multitudes.

### Part 18
<b>And the Rabbis</b> say, <b>and some say Rabba bar Mari says,</b> that the passage <b>“nor he who loves abundance with increase”</b> means <b>whoever loves</b> a Torah scholar <b>who teaches in</b> the presence of <b>an abundance</b> of people, <b>to him shall be increase,</b> i.e., sons who are Torah scholars. The Gemara relates: When they heard that interpretation, <b>the Sages cast their eyes upon Rava, son of Rabba,</b> who loved Torah scholars who disseminate Torah, and he was blessed with sons who were Torah scholars.

### Part 19
The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the ensuing interpretations of the second part of the verse cited earlier (Ecclesiastes 5:9): <b>Ashi to study, Ravina to teach.</b>

### Part 20
<b>Rav Ashi says: Anyone who loves to study in abundance,</b> i.e., with many colleagues, <b>to him shall be increase,</b> i.e., he will succeed in his studies. <b>And that is</b> parallel to that <b>which Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “A sword is upon the <i>baddim</i>, <i>veno’alu</i>”</b> (Jeremiah 50:36)? It is fitting that <b>a sword</b> be placed <b>on the necks of the enemies of Torah scholars,</b> a euphemism for Torah scholars, <b>who sit and engage in</b> the study of <b>the Torah individually [<i>bad bevad</i>]. Moreover, they grow foolish</b> through individual study, as <b>it is written here: <i>Veno’alu</i>, and it is written there: “For we have been foolish [<i>no’alnu</i>]”</b> (Numbers 12:11). <b>Moreover, they</b> thereby <b>sin, as it is stated</b> immediately thereafter: <b>“And for we have sinned.” And if you wish, say</b> that <b>from here</b> it is derived that <i>no’alu</i> means sinned: <b>“The ministers of Zoan have sinned [<i>no’alu</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 19:13).

### Part 21
<b>Ravina says</b> that there is a different interpretation of the verse cited earlier (Ecclesiastes 5:9): <b>Anyone who loves to teach in abundance,</b> before the multitudes, <b>to him shall be increase,</b> as his Torah knowledge is enhanced through those lectures. <b>And that is</b> the parallel to that <b>which Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Much Torah have I studied from my teachers, and</b> I have learned <b>more from my colleagues</b> than <b>from them, and</b> I have learned <b>more from my students</b> than <b>from all of them.</b>

### Part 22
Apropos the virtue of Torah study, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Our feet were standing in your gates, Jerusalem”</b> (Psalms 122:2)? <b>What caused our feet to withstand</b> the enemies <b>in war?</b> It is <b>the gates of Jerusalem, where they were engaged in Torah</b> study. He interprets the term “in your gates” to mean: Because of your gates, the place of justice and Torah.

### Part 23
<b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “A song of the ascents to David: I rejoiced when they said to me, let us go to the house of God”</b> (Psalms 122:1)? <b>David said before the Holy One, Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, I heard people who were saying</b> in reference to me: <b>When will this old man die, and Solomon his son will come</b> and succeed him <b>and build the Temple and we will ascend</b> there <b>for the pilgrimage Festival?</b> It was common knowledge that the Temple would be constructed by David’s successor. David continued: <b>And</b> despite my pain that I am not privileged to build the Temple, <b>I rejoiced. The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to him: “For better is one day in your courtyard than one thousand”</b> (Psalms 84:11), meaning, <b>I prefer one day</b> during <b>which you engage in</b> the study of <b>Torah before Me than</b> the <b>one thousand burnt-offerings that your son Solomon is destined to sacrifice before Me upon the altar</b> (see I Kings 3:4).

### Part 24
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And roads were aligned for them</b> from this city to that city. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC