
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>There, the man</b> who appropriated the collateral <b>is liable to</b> remit monetary <b>payment, and it is</b> only <b>that the lien of the convert</b> on the property <b>has lapsed,</b> as there is no one to receive payment. Therefore, he is not flogged, based on the principle: One is not both flogged and liable to pay restitution.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there</b> the case of <b><i>pe’a</i>,</b> where there is a prohibition, <b>as the Merciful One states: “You shall not wholly reap the corner of</b> your field” (Leviticus 23:22), followed by the mitzva: <b>“To the poor and the convert you shall leave them”</b> (Leviticus 23:22)?

### Part 3
And <b>you find</b> one liable to receive lashes <b>in</b> those cases both if the criterion is whether <b>he fulfilled</b> the mitzva <b>or did not fulfill</b> the mitzva, <b>and</b> if the criterion is whether <b>he nullified</b> the mitzva <b>or he did not nullify it, as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b>mitzva of <i>pe’a</i></b> is <b>to separate</b> it <b>from the standing grain</b> still growing from the ground. If <b>he did not separate</b> it <b>from the standing grain,</b> but reaped the entire field, <b>he separates</b> a portion <b>from the sheaves</b> as <i>pe’a</i>. If he did <b>not separate</b> it <b>from the sheaves, he separates</b> it <b>from the pile</b> where one places the kernels after threshing, <b>before he smooths</b> the pile. Once he smooths the pile, the produce is considered grain from which one is obligated to separate <i>terumot</i> and tithes. If he already <b>smoothed</b> the pile before designating the <i>pe’a</i>, <b>he tithes</b> the grain in the pile <b>and</b> then <b>gives</b> the <i>pe’a</i> <b>to</b> the poor person. Once he grinds the kernels into flour, he no longer separates <i>pe’a</i>.

### Part 4
Apparently, it is possible to nullify the possibility of fulfilling the mitzva of leaving <i>pe’a</i> by grinding the grain; why, then, did Rabbi Yoḥanan omit this case from his list of prohibitions rectified by a positive mitzva for which one is flogged? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yoḥanan holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yishmael, who says:</b> One <b>separates</b> <i>pe’a</i> <b>even from the dough.</b> He maintains that the possibility of fulfilling the mitzva of <i>pe’a</i> is never nullified, as one may separate <i>pe’a</i> even after grinding and kneading. The Gemara challenges: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Yishmael, you also find</b> a way to nullify the possibility of fulfilling the mitzva, in a case <b>where one ate</b> the <b>dough.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara retracts its previous understanding of the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan: We have only this mitzva and another where one would be flogged if not for the relevant mitzva. The term: <b>This,</b> is in reference to the sending away of the mother bird, <b>and</b> the term: <b>Another,</b> is in reference <b>to this</b> <i>halakha</i> of <i>pe’a</i>. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a rapist, no,</b> the possibility of remarrying the rape victim whom he divorced is not nullified, even if he vows on the basis of the consent of the public. <b>Where do we say</b> that a vow <b>on</b> the basis of <b>the consent of the public has no nullification?</b> It is only in a case where one seeks nullification of the vow <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>a matter</b> that is <b>optional,</b> i.e., not a mitzva; <b>but</b> if one seeks nullification of the vow <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>a matter</b> that is <b>a mitzva,</b> even a vow taken on the basis of the consent of the public <b>has</b> the possibility of <b>nullification.</b> In the case of the rapist, he could seek nullification of his vow to enable him to fulfill the mitzva of remarrying his divorcée, and therefore the vow can be nullified.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates an incident that proves this point. <b>As</b> this happened in <b>that</b> incident <b>where</b> there was <b>a certain teacher of children who was negligent in</b> his supervision of the <b>children,</b> and <b>Rav Aḥa vowed</b> on the basis of the consent of the public that <b>he</b> would no longer be allowed to teach children. <b>And</b> nevertheless <b>Ravina restored him</b> to his position, <b>because no</b> other teacher <b>was found who was as accurate as he.</b> Apparently, even a vow taken on the basis of the consent of the public has the possibility of nullification, if that nullification is sought in order to fulfill a mitzva.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And one who eats unslaughtered</b> animal or bird <b>carcasses, or <i>tereifot</i>,</b> or <b>repugnant creatures, or creeping animals,</b> is liable to receive lashes. <b>Rav Yehuda says: One who eats a fish-</b>like creature found <b>in</b> the furrows of a field formed by <b>a plow [<i>binnita devei kerava</i>], we flog him due to</b> violation of the prohibition: <b>“Creeping animals that creep on the ground…</b>shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 11:41). The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who ate a fish-</b>like creature found <b>in</b> the furrows of a field formed by <b>a plow, and Rav Yehuda flogged him.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Abaye says:</b> One who ate <b>a <i>putita</i>,</b> a creeping animal found in the sea, <b>is flogged</b> with <b>four</b> sets of lashes. There are two prohibitions stated with regard to creeping animals in the sea: “And any that do not have fins and scales in the seas and in the rivers…you shall not eat of their flesh” (Leviticus 11:10–11), and: “And any that do not have fins and scales you shall not eat” (Deuteronomy 14:10). In addition, there are two other prohibitions stated with regard to creeping animals in general: “You shall not render yourselves detestable with any creeping animal that creeps, neither shall you render yourselves impure with them” (Leviticus 11:43), for a total of four.

### Part 9
If one ate <b>an ant, he is flogged</b> with <b>five</b> sets of lashes. In addition to the two prohibitions stated with regard to repugnant creatures in general, he is also flogged <b>for</b> violating the prohibitions: <b>“Creeping animals that creep on the ground…</b>shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 11:41), and: “And all creeping animals that creep on the ground, you shall not eat them” (Leviticus 11:42), and: “Neither shall you render yourselves impure with any manner of creeping things that crawls upon the ground” (Leviticus 11:44).

### Part 10
If one ate <b>a wasp, he is flogged</b> with <b>six</b> sets of lashes. In addition to the five prohibitions violated by one who eats an ant, he is flogged with an additional set of lashes <b>due to</b> violation of the prohibition with regard to <b>winged creeping creatures:</b> “And all winged creeping creatures are impure for you, they may not be eaten” (Deuteronomy 14:19).

### Part 11
<b>Rav Aḥai says: One who delays</b> relieving himself through <b>his orifices</b> when the need arises <b>violates</b> the prohibition <b>of: “You shall not make</b> your souls <b>detestable”</b> (Leviticus 20:25). <b>Rav Beivai bar Abaye says: One who drinks from the horn of a bloodletter</b> through which blood has passed <b>violates</b> the prohibition <b>of: “You shall not make</b> your souls <b>detestable.”</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rava bar Rav Huna says:</b> If one <b>crushed nine ants and brought</b> another <b>one</b> that was <b>alive and</b> thereby <b>completed</b> their measure <b>to an olive-bulk</b> and ate them, he is <b>flogged</b> with <b>six</b> sets of lashes: <b>Five for</b> eating <b>an entity</b> for which one is flogged five times as stated above with regard to one who eats an ant, <b>and one for</b> eating <b>an olive-bulk of an unslaughtered carcass</b> all together. <b>Rava</b> says that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Even</b> if <b>he ate two</b> crushed ants <b>and</b> the ant that was alive, he is flogged with six sets of lashes. <b>Rav Yosef says: Even</b> if <b>he ate one</b> crushed ant <b>and</b> the ant that was alive. The Gemara comments: <b>And they do not disagree; this</b> case, where Rava and Rav Yosef say that he is flogged for eating one or two crushed ants and one that is alive, is referring <b>to large</b> ants, which together amount to an olive-bulk. <b>And that</b> case, where Rava bar Rav Huna mentions nine ants, is referring <b>to small</b> ants, as a greater number of ants is required to constitute an olive-bulk and render him liable. Consequently, there is no halakhic dispute in this case.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches that among those flogged is one who <b>ate untithed produce or first-tithe</b> produce whose <i>teruma</i> of the tithe was not taken. <b>Rav says:</b> If one <b>ate untithed produce</b> from which <i>teruma</i> and first tithe were separated and <b>poor man’s tithe</b> was not separated, he is <b>flogged.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara explains: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion did Rav issue this ruling? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that one is liable for</b> eating <b>only untithed produce from which no</b> gifts <b>were taken at all;</b> but if <b><i>teruma gedola</i> was taken from</b> the produce, <b>but first tithe was not taken from it,</b> or if the <b>first tithe</b> was separated <b>but not second tithe, or even</b> if only <b>poor man’s tithe</b> was not separated, <b>from where</b> is it derived that the halakhic status of the produce is that of untithed produce and one is liable for eating it?

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: It is derived as <b>the verse states: “You may not eat within your gates</b> the tithe of your grain or of your wine or of your oil” (Deuteronomy 12:17), <b>and there it states:</b> “And you shall give to the Levite, to the convert, to the orphan, and to the widow, <b>and they shall eat within your gates and be satisfied”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:12). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the phrase “and they shall eat within your gates,” it is referring to <b>poor man’s tithe, here too,</b> “you may not eat within your gates” is referring to produce in which there is <b>poor man’s tithe,</b> as it has not yet been separated, <b>and the Merciful One states</b> a prohibition: <b>You may not</b> eat it.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> This matter is <b>subject to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. Rabbi Eliezer says: One need not</b> separate by means of <b>calling the name upon poor man’s tithe of doubtfully tithed produce [<i>demai</i>].</b> With regard to produce purchased from an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, i.e., one who is unreliable with regard to tithes, there is a rabbinic ordinance requiring one to separate first and second tithe and <i>teruma</i> of the tithe from it. Nevertheless, one is not required to separate poor man’s tithe from that produce, because poor man’s tithe is a monetary debt owed to the poor, and in a case of uncertainty, the principle is: The burden of proof rests upon the claimant. Rabbi Eliezer holds that failure to separate poor man’s tithe does not accord the produce the status of untithed produce. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC