
### Part 1
<b>Refuge was written on</b> signs at every <b>crossroads</b> marking the path to a city of refuge, <b>so that the</b> unintentional <b>murderer would identify</b> the route to the city of refuge <b>and turn to</b> go <b>there. Rav Kahana said: What is the verse</b> from which this is derived? <b>“Prepare for you the road”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:3), meaning: <b>Perform for you preparation of the road.</b>

### Part 2
§ Apropos that <i>halakha</i>, the Gemara cites that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Ḥanina introduced this portion</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of exile <b>with an introduction from here: “Good and upright is God; therefore He directs sinners along the way”</b> (Psalms 25:8). He said: <b>If He directs sinners</b> by commanding the placing of signs directing them to the city of refuge, it may be inferred <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> that He will assist and direct <b>the righteous</b> along the path of righteousness.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish introduced this portion with an introduction from here:</b> It is stated with regard to an unintentional murderer: <b>“And one who did not lie in wait, but God caused it to come to his hand,</b> and I will appoint you a place where he may flee” (Exodus 21:13). Now this is puzzling. Why would God cause one to sin in this manner? The verse states: <b>“As the ancient parable says: From the wicked comes forth wickedness”</b> (I Samuel 24:13). Evil incidents befall those who have already sinned.

### Part 4
Reish Lakish explains: In this light, the verse “But God caused it to come to his hand” may be understood. <b>With regard to what</b> scenario <b>is the verse speaking?</b> It is <b>with regard to two people who killed a person,</b> where <b>one killed unintentionally</b> while <b>the other killed intentionally. For this</b> person <b>there are no witnesses</b> to his action, <b>and for that</b> person <b>there are no witnesses</b> to his action; therefore, neither received the appropriate punishment of exile and execution, respectively. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, summons them to one inn. This</b> person <b>who killed intentionally sits beneath a ladder, and that</b> person <b>who killed unintentionally descends the ladder, and</b> he <b>falls upon him and kills him.</b> There were witnesses to that incident and therefore, <b>that</b> person <b>who killed intentionally is killed, and that</b> person <b>who killed unintentionally is exiled,</b> each receiving what he deserved.

### Part 5
Apropos the path upon which God leads people, the Gemara cites a statement that <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav Huna says, and some say</b> it was a statement that <b>Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: From the Torah, from the Prophets, and from the Writings</b> one learns that <b>along the path a person wishes to proceed, one leads</b> and assists <b>him.</b>

### Part 6
One learns this <b>from the Torah, as it is written</b> that initially God said to Balaam with regard to the contingent dispatched by Balak: <b>“You shall not go with them”</b> (Numbers 22:12). After Balaam implored Him and indicated his desire to go with them, <b>it is written: “Arise, go with them”</b> (Numbers 22:20). One learns this <b>from the Prophets, as it is written: “I am the Lord your God, Who teaches you for your profit, Who leads you on the path that you go”</b> (Isaiah 48:17), indicating that along the path that one seeks to go, God will direct him. One learns this <b>from the Writings, as it is written: “If one seeks the cynics, He will cause him to join the cynics, but to the humble He will give grace”</b> (Proverbs 3:34), indicating that if one chooses cynicism God will direct him there and if he opts for humility God will grant him grace.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara resumes its discussion of the <i>halakhot</i> of exile. <b>Rav Huna says:</b> In the case of an unintentional <b>murderer who was exiled to a city of refuge, and the blood redeemer found him</b> on the way <b>and killed him,</b> he is <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>Rav Huna holds</b> that the verse: “Lest the blood redeemer pursue the murderer…and strike him fatally…<b>and for him there is no sentence of death,</b> as he did not hate him from before” (Deuteronomy 19:6), <b>is written with regard to the blood redeemer,</b> teaching that the blood redeemer is not liable to be executed for killing the murderer.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav Huna from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And for him there is no sentence of death”; the verse is speaking with regard to the</b> unintentional <b>murderer,</b> teaching that the unintentional murderer is not liable to be executed. That is why the Jewish people were commanded to establish cities of refuge to protect him. The <i>baraita</i> proceeds to prove that the verse is written with regard to the murderer. <b>Do you say</b> that it is speaking <b>with regard to the</b> unintentional <b>murderer, or</b> is it speaking <b>only with regard to the blood redeemer? When it states</b> in an earlier verse: <b>“And he did not hate him from before”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:4), it is clear that the reference is to the unintentional murderer, and therefore, <b>you must say</b> that in the phrase: “And for him there is no sentence of death,” <b>the verse is speaking with regard to the</b> unintentional <b>murderer.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: Rav Huna <b>states</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that</b> following <b><i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And for him there is no sentence of death”; the verse is speaking with regard to the blood redeemer.</b> The <i>baraita</i> clarifies: <b>Do you say</b> that it is speaking <b>with regard to the blood redeemer, or</b> is it speaking <b>only with regard to</b> the unintentional <b>murderer? When it states: “As he did not hate him from before,”</b> the unintentional <b>murderer</b> is already <b>stated,</b> as that phrase certainly is referring to him. <b>How do I realize</b> the meaning of the verse: <b>“And for him there is no sentence of death”?</b> It is <b>with regard to the blood redeemer</b> that <b>the verse is speaking.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara cites proof concerning Rav Huna’s ruling from the mishna. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And they would provide</b> the unintentional murderer fleeing to a city of refuge with <b>two Torah scholars,</b> due to the concern that <b>perhaps</b> the blood redeemer <b>will</b> seek to <b>kill him in transit, and</b> in that case <b>they will talk to</b> the blood redeemer. The Gemara asks: <b>What, is it not that</b> the Torah scholars <b>forewarn him that if he kills</b> the unintentional murderer <b>he</b> would be <b>liable to be executed?</b> That contradicts Rav Huna’s opinion that a blood redeemer who kills the unintentional murderer is exempt.

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No,</b> the statement of the Torah scholars to the blood redeemer can be explained <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And they will speak to him</b> about <b>matters appropriate to him. They say to</b> the blood redeemer: <b>Do not accord him treatment</b> appropriate for <b>murderers,</b> as it was <b>unintentionally</b> that <b>he came to be involved in the incident. Rabbi Meir says:</b> The unintentional murderer too <b>speaks [<i>medabber</i>] on his own behalf</b> to dissuade the blood redeemer, <b>as it is stated: “And this is the matter [<i>devar</i>] of the murderer,</b> who shall flee there and live” (Deuteronomy 19:4), indicating that the murderer himself apologizes and speaks to the blood redeemer. The Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Meir: <b>Many</b> matters <b>are performed</b> more effectively through <b>agency.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master says</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: It was <b>unintentionally</b> that <b>he came to be involved in the incident.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t this <b>obvious? As, if it were intentionally</b> that he killed a person, <b>is he liable to be exiled?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> even intentional murderers flee to a city of refuge on occasion.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues: <b>And</b> so <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: Initially, either</b> one who killed another <b>unintentionally or</b> one who killed another <b>intentionally</b> would <b>hurry</b> and flee <b>to the cities of refuge, and the court</b> in his city would <b>send</b> for him <b>and</b> would <b>bring him from there</b> to stand trial.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: With regard to <b>one who was</b> found <b>liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty for intentional murder, after the trial the court <b>would execute him, as it is stated: “And the elders of his city shall send and take him from there and deliver him into the hands of the blood redeemer and he shall die”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:12). And with regard to <b>one who was not</b> found <b>liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty, e.g., if they deemed that it was due to circumstances beyond his control, <b>they freed him, as it is stated: “And the congregation shall rescue the murderer from the hands of the blood redeemer”</b> (Numbers 35:25). With regard to <b>one who was</b> found <b>liable to be exiled,</b> the court would <b>restore him to his place</b> in the city of refuge, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And the congregation shall judge between the murderer and the blood redeemer…<b>and the congregation shall restore him to his city of refuge, that he fled there”</b> (Numbers 35:24–25).

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The Torah does not command intentional murderers to flee to a city of refuge; rather, the Torah is cognizant of the fact that in practice, intentional murderers <b>would exile</b> themselves <b>on their own,</b> as <b>they thought</b> that they would be <b>admitted</b> to these cities, which would provide refuge for <b>both unintentional and intentional</b> murderers, <b>and they do not know that</b> only those who murder <b>unintentionally are admitted</b> to these cities, but those who murder <b>intentionally are not admitted.</b>

### Part 16
§ <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> An unintentional murderer <b>is not admitted to a city</b> of refuge <b>whose majority</b> consists of unintentional <b>murderers, as it is stated</b> with regard to an unintentional murderer who fled to a city of refuge: <b>“And he shall speak his matters in the ears of the elders of that city”</b> (Joshua 20:4), indicating that there is some novel element in the matters that he seeks to convey to the elders of the town, <b>but not when their matters are equal to his matters,</b> as those elders made the same statements when they arrived at the city of refuge as unintentional murderers.

### Part 17
<b>And Rabbi Elazar says:</b> An unintentional murderer <b>is not admitted to a city in which there are no elders, as we require</b> the fulfillment of the verse: “And he shall speak in the ears of <b>the elders of the city”</b> (Joshua 20:4), <b>and there are none. It was stated: A city in which there are no elders</b> is the subject of a dispute between <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi. One says:</b> An unintentional murderer <b>is admitted</b> there, <b>and one says:</b> An unintentional murderer <b>is not admitted</b> there. The Gemara explains: <b>According to the one who says</b> that an unintentional murderer <b>is not admitted to a city in which there are no elders,</b> his reasoning is due to the fact that <b>we require</b> the presence of <b>the elders of the city and there are none. According to the one who says</b> that an unintentional murderer <b>is admitted</b> there, his reasoning is that he holds that speaking to the elders is <b>merely a mitzva</b> <i>ab initio</i>, but it does not affect the city’s status as a city of refuge.

### Part 18
<b>And a city in which there are no elders</b> is the subject of another dispute between <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi. One says:</b> One <b>can become a wayward and rebellious son in it. And one says:</b> One <b>cannot become a wayward and rebellious son in it.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>According to the one who says</b> that one <b>cannot become wayward and rebellious son in it,</b> it is due to the fact that <b>we require</b> the presence of the elders of the city, as it is written: “And his father and mother shall take hold of him and bring him out to <b>the elders of his city</b> and the gate of his place” (Deuteronomy 21:19), <b>and there are none. According to the one who says</b> that one <b>can become a wayward and rebellious son in it,</b> the presence of the elders is <b>merely a mitzva</b> <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 19
<b>And a city in which there are no elders</b> is the subject of another dispute between <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi. One says:</b> If a corpse was discovered proximate to that city, the inhabitants of the city <b>bring a heifer whose neck is broken. And one says:</b> The inhabitants of the city <b>do not bring a heifer whose neck is broken.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>According to the one who says</b> that the inhabitants of the city <b>do not bring a heifer whose neck is broken,</b> it is due to the fact that <b>we require</b> the presence of the elders of the city, as it is written: “And <b>the elders of that city</b> shall bring the calf down to a rough valley” (Deuteronomy 21:4), <b>and there are no</b> elders. <b>According to the one who says</b> that the inhabitants of the city <b>bring a heifer whose neck is broken,</b> the presence of the elders is <b>merely a mitzva</b> <i>ab initio</i>.

### Part 20
§ <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina says: For what</b> reason <b>was the portion</b> discussing <b>murderers stated</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC