
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In a case where there <b>were two</b> witnesses <b>observing</b> an individual violating a capital transgression <b>from this window</b> in a house, <b>and two observing him from that window</b> in a house, <b>and one</b> person was <b>forewarning</b> the transgressor <b>in the middle</b> between the two sets of witnesses, the <i>halakha</i> depends on the circumstances. In a situation <b>where some of</b> the witnesses observing from the two windows <b>see each other,</b> the testimony of all <b>these</b> witnesses constitutes <b>one testimony, but if</b> they do <b>not</b> see each other, the testimony of <b>these</b> witnesses constitutes <b>two</b> independent <b>testimonies. Therefore,</b> as two independent sets of witnesses, <b>if one of</b> the sets <b>was found</b> to be a set of <b>conspiring</b> witnesses, while the testimony of the other set remained valid, both <b>he,</b> the one accused of violating the capital transgression, <b>and they,</b> the conspiring witnesses, <b>are executed, and the second</b> set, whose testimony remained valid, <b>is exempt.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Transgressors <b>are never executed unless his two witnesses are</b> the ones <b>forewarning him, as it is stated: “At the mouth of two witnesses…</b>he who is to be put to death shall die” (Deuteronomy 17:6), from which it is derived that it is from the mouths of the two witnesses that the accused must be forewarned, and forewarning issued by someone else is insufficient. <b>Alternatively,</b> from the phrase <b>“at the mouth of two witnesses”</b> one derives <b>that</b> the judges must hear the testimony directly from the witnesses, and the <b>Sanhedrin will not hear</b> testimony <b>from the mouth of an interpreter.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Zutra bar Tuvya says</b> that <b>Rav says: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to disjointed testimony,</b> in which each of the witnesses saw the incident independent of the other, <b>that it is not valid?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “He shall not die at the mouth of one witness”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:6). The exposition is as follows: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>“one</b> witness”? <b>If we say</b> that it means <b>one witness literally, we learn it from the first</b> portion of the verse: <b>“At the mouth of two witnesses,”</b> indicating that the testimony of fewer than two witnesses is not valid. <b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning of <b>“one</b> witness”? It means that the accused is not executed based on the testimony of people who witnessed an incident with <b>one</b> witness here and <b>one</b> witness elsewhere.

### Part 4
The Gemara notes: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It is written: <b>“He shall not die at the mouth of one witness,”</b> from which it is derived <b>to include</b> the <i>halakha</i> that in the case of <b>two</b> witnesses <b>who observe</b> an individual violating a capital transgression, <b>one from this window and one from that window, and they do not see each other, that they do not join</b> to constitute a set of witnesses. <b>Moreover, even</b> if they witnessed the same transgression from the same perspective, watching the incident not at the same time but <b>one after the other in one window, they do not join</b> to constitute a set of witnesses.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye:</b> Why is it necessary to mention both cases? <b>Now if</b> in the case where <b>one</b> witness views the incident <b>from this window and one</b> witness views the incident <b>from that window, where this</b> witness <b>sees the entire incident and that</b> witness <b>sees the entire incident, you say</b> that <b>they do not join</b> to testify together as two witnesses, if they see the incident <b>one after the other, where this</b> witness <b>sees half</b> the <b>incident and that</b> witness <b>sees half</b> the <b>incident,</b> is it <b>necessary</b> to say that the witnesses do not join together? Abaye <b>said to him:</b> It <b>is necessary</b> to state this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard <b>to</b> a case where they witnessed one who <b>engages in intercourse with a forbidden relative,</b> which is a continuing act, and each of the witnesses saw sufficient behavior to render the transgressor liable. The <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> teaches that even in that case, they do not join to constitute a set of witnesses.

### Part 6
Apropos witnesses joining to constitute a set of witnesses, <b>Rava says:</b> Even if the witness in either window is unable to see the witness in the other window, <b>if</b> the witness in each window <b>sees the one who is forewarning</b> the accused, <b>or</b> if <b>the one who is forewarning</b> the accused <b>could see</b> the two disjointed witnesses, <b>they join</b> to constitute a set of witnesses. <b>Rava says:</b> The one <b>forewarning</b> the accused of <b>whom</b> the Sages <b>spoke</b> need not be a third witness, but <b>even</b> if the victim forewarns the murderer <b>from his own mouth, and even</b> if the forewarning emerged <b>from the mouth of a demon,</b> meaning the source of the forewarning is unknown, the forewarning is legitimate.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Naḥman says: Disjointed testimony</b> of two witnesses, each of whom observed an incident independent of the other, <b>is valid in</b> cases of <b>monetary law, as it is written: “He shall not die at the mouth of one witness”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:6). This indicates that <b>it is</b> only <b>with regard to</b> cases of <b>capital law that</b> disjointed testimony <b>is not valid, but with regard to</b> cases of <b>monetary law</b> that testimony <b>is valid.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Zutra objects to this: But if that is so,</b> and disjointed testimony is effective in certain cases, <b>in</b> cases of <b>capital law</b> disjointed testimony <b>should spare</b> the accused from execution. Since one must exploit every avenue possible to prevent executions, in a case where some of the disjointed witnesses were rendered conspiring witnesses, the entire testimony should be voided on their account. <b>Why,</b> then, <b>did we learn</b> in the mishna that if one set witnessed the capital transgression from one window and one set from the other window, and one set was found to be a set of conspiring witnesses, <b>he,</b> the accused, <b>and they,</b> the conspiring witnesses, <b>are executed?</b> The Gemara comments: Indeed, that is <b>difficult</b> according to Rav Naḥman.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Perpetrators are never executed unless his two witnesses are the ones forewarning him. <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: And is Rabbi Yosei of</b> the opinion that <b>this</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> is correct, and forewarning by the witnesses is indispensable? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (9b): <b>Rabbi Yosei says: An enemy</b> who commits murder cannot claim that he killed the victim unwittingly. Rather, <b>he is executed</b> even if there was no forewarning, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that his</b> halakhic status is <b>like</b> that of one who is <b>cautioned and forewarned.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yosei does not always require that there be forewarning.

### Part 10
Abaye <b>said to him: That</b> statement in the mishna you cited that is attributed to Rabbi Yosei <b>is</b> actually the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says: A <i>ḥaver</i> does not require forewarning, as forewarning was instituted only to distinguish between</b> one who commits a transgression <b>unwittingly and</b> one who does so <b>intentionally.</b> A <i>ḥaver</i>, who is a Torah scholar, does not require forewarning to distinguish between them. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, whose opinion is cited in the mishna here, is of the opinion that forewarning is a necessary prerequisite to executing someone who is judged liable, and that forewarning must be issued by the witnesses.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Alternatively,</b> from the phrase in the verse <b>“at the mouth of two witnesses”</b> one derives <b>that</b> the <b>Sanhedrin will not hear</b> testimony <b>from the mouth of an interpreter.</b> The Gemara relates: There were <b>certain</b> people who spoke <b>a foreign</b> language <b>who came before Rava</b> for judgment. <b>Rava installed an interpreter between them</b> and heard the testimony through the interpreter. The Gemara asks: <b>And how did he do so? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna <b>that</b> the <b>Sanhedrin will not hear</b> testimony <b>from the mouth of an interpreter?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rava knew what they were saying,</b> as he understood their language, <b>but he did not know</b> how to <b>respond</b> to them in their language. He posed questions through the interpreter but understood the answers on his own, as required by the mishna.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC