
### Part 1
<b>“That a person shall perform and live by them”</b> (Leviticus 18:5). It is inferred <b>that</b> with regard to <b>one who sits and did not perform a transgression,</b> God <b>gives him a reward like</b> that received by one who <b>performs a mitzva.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that as the verse <b>states: “Only be steadfast to not eat the blood, as the blood is the soul”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:23), it can be derived <i>a fortiori</i>: <b>And if</b> with regard to <b>the blood, which a person’s soul loathes, one who abstains from its</b> consumption <b>receives a reward</b> for that action, as it is written in a subsequent verse: “You shall not eat it, so that it shall be good for you and for your children after you” (Deuteronomy 12:25); then concerning <b>robbery and</b> intercourse with <b>forbidden relatives, which a person’s soul desires and covets, one who abstains from their</b> performance and overcomes his inclination, <b>all the more so that he and his descendants and the descendants of his descendants until the end of all generations will merit</b> a reward.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akashya says: The Holy One, Blessed be He, sought to confer merit upon the Jewish people; therefore, He increased for them Torah and mitzvot,</b> as each mitzva increases merit, <b>as it is stated: “It pleased the Lord for the sake of His righteousness to make the Torah great and glorious”</b> (Isaiah 42:21). God sought to make the Torah great and glorious by means of the proliferation of mitzvot.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel’s colleagues are in disagreement with him</b> and hold that lashes do not exempt the sinner from <i>karet</i>. <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said</b> that this is so, as <b>they say</b> in <b>the school of Rav</b> that <b>we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Megilla</i> 7b): <b>The difference between Shabbat and Yom Kippur</b> with regard to the labor prohibited on those days <b>is only that</b> in <b>this</b> case, Shabbat, <b>its intentional</b> desecration is punishable <b>by human hands,</b> as he is stoned by a court based on the testimony of witnesses who forewarned the transgressor, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, Yom Kippur, <b>its intentional</b> desecration is punishable at the hand of God, <b>with <i>karet</i>. And if</b> the statement of Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel <b>is so,</b> in both <b>this</b> case, Shabbat, <b>and that</b> case, Yom Kippur, the punishment would be <b>by human hands.</b> Apparently, the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna, the Rabbis, disagrees with Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says:</b> There is no proof from here that Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel’s colleagues disagree with him, as in accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna taught? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak, who says: There are no lashes in</b> cases of <b>those liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i>. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> All <b>those liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i></b> in cases of forbidden relations <b>were included in</b> the principle: “For whoever shall commit any of these abominations, even the people who commit them shall be cut off from among their people” (Leviticus 18:29). <b>And why was <i>karet</i></b> in the case of relations with <b>one’s sister excluded</b> from this verse and mentioned independently (Leviticus 20:17)? It is <b>to sentence</b> one who transgresses a prohibition punishable with <i>karet</i> <b>to</b> be punished <b>with <i>karet</i></b> alone, <b>and not with lashes.</b> Other Sages disagree with Rabbi Yitzḥak (see 13b).

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi said: Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Yitzḥak and hold that there are lashes even in cases where there is liability for <i>karet</i>, there is no proof that Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel’s colleagues disagree with him. The mishna can be understood as follows: In <b>this</b> case, Shabbat, the <b>primary</b> punishment for <b>its intentional</b> desecration is <b>by human hands, and</b> in <b>that</b> case, Yom Kippur, the <b>primary</b> punishment for <b>its intentional</b> desecration is <i>karet</i>, which is a punishment <b>at the hand of Heaven.</b> If he was flogged, he is exempt from <i>karet</i>.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava says</b> that <b>Rav says: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel,</b> who ruled that lashes exempt the sinner from <i>karet</i>. <b>Rav Yosef said: Who ascended on high and came and said</b> to you that one who is flogged is exempted from <i>karet</i>? That is not dependent upon the decision of an earthly court. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>But</b> according to your reasoning, then with regard to <b>that which Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> There are <b>three matters</b> that the <b>earthly court implemented and the heavenly court agreed with them,</b> the same question applies: <b>Who ascended on high and came and said</b> to him that this is so? <b>Rather,</b> in arriving at Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi’s conclusion <b>we</b> homiletically <b>interpret verses. Here too,</b> with regard to lashes and <i>karet</i>, <b>we</b> homiletically <b>interpret verses.</b>

### Part 8
§ With regard to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself, Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says:</b> There are <b>three matters</b> that the <b>earthly court implemented and the heavenly court agreed with them, and these are they: Reading the Scroll</b> of Esther on Purim, <b>and greeting</b> another <b>with the name of God, and bringing</b> the first <b>tithe</b> to the Temple treasury in Jerusalem. From where is it derived that the heavenly court agreed with them?

### Part 9
<b>Reading the Scroll</b> of Esther is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “The Jews confirmed, and they took upon themselves”</b> (Esther 9:27). The verse could have simply said: They took upon themselves. From the formulation of the verse it is interpreted: <b>They confirmed above</b> in Heaven that <b>which they took upon themselves below</b> on earth.

### Part 10
<b>And greeting</b> another with the name of God is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And presently Boaz came from Bethlehem and said to the harvesters: The Lord is with you, and they said to him: May the Lord bless you”</b> (Ruth 2:4). <b>And it states:</b> “And the angel of the Lord appeared to him and said to him: <b>The Lord is with you, mighty man of valor”</b> (Judges 6:12). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the reason that the Gemara cites the additional source about Gideon, introduced with the phrase: <b>And it states?</b> Why was the proof from Boaz’s statement to the harvesters insufficient? The Gemara explains: <b>And if you would say: It is Boaz who did</b> so <b>on his own, and from Heaven they did not agree with him; come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof, <b>and it says: “The Lord is with you, mighty man of valor.”</b> The angel greeted Gideon with the name of God, indicating that there is agreement in Heaven that this is an acceptable form of greeting.

### Part 11
From where is it derived that the heavenly court agreed to the <b>bringing</b> of the first <b>tithe</b> to the Temple treasury in Jerusalem? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “Bring you the whole tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in My house, and try Me now with this, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open for you the windows of heaven and pour you out a blessing, that there shall be more than sufficiency [<i>ad beli dai</i>]”</b> (Malachi 3:10). This indicates that the heavenly court agreed that the first tithe should be brought to the Temple treasury. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>“<i>ad beli dai</i>”? Rami bar Rav says:</b> It means that the abundance will be so great <b>that your lips will be worn out [<i>yivlu</i>], from saying enough [<i>dai</i>].</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara cites a somewhat similar statement. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: In three places the Divine Spirit appeared</b> before all to affirm that the action taken was appropriate: <b>In the court of Shem, in the court of Samuel the Ramathite, and in the court of Solomon.</b> The Gemara elaborates: This occurred <b>in the court of Shem, as it is written</b> in the context of the episode of Judah and Tamar: <b>“And Judah acknowledged them and said: She is more righteous than I [<i>mimmenni</i>]”</b> (Genesis 38:26). <b>How did</b> Judah <b>know</b> that Tamar’s assertion that she was bearing his child was correct? <b>Perhaps, just as he went to her</b> and hired her as a prostitute, <b>another person went to her</b> and hired her <b>as well,</b> and he is not the father. Rather, <b>a Divine Voice emerged and said:</b> It is <b>from Me [<i>mimmenni</i>]</b> that these <b>secrets emerged.</b> God affirmed that her assertion was correct and that it was His divine plan that Judah would father a child from Tamar.

### Part 13
Likewise, this occurred <b>in the court of Samuel, as it is written: “Here I am; testify against me before the Lord and before His anointed: Whose ox have I taken…And they said: You have neither defrauded us nor oppressed us…And he said to them: The Lord is witness against you, and His anointed is witness this day, that you have not found anything in my hand. And he said: He is witness”</b> (I Samuel 12:3–5). Based on the context, instead of the singular: <b>“And he said,”</b> the plural: <b>And they said, should have</b> been written, as the verse appears to be the reply of the Jewish people to Samuel’s challenge, attesting to the truth of his statement. Rather, <b>a Divine Voice emerged and said: I,</b> God, <b>am witness to this matter.</b>

### Part 14
This occurred <b>in the court of Solomon,</b> when the Divine Spirit appeared in the dispute between two prostitutes over who was the mother of the surviving child, <b>as it is written: “And the king answered and said: Give her the living child, and do not slay him; she is his mother”</b> (I Kings 3:27). <b>How did</b> Solomon <b>know</b> that she was the mother? <b>Perhaps she was devious</b> and was not the mother of the surviving child at all. Rather, <b>a Divine Voice emerged and said: She is his mother.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rava said: From where</b> do you draw these conclusions? None of these proofs is absolute. <b>Perhaps</b> in the case of <b>Judah, once he calculated</b> the passage of the <b>months and the days</b> from when he engaged in intercourse with Tamar <b>and it happened</b> to correspond with the duration of her pregnancy, he realized that her assertion is correct. There is no room to suspect that another man was the father, as the principle is: Based on that <b>which we see, we establish presumptive status;</b> based on that <b>which we do not see, we do not establish presumptive status.</b>

### Part 16
With regard to <b>Samuel too,</b> no proof may be cited from the use of the singular, as on occasion the <b>entire Jewish people is referred to in the singular, as it is written,</b> e.g.: <b>“The Jewish people is saved by the Lord”</b> (Isaiah 45:17).

### Part 17
With regard to <b>Solomon too,</b> perhaps he reasoned that <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that this</b> woman <b>is merciful</b> and seeks to spare the baby <b>and this</b> woman <b>is not merciful,</b> it is evident that the former is its mother. <b>Rather,</b> Rava concludes: There is no proof from the verses that a Divine Spirit appeared in those circumstances; rather, there is <b>a tradition</b> that this is the case.

### Part 18
§ <b>Rabbi Simlai taught:</b> There were <b>613 mitzvot stated to Moses</b> in the Torah, consisting of <b>365 prohibitions corresponding to the number of days</b> in <b>the solar year, and 248 positive</b> mitzvot <b>corresponding to</b> the number of <b>a person’s limbs. Rav Hamnuna said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? It is written: <b>“Moses commanded to us the Torah, an inheritance</b> of the congregation of Jacob” (Deuteronomy 33:4). The word <b>Torah, in</b> terms of <b>its numerical value [<i>gimatriyya</i>],</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC