
### Part 1
Apropos the case where one receives several sets of lashes for performing a single action, the mishna continues: <b>There is</b> one who <b>plows a single furrow and is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>for</b> violating <b>eight prohibitions.</b> How so? For <b>plowing with an ox and a donkey,</b> in violation of the prohibition: “You shall not plow with an ox and a donkey together” (Deuteronomy 22:10); <b>and they are consecrated,</b> and therefore he is guilty of misuse of consecrated property; <b>and</b> he is plowing <b>diverse kinds in a vineyard; and</b> it is <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year, when it is prohibited to work the land; <b>and</b> it is on <b>a Festival,</b> when plowing is a prohibited labor; <b>and</b> he is both <b>a priest and a nazirite</b> and is performing the plowing <b>in a place of impurity</b> imparted by a corpse, which is prohibited for both a priest (see Leviticus 21:1) and a nazirite (see Numbers 6:6).

### Part 2
<b>Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai says:</b> If he <b>was wearing</b> a garment consisting of <b>diverse kinds</b> of wool and linen while plowing he is <b>also</b> flogged for violating that prohibition. The Sages <b>said to him:</b> That is <b>not</b> a prohibition in <b>the</b> same <b>category</b> as the others, as it is not connected to the act of plowing. Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai <b>said to them:</b> According to that criterion, the fact that he is <b>a nazirite is also not</b> in <b>the</b> same <b>category,</b> as a nazirite and a priest are not flogged for plowing; rather, they are flogged for contracting impurity imparted by a corpse.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Beivai says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> that when the mishna teaches with regard to wearing a garment of diverse kinds of wool and linen: And <b>he removes</b> it <b>and dons</b> it after each forewarning, does it mean that one is liable for each forewarning only if he <b>actually</b> removes and <b>dons</b> it, <b>or</b> perhaps one is liable <b>even</b> if <b>he inserts and removes</b> his arm from <b>the sleeve of his garment [<i>unkali</i>];</b> perhaps this is also considered removing and donning the garment? The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, gestured:</b> One is liable only for actually <b>inserting</b> his body in the garment entirely <b>and</b> then <b>removing</b> it. <b>Rav Ashi says:</b> The reference in the mishna is not to actually removing and donning the garment; rather, <b>even if he only waited</b> an interval <b>equivalent</b> to the period required <b>to remove and to don</b> the garment, he is <b>liable</b> to receive lashes for each and every forewarning.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches: <b>There is</b> one who <b>plows</b> a single <b>furrow</b> and is liable to receive lashes for violating eight prohibitions. <b>Rabbi Yannai says</b> that when the Sages sat <b>in a group,</b> their opinions <b>were counted and they concluded: One who covers</b> seeds of <b>diverse kinds</b> with dirt <b>is flogged</b> for sowing diverse kinds. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to them: Isn’t this</b> the <i>halakha</i> in <b>our mishna: There is</b> one who <b>plows a single furrow and is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>for</b> violating eight prohibitions, including: For <b>plowing with an ox and a donkey, and they are consecrated, and</b> he is plowing <b>diverse kinds in a vineyard.</b> With regard to <b>this</b> person who <b>plows who is liable</b> to receive lashes <b>due to</b> violating the prohibition of <b>diverse kinds, how can you find these</b> circumstances? Plowing a field is unrelated to sowing diverse kinds. Is it <b>not</b> a case <b>where one covers</b> the seeds with dirt <b>in the course of</b> his plowing <b>as he proceeds,</b> indicating that one who covers the seeds of diverse kinds is flogged?

### Part 5
Rabbi Yannai <b>said to him:</b> You are correct; but <b>if I had not lifted the earthenware</b> shard <b>for you, would you have found the gem beneath it?</b> It was only after I told you the <i>halakha</i> that you succeeded in finding a source in the mishna. Later, <b>Reish Lakish said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: If</b> it was <b>not</b> for the fact <b>that a great man,</b> Rabbi Yannai, <b>praised your</b> statement, <b>I would say</b> that there is no proof from the mishna, as it is possible to say: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna? It is</b> that of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: One who maintains</b> diverse kinds by performing actions essential for their existence <b>is flogged.</b> Therefore, one who plows and covers seeds of diverse kinds is liable to receive lashes, as he facilitates the existence of the diverse kinds, not because in covering the seeds it is as though he sowed them.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the aforementioned statement of <b>Rabbi Akiva?</b> It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who weeds and one who covers</b> the seeds of <b>diverse kinds</b> with dirt <b>is flogged,</b> as he performed an action that promotes the growth of the diverse kinds, which is tantamount to sowing. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Even one who maintains</b> diverse kinds violates the prohibition.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“Your field you shall not sow with diverse kinds”</b> (Leviticus 19:19), <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>sowing</b> diverse kinds is prohibited. <b>From where</b> do I derive that <b>maintaining</b> diverse kinds, which does not involve any positive action, is also prohibited? It is as <b>the verse states: “Your animals you shall not breed with different species [<i>kilayim</i>]; your field you shall not sow with diverse kinds [<i>kilayim</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 19:19), which is interpreted as though it is written: Diverse kinds [<i>kilayim</i>] in your field you shall not sow, indicating that one may not allow diverse kinds to remain in his field.

### Part 8
<b>Ulla said to Rav Naḥman: And let him be flogged also for</b> violating the prohibition of <b>sowing on a Festival.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b> Indeed, lashes for that prohibition could have been included in the mishna. The <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> certain prohibitions <b>and omitted</b> other prohibitions.

### Part 9
Ulla <b>said to him: The <i>tanna</i> taught</b> and specifically enumerated <b>eight</b> sets of lashes, <b>and you say</b> that <b>he taught</b> some <b>and omitted</b> some? <b>Rava says:</b> The reason that sowing on a Festival was omitted is that <b>there is a division of labors on Shabbat, but there is no division of labors on a Festival.</b> On Shabbat, one who unwittingly performs several prohibited labors during one lapse of awareness is liable to bring one sin-offering for each labor that he performed. On a Festival, if one performs several prohibited labors, he is liable to receive only one set of lashes, as there is one prohibition against performing labor on a Festival. Since the mishna listed plowing on the Festival, it does not also list sowing on the Festival. Ulla <b>said to him: That [<i>ada</i>] is so.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> the opinion of Rava: <b>And is there no division of labors on a Festival? But didn’t we learn</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who cooks</b> a sciatic <b>nerve in milk on a Festival and eats it is flogged</b> with <b>five</b> sets of lashes. How so? <b>He is flogged for</b> violating the prohibition of <b>eating</b> a sciatic <b>nerve</b> (see Genesis 32:33); <b>and he is flogged for</b> violating the prohibition of <b>cooking on a Festival not for</b> the <b>purpose</b> of the Festival, as he is prohibited from eating it; <b>and he is flogged for</b> violating the prohibition of <b>cooking</b> a sciatic <b>nerve,</b> which is meat, <b>in milk; and he is flogged for</b> violating the prohibition of <b>eating meat</b> cooked <b>in milk; and he is flogged</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC