
### Part 1
Apropos disqualified witnesses, the Gemara relates: Two people called <b>Ile’a and Tuviyya,</b> who signed as witnesses on a promissory note, <b>were relatives of the guarantor</b> of the loan. <b>Rav Pappa thought to say</b> that since <b>vis-à-vis the borrower and lender</b> these witnesses <b>are distant</b> and are not related, their testimony on the document is valid. <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to Rav Pappa: If the borrower does not have</b> the means to repay the loan, <b>doesn’t</b> the <b>lender pursue the guarantor</b> to claim his debt? Therefore, the guarantor is party to the loan, and his relatives are not eligible to serve as witnesses on the promissory note.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna continues to discuss the matter of testimony in the case of one who is liable to be executed. Concerning <b>one whose verdict was delivered</b> and he was sentenced to death <b>and he fled, and he</b> then <b>came before the same court</b> that sentenced him, <b>they do not overturn his verdict</b> and retry him. Rather, the court administers the previous verdict. Consequently, in <b>any place where two</b> witnesses <b>will stand and say: We testify with regard to a man</b> called <b>so-and-so that his verdict was delivered</b> and he was sentenced to death <b>in the court of so-and-so, and so-and-so and so-and-so</b> were <b>his witnesses, that</b> person <b>shall be executed</b> on the basis of that testimony.

### Part 3
The mishna continues: The mitzva to establish <b>a Sanhedrin</b> with the authority to administer capital punishments <b>is in effect</b> both <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and outside Eretz</b> Yisrael. <b>A Sanhedrin that executes</b> a transgressor <b>once in seven years is characterized</b> as <b>a destructive</b> tribunal. Since the Sanhedrin would subject the testimony to exacting scrutiny, it was extremely rare for a defendant to be executed. <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says:</b> This categorization applies to a Sanhedrin that executes a transgressor <b>once in seventy years. Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva say: If we had been</b> members <b>of the Sanhedrin,</b> we would have conducted trials in a manner whereby <b>no person would have ever been executed. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> In adopting that approach, <b>they too</b> would <b>increase</b> the number of <b>murderers among the Jewish people.</b> The death penalty would lose its deterrent value, as all potential murderers would know that no one is ever executed.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara infers: <b>It is</b> in the case of one who comes <b>before the same court that they do not overturn</b> the verdict, <b>but</b> if one comes <b>before a different court they overturn</b> the verdict and retry the case. The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t it taught in the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Any place where two</b> witnesses <b>will stand and say: We testify with regard to a man</b> called <b>so-and-so that his verdict was delivered</b> and he was sentenced to death <b>in the court of so-and-so, and so-and-so and so-and-so</b> were <b>his witnesses, that</b> person <b>shall be executed</b> on the basis of that testimony? This indicates that the verdict is not overturned and the defendant is not retried even before another court.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said:</b> This apparent contradiction is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> in the first clause of the mishna, from which it was inferred that the second court overturns the initial verdict, it is referring to a case where the initial verdict was outside Eretz Yisrael and the defendant came before a court <b>in Eretz Yisrael. There,</b> in the latter clause, which indicates that the second court sustains the initial verdict and does not retry the defendant, it is referring to a case where the initial verdict was in Eretz Yisrael, and the case subsequently came before a court <b>outside Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 6
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, that <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Dostai says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Shataḥ:</b> If a convicted defendant <b>fled from Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>to outside Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>one does not overturn his verdict.</b> Rather, they implement the initial verdict. But if one fled <b>from outside Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>to Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>one overturns his verdict</b> and the defendant is retried. Perhaps, <b>due to the merit of Eretz Yisrael,</b> the court will discover a reason to exonerate him.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: The mitzva to establish <b>a Sanhedrin</b> with the authority to administer capital punishments <b>is in effect</b> both in Eretz Yisrael and outside Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara clarifies: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? It is <b>as the Sages taught:</b> It is written with regard to the sentencing of murderers: <b>“And these shall be for you as a statute of justice for your generations</b> in all your dwelling places” (Numbers 35:29), from which <b>we learn that</b> the mitzva to establish <b>a Sanhedrin is in effect</b> both <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and outside Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 8
<b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states:</b> “Judges and officers you shall appoint <b>in all your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:18), which indicates that the mitzva to establish a Sanhedrin is in effect where the gates are yours, i.e., only in Eretz Yisrael? The explanation is as follows: <b>In your gates,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>you establish courts in each and every district and in each and every city, and outside Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>you establish</b> courts <b>in each and every district, but you do not establish</b> courts <b>in each and every city.</b> The requirement to establish courts in every city is only in Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A Sanhedrin that executes</b> once in seven years is characterized as a destructive tribunal. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says: This categorization applies to a Sanhedrin that executes once in seventy years. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Is Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya saying that a Sanhedrin that executes <b>once in seventy,</b> rather than seven, <b>years is characterized as a destructive</b> tribunal? <b>Or perhaps</b> he is saying that <b>standard conduct is</b> for a Sanhedrin to execute once in seventy years, and only if it executes more than one person during that period is it characterized as destructive? The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 10
The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva say: If we had been</b> members of the Sanhedrin, we would have conducted the trials in a manner where no person would have ever been executed. The Gemara asks: <b>How would they have acted</b> to spare the accused from execution if witnesses testified that he intentionally committed murder? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar both say</b> that they would have asked the witnesses: <b>Did you see</b> whether the accused <b>killed a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> i.e., a person with a condition that would lead to his death within twelve months, or if <b>he killed</b> someone who was <b>intact?</b> The halakhic status of a <i>tereifa</i> is like that of one who is dead, in the sense that one who kills him is not executed. Since no witness can be certain with regard to the victim’s physical condition, they would invalidate any testimony to a murder.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ashi said:</b> Even <b>if you say</b> that they examined him postmortem and <b>he was intact</b> the testimony could be challenged, as <b>perhaps in the place</b> that the <b>sword</b> pierced the victim’s body <b>there was a perforation</b> in one of the organs that renders the person a <i>tereifa</i>, but which was rendered undetectable by the wound caused by the sword.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to one who engages in intercourse with a forbidden relative, how would they have acted</b> to spare the accused from execution? <b>Abaye and Rava both say</b> that they would have asked the witnesses: <b>Did you see</b> the intercourse, <b>like a brush</b> entering <b>into a tube?</b> Since witnesses rarely witness the act that closely, one could claim that the testimony is incomplete. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> concerning <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva, <b>how would they</b> have <b>adjudicated</b> that case? The Gemara answers: They hold <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Shmuel, as Shmuel says: In</b> cases involving <b>adulterers</b> one can testify and convict them <b>from when they will appear as adulterers,</b> without any need for him to witness the act in graphic detail.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC