
### Part 1
<b>from</b> the term <b>“his sister” at the beginning</b> of the verse (Leviticus 20:17), as the verse could have been formulated: And a man who takes the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother, and there is no need to mention a sister at all. Liability for intercourse with a woman who is the daughter of both his father and his mother is derived from the term “his sister.”

### Part 2
<b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> opinion of the Rabbis, since nothing relevant to the topic of intercourse with one’s sister is derived from the term “sister,” <b>that</b> term <b>is necessary</b> in order to derive an unrelated matter, i.e., <b>to divide</b> the various prohibitions and establish liability <b>for</b> either <b>one who blends</b> anointing oil <b>or for one who applies</b> anointing oil to receive <b><i>karet</i>,</b> if he performed either intentionally, and to bring a sin-offering if he performed either unwittingly, even though only a single punishment of <i>karet</i> is written in the verse: “A man who blends a mixture like it and who places any of it upon a non-priest, and he shall be excised from his people” (Exodus 30:33).

### Part 3
<b>And the other,</b> Rabbi Yitzḥak, <b>holds</b> in this regard <b>in accordance with</b> that which <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> says that <b>Rabbi Hoshaya says, as Rabbi Elazar says</b> that <b>Rabbi Hoshaya says</b> that there is a principle: <b>Any place where you find two</b> different <b>prohibitions and one</b> punishment of <b><i>karet</i></b> stated concerning them, <b>they are distinct with regard to</b> liability to bring <b>an offering;</b> if he performed both unwittingly, he is liable to bring two sin-offerings. According to Rabbi Yitzḥak, there is no need for an additional derivation to render one who unwittingly blends and applies anointing oil liable to bring two sin-offerings.

### Part 4
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>he does not hold in accordance with</b> that which <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> says that Rabbi Hoshaya says in this regard, <b>and he derives</b> liability to bring two sin-offerings for one who unwittingly blends and applies anointing oil <b>from</b> a superfluous term elsewhere: <b>“And a man who lies with a woman who is afflicted,</b> and…both of them shall be excised” (Leviticus 20:18). Intercourse with a menstruating woman is already included in the verse: “For anyone who performs any of these abominations, the souls who do so shall be excised from among their people” (Leviticus 18:29). Since this verse does not introduce any nuance concerning the punishment of <i>karet</i> for one who engages in intercourse with a menstruating woman, an unrelated matter is derived, which establishes liability for one who blends anointing oil and for one who applies anointing oil to receive <i>karet</i> if he performed either act intentionally, and to bring a sin-offering if he performed either act unwittingly.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> opinion of the Rabbis, what is derived from the verse? <b>That</b> verse <b>is necessary for him to</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a woman is impure</b> as a menstruating woman <b>only if the blood of menstruation is discharged through her vagina?</b> Blood discharged from any other orifice does not render her impure. It is derived <b>as it is stated: “And a man who lies with a woman who is afflicted, and uncovers her nakedness”</b> (Leviticus 20:18), which <b>teaches that a woman is impure only if the blood of menstruation is discharged through her vagina.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And a ritually impure person who ate sacrificial</b> food, and one who entered the Temple while ritually impure, are flogged. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, one who entered the Temple</b> while ritually <b>impure</b> is flogged, as <b>a punishment is written and a prohibition is written.</b> The Gemara elaborates: There is <b>a punishment, as it is written: “He has rendered impure the Tabernacle of the Lord, and</b> that soul <b>shall be excised”</b> (Numbers 19:13). And there is <b>a prohibition,</b> as it is written: <b>“And they shall not render their camp impure”</b> (Numbers 5:3). <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a ritually impure person who ate sacrificial</b> food, <b>granted, a punishment is written: “And the soul that eats from the flesh of a peace-offering that pertains to the Lord and his impurity is upon him, and</b> that soul <b>shall be excised”</b> (Leviticus 7:20). <b>But from where is a prohibition</b> derived?

### Part 7
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> The prohibition is derived from that which is written with regard to a woman after childbirth who has not yet completed the purification process: <b>“No consecrated item shall she touch”</b> (Leviticus 12:4), and the reference is not merely to touching, but to eating.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that a Sage named <b>Bardela teaches:</b> The matter <b>is derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the term <b>“his impurity”</b> written here, and the term <b>“his impurity”</b> written there. <b>Here,</b> with regard to a ritually impure person who eats sacrificial food, <b>it is written: “And his impurity is upon him, and</b> that soul <b>shall be excised,” and there,</b> with regard to a ritually impure person entering the Temple, <b>it is written: “He shall be impure, his impurity is yet upon him”</b> (Numbers 19:13). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to a ritually impure person who entered the Sanctuary, there is <b>a punishment and</b> there is <b>a prohibition,</b> as noted earlier, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to a ritually impure person who ate sacrificial food, it is derived that there is <b>a punishment and</b> there is <b>a prohibition.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara analyzes the dispute: <b>Granted, Reish Lakish did not say</b> that the source for the prohibition is a verbal analogy <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> as <b>he did not receive</b> this <b>verbal analogy</b> as a tradition from his teachers and one may not derive a verbal analogy on his own. <b>But what is the reason that Rabbi Yoḥanan did not say</b> that the source of the prohibition is the verse “No consecrated item shall she touch,” <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish,</b> as that appears to be a more straightforward source? The Gemara answers: Rabbi Yoḥanan could <b>say to you: That</b> is not a prohibition for partaking of sacrificial food in a state of impurity; rather, it is <b>a prohibition for</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i></b> in a state of impurity.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And Reish Lakish, from where</b> does <b>he</b> derive <b>a prohibition against</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i></b> in a state of impurity? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> that which is written: <b>“Any man from the descendants of Aaron who is leprous or a <i>zav</i></b> may not partake of the sacred food until he will be pure” (Leviticus 22:4). The phrase “descendants of Aaron” indicates that the prohibition applies to all descendants, including women. <b>What,</b> then, <b>is an item whose</b> status <b>is equal</b> with regard <b>to all descendants of Aaron,</b> as opposed to certain sacrificial foods that may be eaten only by males? <b>You must say it is <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, what is derived from this verse? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> verse serves <b>to</b> prohibit <b>partaking</b> of <i>teruma</i> while impure; <b>and that</b> verse: “No consecrated item shall she touch,” serves <b>to</b> prohibit <b>touching</b> <i>teruma</i> while impure.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Reish Lakish,</b> does <b>this</b> verse: <b>“No consecrated item shall she touch”</b> (Leviticus 12:4), <b>come to</b> teach <b>this</b> prohibition concerning partaking of sacrificial food? <b>He requires that</b> verse in order <b>to</b> derive the prohibition of <b>a ritually impure person who touched sacrificial</b> food. <b>As it was stated</b> that there is an amoraic dispute with regard to <b>a ritually impure person who touched sacrificial</b> food. <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> He is <b>flogged. Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He is not flogged.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> He is <b>flogged,</b> as it is written: <b>“No consecrated item shall she touch.” Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He is not flogged,</b> because it <b>is</b> to teach <b>a prohibition for</b> touching <b><i>teruma</i> that this</b> verse <b>comes.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: Reish Lakish derives both prohibitions from this verse. The prohibition concerning <b>a ritually impure person who touched sacrificial</b> food is derived <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the Merciful One formulates</b> the prohibition <b>with the term touching.</b> The <b>prohibition for</b> a ritually impure person who <b>partakes</b> of sacrificial food is derived because the matter of a ritually impure person eating <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>is juxtaposed to</b> the matter of entering <b>the Temple</b> while ritually impure, as the Gemara explains below.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And still, does</b> the verse <b>come for that</b> derivation? Reish Lakish <b>requires that</b> verse in order <b>to</b> derive the prohibition for <b>a ritually impure person who ate sacrificial meat before the sprinkling of</b> the <b>blood</b> of the offering on the altar, when it is not permitted to partake of the meat. <b>As it was stated,</b> there is an amoraic dispute with regard to <b>a ritually impure person who ate sacrificial meat before the sprinkling of</b> the <b>blood. Reish Lakish says:</b> He is <b>flogged</b> for doing so; <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He is not flogged.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> He is <b>flogged,</b> as it is written: <b>“No consecrated item shall she touch,”</b> which is stated in general terms, indicating that it <b>is no different</b> whether one touches the consecrated item <b>prior to sprinkling</b> the blood, <b>and</b> it <b>is no different</b> if one touches the consecrated item <b>after sprinkling</b> the blood. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He is not flogged. Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning,</b> that the prohibition is derived by means of the verbal analogy cited above, <b>as the verse states “his impurity,”</b> written with regard to a ritually impure person who eats sacrificial food, and the meaning of that term is derived from <b>“his impurity,”</b> written with regard to a ritually impure person entering the Temple. <b>And when “his impurity” is written,</b> it is with regard to partaking of sacrificial meat <b>after the sprinkling</b> of the blood <b>that it is written.</b> The Gemara explains that according to Reish Lakish, <b>that</b> prohibition <b>is derived from</b> the term: <b>“No [<i>bekhol</i>] consecrated item,”</b> as the term <i>bekhol</i> is inclusive and prohibits one from partaking of sacrificial meat even before the sprinkling of the blood.

### Part 15
The Gemara comments: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Reish Lakish.</b> It is written: <b>“No consecrated item shall she touch”;</b> this is <b>a prohibition for</b> a ritually impure person who <b>eats</b> sacrificial food. <b>Do you say</b> that it is <b>a prohibition for</b> a ritually impure person who <b>eats</b> sacrificial food, <b>or</b> perhaps <b>it is only a prohibition for</b> a ritually impure person who <b>touches</b> sacrificial food? <b>The verse states: “No consecrated item shall she touch, and to the Temple</b> she may not come” (Leviticus 12:4). The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the matter of a ritually impure person eating <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>to</b> the matter of entering <b>the Temple</b> while ritually impure. <b>Just as</b> entering <b>the Temple</b> is <b>a matter</b> that entails a punishment <b>that involves the taking of a life,</b> i.e., <i>karet</i>, <b>so too, every matter</b> in that verse entails a punishment <b>that involves the taking of a life.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>And if</b> the prohibition is <b>with regard to touching</b> sacrificial food, <b>is there</b> a punishment that entails <b>the taking of a life? Rather,</b> the prohibition is <b>with regard to eating.</b>

### Part 16
§ <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to <b>any prohibition that</b> has <b>a positive mitzva</b> that <b>preceded it,</b> everyone agrees that <b>one is flogged for its</b> violation, as it is not classified as a prohibition that entails fulfillment of a positive mitzva.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC