
### Part 1
The unintentional murderers <b>would pay a fee to the Levites</b> as rent for their living quarters in the cities of refuge, which were Levite cities; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Meir says: They would not pay a fee to them,</b> but would reside rent free, as they are required to live there by Torah law. They also disagreed with regard to the status of the unintentional murderer when he returns home after the death of the High Priest. <b>He returns to the</b> same public <b>office that he occupied</b> prior to his exile; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: He does not return to the office that he occupied.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Kahana said:</b> This <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Meir is with regard to payment of rent to the Levite landlords <b>in</b> the <b>six</b> cities of refuge designated in the Torah and in the book of Joshua, <b>as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that in the verse: “They shall be cities of refuge for you” (Numbers 35:11), the term <b>“for you”</b> means that the cities shall be for you only <b>for providing refuge,</b> and therefore they must pay rent to the Levites. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that the term <b>“for you”</b> means <b>for all your needs;</b> therefore, they are not required to pay rent. <b>But with regard to the forty-two</b> additional Levite cities, which also served as cities of refuge, <b>everyone agrees</b> that the unintentional murderers <b>would pay rent to</b> the Levite landlords.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said to him: But</b> the term <b>“for you” certainly indicates for all your needs;</b> therefore, the dispute cannot be as Rav Kahana explains it. <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The <b>dispute</b> is only <b>with regard to</b> the <b>forty-two</b> Levite cities, <b>as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that from the verse: “They shall be the six cities of refuge…<b>and beside them you shall give</b> forty-two cities” (Numbers 35:6), it is derived that the forty-two cities are <b>like these</b> original six cities, only insofar as <b>with regard to</b> the unintentional murderer being <b>admitted. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds</b> that from the verse: “They shall be the six cities of refuge…<b>and beside them you shall give</b> forty-two cities,” it is derived that the forty-two cities are <b>like these</b> original six cities in every sense: <b>Just as those</b> six cities were given to you, i.e., the unintentional murderers, <b>for all your needs, so too, these</b> forty-two cities were given to you, i.e., the unintentional murderers, <b>for all your needs. But with regard to</b> the <b>six</b> cities specifically designated as cities of refuge, <b>everyone agrees</b> that unintentional murderers <b>would not pay</b> the Levites <b>a fee.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that there is a dispute as to whether the unintentional murderer <b>returns to the</b> same public <b>office that he occupied</b> prior to his exile. On a related note, <b>the Sages taught</b> with regard to a Hebrew slave liberated during the Jubilee Year, about whom it is written: <b>“And he returns to his family, and to the estate of his fathers he shall return”</b> (Leviticus 25:41): <b>He returns to his family, but he does not return to that</b> status of prominence and honor <b>that his ancestors held;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Meir says: He even returns to that</b> status of prominence and honor <b>that his ancestors held.</b> From the phrase <b>“to the estate of his fathers</b> he shall return,” it is derived that he returns to be <b>like his fathers.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And likewise,</b> the same is true <b>with regard to an exile</b> sent to a city of refuge, as <b>when</b> the verse <b>states:</b> “To the estate of his fathers <b>he shall return,”</b> the term “he shall return” is redundant and it serves <b>to include the</b> unintentional <b>murderer.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>And likewise,</b> the same is true <b>with regard to an exile?</b> The Gemara explains: It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: <b>“The murderer shall return to his ancestral land”</b> (Numbers 35:28), from which it is derived that <b>he returns to his ancestral land, but he does not return to that</b> status of prominence and honor <b>that his ancestors held;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Meir says: He even returns to that</b> status of prominence and honor <b>that his ancestors held.</b> Rabbi Meir <b>derives</b> this by means of a verbal analogy <b>from there,</b> i.e., between the term of <b>“return”</b> written with regard to the unintentional murderer, and the term of <b>“return”</b> written with regard to the Hebrew slave. The verbal analogy teaches that just as a Hebrew slave returns to his father’s estate and the status of prominence held by his ancestors, so too, the unintentional murderer returns to his ancestral land and to the status of prominence held by his ancestors.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC