
### Part 1
<b>“He shall be impure”</b> (Numbers 19:13), indicating that the same <i>halakhot</i> apply <b>in any case,</b> unrelated to the manner in which he became impure.

### Part 2
The Gemara challenges: <b>He requires that</b> verse for a different derivation, <b>as that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The phrase <b>“He shall be impure”</b> serves <b>to include one who immersed that day</b> and whose purification process will be completed at nightfall. If he enters the Temple before nightfall, he is also liable to receive <i>karet</i>. The phrase later in that verse: <b>“His impurity is upon him,”</b> serves <b>to include one who has not yet</b> brought <b>an atonement</b> offering to complete the purification process, e.g., a leper or a <i>zav</i>. Rava <b>said to</b> Ravina: <b>I said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that one rendered impure by a <i>met mitzva</i> is liable to receive <i>karet</i> is derived <b>from</b> the extraneous term “yet,” in the phrase later in that same verse: <b>“His impurity is yet</b> upon him,” which indicates that one is liable for entering the Temple in a state of impurity regardless of the manner in which he became impure. That is one version of the discussion.

### Part 3
<b>Some teach</b> this exchange <b>with regard to this</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>“In plowing and in harvest you shall rest”</b> (Exodus 34:21). <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> This verse is referring to the Sabbatical Year. The Torah <b>does not need to state</b> the prohibition against <b>plowing</b> during the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>or harvesting</b> during the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>as it is already stated: “You shall neither sow your field, nor prune your vineyard”</b> (Leviticus 25:4). What, then, is derived from this verse? <b>Rather,</b> it is derived that <b>even plowing</b> on the <b>eve of</b> the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>which</b> facilitates growth of crops when the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year <b>enters, and</b> the <b>harvest of</b> crops that grew during the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>which emerged</b> and were reaped after the <b>conclusion of the Sabbatical</b> Year, are prohibited.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yishmael says:</b> This verse in Exodus is not referring to the Sabbatical Year; rather, the reference is to plowing and harvesting on Shabbat. <b>Just as plowing</b> is <b>optional,</b> as there is no case where there is a mitzva to plow per se, <b>so too,</b> the <b>harvesting</b> mentioned in the verse is <b>optional.</b> This serves to exclude from the prohibition <b>the harvesting of</b> barley for <b>the <i>omer</i></b> offering, <b>which is a mitzva,</b> and is therefore permitted on Shabbat.

### Part 5
<b>One of the Sages said to Rava: From where</b> does Rabbi Yishmael ascertain <b>that</b> the <b>plowing</b> mentioned in the verse is referring to plowing <b>that</b> is <b>optional? Perhaps</b> the reference is to <b>plowing</b> a field to grow barley for use in the <b><i>omer</i></b> offering, <b>which</b> is <b>a mitzva, and even so the Merciful One states: “You shall rest.”</b> Rava <b>said to him: Since if</b> one <b>found</b> the field already <b>plowed,</b> he need <b>not plow</b> the field but he may directly proceed to sow the barley in the plowed field, clearly, even if one plows a field to facilitate fulfillment of a mitzva, plowing is <b>not a mitzva</b> per se.

### Part 6
<b>Ravina raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rava</b> from the clause of the mishna that states that the example of the forest serves <b>to exclude a father who strikes his son, and a teacher who oppresses his student, and an agent of the court. And</b> according to your opinion, <b>why</b> are a father who strikes his son and a teacher who oppresses his student excluded from exile? <b>Let us say</b> with regard to a father who strikes his son: <b>Since if</b> the son was <b>learned,</b> it is <b>not a mitzva</b> to strike him, <b>now,</b> in a case where the son is not learned and he strikes him to facilitate his education <b>too,</b> it is <b>not a mitzva,</b> and therefore he should be exiled. Rava replied: <b>There, even if</b> the son <b>is learned,</b> the father <b>is performing a mitzva</b> by striking him from time to time, <b>as it is written: “Chastise your son, and he will give you rest; and he will give delight to your soul”</b> (Proverbs 29:17).

### Part 7
<b>Rava then said: That which I said is nothing,</b> as there is a different proof that the verse is not referring to plowing that is a mitzva. Based on the juxtaposition of the two, it is derived that <b>harvesting</b> is <b>similar</b> to <b>plowing: Just as</b> in the case of <b>plowing,</b> if <b>one found</b> the field already <b>plowed, he</b> need <b>not plow,</b> as there is no case where there is a mitzva to plow per se, <b>so too</b> with regard to <b>harvesting as well,</b> as if <b>one found</b> the barley already <b>harvested, he</b> need <b>not harvest. And if it enters your mind</b> that the reference in the verse is to plowing and harvesting for the purpose of <b>a mitzva,</b> is it so that if <b>one found</b> the barley already <b>harvested, he</b> need <b>not harvest?</b> There is <b>a mitzva to harvest and bring</b> the barley for the <i>omer</i> offering. The prohibition in the verse applies only to harvesting that is optional.

### Part 8
mishna <b>The father is exiled</b> to a city of refuge <b>due to</b> his unintentional murder of his <b>son. And the son is exiled due to</b> his unintentional murder of his <b>father. Everyone is exiled due to</b> their unintentional murder of <b>a Jew, and a Jew is exiled due to</b> his unintentional murder of any of <b>them, except for</b> the unintentional murder of <b>a gentile who resides in Eretz Yisrael and observes the seven Noahide mitzvot [<i>ger toshav</i>]. And a <i>ger toshav</i> is exiled only due to</b> his unintentional murder of <b>a <i>ger toshav</i>.</b>

### Part 9
gemara The mishna teaches: <b>The father is exiled</b> to a city of refuge <b>due to</b> his unintentional murder of his <b>son.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say</b> in the previous mishna: <b>To exclude a father who strikes his son,</b> who is not exiled? The Gemara answers: This mishna is referring to a son <b>who is learned,</b> and there is no mitzva to strike him; therefore, since the striking is optional, the father is exiled. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say: Even if</b> the son <b>is learned,</b> the father <b>performs a mitzva</b> by striking his son? The Gemara answers: This ruling of the mishna is stated <b>with regard to a carpenter’s apprentice [<i>bishevaleya</i>].</b> Since the father is teaching his son carpentry, not Torah, there is no mitzva to strike him to spur him to study.

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: In the case of <b>a carpenter’s apprentice,</b> his father <b>is teaching him a livelihood,</b> which is also a mitzva. The Gemara answers: The reference is to a son <b>who has</b> already <b>learned another craft,</b> and since he is able to earn his livelihood there is no mitzva to teach him a second craft.

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the son is exiled due to</b> his unintentional murder of his <b>father. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i>. It is written: “And a murderer shall flee there, one who strikes a person unintentionally” (Numbers 35:11), from which it is derived that <b>one who strikes a person</b> is exiled. This serves <b>to exclude one who strikes his father,</b> whose punishment for doing so intentionally is more severe than that of the standard intentional murderer, and therefore the son is not subject to exile. <b>Rav Kahana said:</b> This is <b>not difficult; this</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and that</b> mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis disagree (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 50a) whether a son who kills his father intentionally is executed by strangulation or by the sword.

### Part 12
<b>According to Rabbi Shimon, who says: Strangulation</b> is more <b>severe than</b> execution by the <b>sword,</b> which is why a son who kills his father is liable to be executed by strangulation, one who commits the <b>unwitting</b> violation of a prohibition generally punishable by execution by the <b>sword,</b> i.e., intentional murder of one who is not a parent, <b>is eligible for atonement</b> by means of exile; one who commits the <b>unwitting</b> violation of a prohibition generally punishable by the more severe death of <b>strangulation,</b> i.e., intentional murder of a parent, <b>is not eligible for atonement</b> by means of exile.

### Part 13
By contrast, <b>according to the Rabbis, who say:</b> Execution by the <b>sword</b> is more <b>severe than strangulation,</b> which is why a son who kills his father is liable to be executed by the sword, a son who <b>unintentionally kills his father</b> has performed <b>an unwitting</b> violation of a prohibition generally punishable by execution by the <b>sword. And</b> one who commits <b>an unwitting</b> violation of a prohibition generally punishable by execution by the <b>sword,</b> i.e., intentional murder of one who is not a parent, <b>is eligible for atonement</b> by means of exile.

### Part 14
<b>Rava says:</b> That which was derived in the <i>baraita</i> that one who strikes a person is exiled, to exclude one who strikes his father, who is not exiled, is not referring to a son who unintentionally kills his father, as in that case the son is certainly exiled. Rather, it is <b>to exclude one</b> who <b>inflicts a wound on his father unwittingly.</b> The novel element of this derivation is that <b>it enters your mind to say: Since</b> in a case <b>where</b> he wounded his father <b>intentionally, he is liable to be executed</b> like a murderer (see Exodus 21:15), if he did so <b>unwittingly, let him also be exiled</b> like an unintentional murderer. Therefore, this derivation <b>teaches us</b> that exile is administered specifically to an unintentional murderer, but it is not administered to the unwitting performer of any other transgression.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Everyone is exiled due to</b> their unintentional murder of <b>a Jew,</b> and a Jew is exiled due to his unintentional murder of any of them. The Gemara asks: <b>Everyone is exiled due to</b> their unintentional murder of <b>a Jew: What</b> case that was not already specified does this phrase serve <b>to add?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to add</b> a Canaanite <b>slave and a Samaritan.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>We learn</b> by inference from this mishna <b>that which the Sages taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: A Canaanite <b>slave and a Samaritan are exiled and flogged due to a Jew, and a Jew is exiled and flogged due to a Samaritan and</b> a Canaanite <b>slave.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Granted, a slave and a Samaritan are exiled and flogged due to a Jew;</b> either of them is <b>exiled</b> in a case <b>where he killed</b> a Jew unintentionally, <b>and flogged</b> in a case <b>where he cursed</b> the Jew, thereby violating a Torah prohibition. <b>But</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a Jew is exiled and flogged due to a Samaritan, granted,</b> the Jew is <b>exiled</b> in a case <b>where</b> he <b>killed</b> the Samaritan unintentionally, <b>but</b> the Jew <b>is flogged for</b> violating <b>what</b> prohibition? <b>For cursing</b> the Samaritan? Isn’t that prohibition derived from the verse: <b>“And a leader in your people you may not curse”</b> (Exodus 22:27), from which it is inferred that the prohibition is in effect only <b>with regard to</b> one who <b>performs an action</b> characteristic <b>of your people,</b> who comports himself as an observant, God-fearing Jew? Even if the conversion of the Samaritans was valid, they regularly violate numerous prohibitions, and they do not comport themselves as observant Jews.

### Part 17
<b>Rather, Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> This <i>baraita</i> is not referring to lashes administered for cursing; rather, one is flogged in a case <b>where</b> a Jew <b>testified against</b> a Samaritan and a Samaritan testified against a Jew <b>and he was rendered a conspiring witness.</b> The Gemara asks: Does that mean that <b>in the corresponding</b> situation <b>with regard to</b> a Canaanite <b>slave,</b> a slave is flogged in a case <b>where</b> he <b>testified against</b> a Jew <b>and was rendered a conspiring witness? Is a slave eligible to</b> give <b>testimony? Rather, Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, said: What are we dealing with here?</b> The Jew is flogged due to a slave and a Samaritan, and the slave and the Samaritan are flogged due to the Jew in a case <b>where one struck</b> the other with <b>a blow</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC