
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the attendant rips the garments of the person about to be flogged. The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? It is <b>due to</b> the verse: “Forty he shall flog him…and your brother shall be <b>debased</b> before you” (Deuteronomy 25:3), as tearing his garments debases him.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Sheshet says in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to the strap</b> used for flogging <b>that it is</b> a strap from the hide <b>of a calf?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “Forty he shall flog him,” and juxtaposed to it</b> is written: <b>“You shall not muzzle an ox in its threshing”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:4), indicating that the strap is from the hide of an ox.

### Part 3
<b>And Rav Sheshet says in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to a <i>yevama</i> who happened before</b> a <i>yavam</i> <b>afflicted with boils, that one does not compel her</b> to enter into that levirate marriage? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “You shall not muzzle an ox in its threshing,” and juxtaposed to it</b> is written: <b>“When brothers dwell together”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:5), which is the passage dealing with levirate marriage. The <i>yevama</i> is not muzzled, as it were, when she states that she does not want to enter into levirate marriage with him.

### Part 4
<b>And Rav Sheshet says in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya:</b> Concerning <b>anyone who treats the Festivals with contempt, it is as though</b> he is <b>worshipping idols, as it is written: “Molten gods you shall not make for yourself”</b> (Exodus 34:17), <b>and juxtaposed to it</b> is written: <b>“The festival of Passover you shall observe”</b> (Exodus 34:18).

### Part 5
<b>And Rav Sheshet says in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya:</b> Concerning <b>anyone who speaks malicious speech, and any-one who accepts malicious speech</b> as the truth, <b>and anyone who testifies a false testimony, it is fit to throw him to the dogs, as it is written: “To the dog you shall cast it”</b> (Exodus 22:30), <b>and juxtaposed to it</b> is written: <b>“You shall not accept [<i>lo tissa</i>] a false report;</b> do not join with the wicked to be a false witness” (Exodus 23:1). In addition to prohibitions against false testimony and against accepting malicious speech, Rav Sheshet <b>also reads into</b> the verse the meaning: <b>You shall not relate [<i>lo tassi</i>]</b> a false report.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And two straps</b> go up and down the doubled strap of calf hide. The Sage <b>taught: And</b> they are straps <b>of donkey</b> hide. <b>As a certain Galilean interpreted before Rav Ḥisda:</b> It is written: <b>“The ox knows its owner, and the donkey its master’s trough; but Israel does not know,</b> My people does not consider” (Isaiah 1:3). <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, says: Let the one who recognizes its master’s trough,</b> an ox and donkey, <b>come and exact retribution,</b> through lashes with a strap of ox and donkey hide, <b>from one who does not recognize his Master’s trough</b> and performs transgressions.

### Part 7
The mishna teaches: The length of <b>its handle</b> is <b>one handbreadth,</b> and the width of the straps is one handbreadth, and the strap must be long enough so that its end reaches the top of his abdomen. <b>Abaye said: Conclude from it</b> that <b>for each and every one, we craft</b> the strap <b>according to</b> the size of <b>their back. Rava said to him: If so, there will be numerous straps</b> in court <b>for them. Rather, Rava said: It has loops; when</b> the attendant <b>wants, he ties</b> the loops to shorten the strap, and <b>when</b> the attendant <b>wants, he loosens</b> the loops to lengthen the strap. The length of the strap can be adjusted to correspond to the height of the person being flogged.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>One flogs him</b> with one-third of the lashes from the front of him and two one-third portions from behind him. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Kahana said:</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as the verse states: “And the judge shall cause him to lie down, and strike him before him in accordance with his wickedness, by number”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:2), indicating that the attendant strikes him in accordance with <b>one</b> portion of <b>wickedness from the front of him,</b> and <b>two</b> portions of <b>wickedness from behind him.</b>

### Part 9
The mishna teaches: <b>And he does not flog him</b> when the one receiving lashes is standing, nor when he is sitting; rather, he flogs him when he is hunched, as it is stated: “And the judge shall cause him to lie down.” <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to the strap that it is doubled?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: And he shall cause him to lie down [<i>vehippilo</i>],</b> which is interpreted based on the similar Aramaic root <i>ayin</i>, <i>peh</i>, <i>peh</i>, meaning double. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t he require</b> that verse <b>for</b> the fundamental <i>halakha</i> <b>itself,</b> as the mishna teaches: He flogs him when he is hunched. The Gemara answers: <b>If so, let the verse write: Shall bend him. What</b> is the meaning of: <b>“Shall cause him to lie down”? Conclude two</b> conclusions <b>from it:</b> The <i>halakha</i> that the person being flogged must be hunched, and the allusion to the doubling of the strap.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the</b> attendant <b>flogging</b> the one receiving lashes <b>flogs</b> him <b>with</b> one <b>hand</b> with all his strength. <b>The Sages taught:</b> For the administration of lashes, the court <b>appoints only attendants</b> who are <b>lacking in strength and</b> are <b>exceedingly knowledgeable</b> in Torah. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The court may appoint <b>even</b> those who are <b>lacking in knowledge and</b> are <b>exceedingly strong.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rava said: It is reasonable</b> to rule <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, as it is written:</b> “Forty he shall flog him; <b>he shall not exceed, lest he continue</b> to beat him” (Deuteronomy 25:3). He explains: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that even people <b>lacking in</b> halakhic <b>knowledge</b> are appointed, <b>that is</b> why <b>it is necessary to warn</b> him not to add lashes. <b>But if you say</b> only people who are <b>exceedingly knowledgeable</b> are appointed, <b>does</b> the Torah <b>need to warn</b> the attendant? Apparently, even a person lacking in knowledge can be appointed as an attendant. <b>And</b> according to <b>the Rabbis,</b> that is no proof, as there is an expression that <b>one implores only one who is</b> already <b>implored.</b> In other words, only one who is already cognizant of a <i>halakha</i> can be effectively warned to observe it.

### Part 12
It is <b>taught: When</b> the attendant <b>raises</b> the strap to administer the lashes, <b>he raises</b> it <b>with both hands, and when he flogs</b> the one receiving lashes, <b>he flogs with one hand, so that</b> the lashes <b>will come from him</b> in a deliberate manner.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the</b> court <b>crier recites</b> the verse beginning: “If you do not observe to perform,” as well as other verses. <b>The Sages taught: The most prominent of the judges recites</b> the verses, <b>the second</b> most prominent judge <b>counts</b> the lashes, <b>and the third</b> most prominent <b>says</b> to the attendant: <b>Strike him. When the lashes are numerous,</b> the one reciting the verses <b>extends</b> his recitation; <b>when the lashes are few,</b> he <b>curtails</b> his recitation by reciting it faster. In both cases, he does so to coordinate the recitation with the duration of the lashes. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: And then <b>he returns to the beginning of the</b> first <b>verse,</b> indicating that one could read the passage several times? The Gemara answers: The <b>mitzva is to precisely</b> coordinate recitation of the verses with the flogging, <b>and if he did not precisely</b> coordinate between them, and he completed the recitation of the verses before completing the lashes, <b>he returns to the beginning of the</b> first <b>verse.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara cites another <i>baraita</i> with regard to the number of lashes. <b>The Sages taught:</b> From the verse: “He shall not exceed, lest he continue to beat him beyond these, <b>a great flogging”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:3), <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> a prohibition with regard to <b>a great flogging; from where</b> do I derive that even <b>a minimal</b> excessive <b>flogging</b> is prohibited? I derive it from <b>the verse</b> that <b>states: “He shall not exceed,”</b> at all. The Gemara asks: If so, <b>why</b> must <b>the verse state: “A great flogging”?</b> This <b>teaches that the initial</b> lashes must be administered <b>as a great flogging,</b> with all of the attendant’s strength.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: If the one being flogged <b>sullies himself,</b> with excrement or urine, he is exempt from further lashes. Rabbi Yehuda says: The man is exempted with excrement, and the woman is exempted even with urine. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: For <b>both a man and a woman,</b> they are exempted if they sully themselves <b>with excrement, but not</b> if they do so <b>with urine;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: The man with excrement, and the woman</b> even <b>with urine. And the Rabbis say: Both a man and a woman</b> are exempt from further lashes <b>whether</b> they sullied themselves <b>with excrement or with urine.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks with regard to the opinion attributed to Rabbi Yehuda: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Both a man and a woman</b> are exempted <b>with excrement,</b> indicating that Rabbi Yehuda holds that a woman is not exempted with urine. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> There is no contradiction; that <i>baraita</i> is merely stating that according to Rabbi Yehuda <b>both are equal with regard to excrement.</b> That does not mean that Rabbi Yehuda holds that a woman is not exempted with urine.

### Part 17
<b>Shmuel says:</b> If <b>they bound him</b> to be flogged <b>and he fled from</b> the <b>court,</b> he is <b>exempt. The Gemara raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: If he <b>was debased</b> with excrement, <b>whether during</b> the <b>first</b> lash <b>or during</b> the <b>second</b> lash, the court <b>exempts him.</b> But in a case where the <b>strap was severed</b> during the course of the flogging, if this occurred <b>during</b> the <b>second</b> lash <b>they exempt him,</b> but if it happened <b>during</b> the <b>first</b> lash, <b>they do not exempt him. Why</b> is he not exempted during the first lash? <b>Let</b> his status <b>be like one who fled</b> from the court before the flogging began, in which case he is exempt. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> in that case, <b>he fled</b> from the court and he is not compelled to return; <b>here, he did not flee,</b> and therefore he is not exempted without being flogged.

### Part 18
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>they assessed</b> concerning <b>him that when he is flogged he</b> will be <b>debased</b> with excrement, <b>they exempt him,</b> as the court does not administer a punishment that will lead to debasing the one being flogged beyond the shame generated by the lashes themselves. But if they assessed concerning him <b>that</b> it is only <b>when he will leave the court</b> that <b>he</b> will be <b>debased</b> with excrement, <b>they flog him. Moreover, even if he was debased initially,</b> before any lashes were administered, <b>they</b> nevertheless <b>flog him, as it is stated: “And strike him…and</b> your brother <b>shall be debased”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:2–3), indicating that the reference is to one debased as a result of the lashes, <b>and not</b> to <b>one who was already debased in court</b> prior to being flogged.

### Part 19
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>All those liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> who were flogged are exempted from their</b> punishment of <b><i>karet</i>, as it is stated: “And your brother shall be debased before your eyes”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:3), indicating: <b>Once he is flogged he is as your brother,</b> as his sin has been atoned and he is no longer excised from the Jewish people; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel.</b>

### Part 20
<b>And Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel says: And if</b> for <b>one who performs one transgression his soul is taken for it,</b> as one’s soul can be uprooted from the world for one transgression, for <b>one who performs a single mitzva,</b> it is <b>all the more so</b> the case <b>that his soul will be given to him,</b> as the reward for performing mitzvot is greater than the punishment for performing transgressions. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: It is derived from its</b> own <b>place</b> in the Torah, <b>as it is stated</b> at the conclusion of the passage discussing intercourse with forbidden relatives, which is punishable with <i>karet</i>: <b>“And the souls that perform</b> them <b>shall be excised”</b> (Leviticus 18:29), <b>and it states</b> toward the beginning of that chapter:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC