
### Part 1
<b>coarse bread,</b> made from coarse flour that has not been thoroughly sifted, <b>new beer, and vegetables.</b> This indicates that vegetables are harmful to one’s well-being. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement of Rav Huna is referring <b>to garlic and leeks,</b> which are beneficial; <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to other vegetables,</b> which are harmful. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Garlic is</b> a healthy <b>vegetable; leeks</b> are <b>a half-vegetable,</b> meaning they are half as healthful. If <b>radish has been seen, an elixir of life has been seen,</b> as it is very beneficial to the body.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: If <b>radish has been seen, a lethal drug has been seen?</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that deprecates radish, it is referring <b>to</b> its <b>leaves; there,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> that praises radish, it is referring <b>to the roots.</b> Alternatively, <b>here</b> it is referring <b>to the summer,</b> when radish is beneficial; <b>there,</b> it is referring <b>to the winter,</b> when it is harmful.

### Part 3
On the topic of the attributes of different locations, <b>Rav Yehuda</b> also <b>said that Rav said:</b> In <b>any city that has</b> many <b>ascents and descents,</b> which can be taxing to the body, <b>people and animals die at half their days,</b> meaning half of their life expectancy. The Gemara expresses surprise: <b>Can it enter your mind</b> that Rav really meant to say that they <b>die</b> prematurely? Even in such cities they are known to have a regular life expectancy. <b>Rather, say: They grow old at half their days,</b> i.e., they age prematurely due to the strain of climbing up and down the inclines. Similarly, <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: The ascents</b> and descents <b>between Beit Biri and Beit Neresh,</b> my place of residence, <b>made me grow old</b> prematurely.

### Part 4
With regard to the measurements of a city’s boundaries, <b>the Sages taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: If, in order to measure the Shabbat limit, <b>one comes to square</b> a city, i.e., to extend the city’s boundaries to include all of its protrusions within an imaginary square, <b>he squares it</b> so that the sides of the square align <b>with the four</b> directions <b>of the world. He sets the northern</b> side of the square <b>to</b> align with <b>the north of the world, and its southern</b> side <b>to</b> align with <b>the south of the world. And your sign</b> by which you can recognize the directions of the world is as follows: The constellation of <b>Ursa Major is in the north and Scorpio is in the south.</b> The directions of the city are determined by these constellations.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: If one does not know how to square</b> the city in alignment <b>with the four</b> directions <b>of the world</b> based upon the constellations, <b>he should square it based upon the seasons,</b> although this is less precise. <b>How so?</b> Where <b>the sun rises and sets on the longest day</b> of the year, the summer solstice, <b>this</b> route of the sun <b>is the face of the north.</b> The sun rises in the northeast and sets in the northwest, and thus travels from east to west across the north side of the world. Conversely, where <b>the sun rises and sets on the shortest day</b> of the year, the winter solstice, <b>this</b> route of the sun <b>is the face of the south.</b> Whereas at <b>the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox,</b> when day and night are equal in length, <b>the sun rises in the middle of the east and sets in the middle of the west.</b>

### Part 6
<b>As it is stated:</b> “One generation passes away and another generation comes; but the earth abides forever. The sun also rises and the sun goes down, and hastens to its place, where it rises again. <b>It goes toward the south, and turns about to the north;</b> round and round goes the wind, and on its circuits the wind returns” (Ecclesiastes 1:4–6). The verse is understood as describing the sun’s movements, as follows: <b>“It goes toward the south” during the day; “and turns about to the north,”</b> on the other side of the earth, <b>at night. “Round and round goes the wind [<i>ruaḥ</i>];”</b> the word <i>ruaḥ</i> can also mean direction or side. Rabbi Yosei explains that <b>these are the face of the east and the face of the west; sometimes</b> the sun <b>traverses them</b> visibly, <b>and sometimes it turns about them</b> without being seen.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Mesharshiya said: There is no</b> validity to these <b>rules</b> established by Rabbi Yosei, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The sun has never risen,</b> even during the summer, <b>at the northeastern corner</b> of the sky <b>and set in the northwestern corner, nor has the sun</b> ever <b>risen,</b> even during the winter, <b>at the southeastern corner and set in the southwestern corner.</b> Therefore, one can establish the directions of the world according to the sun’s path only during the autumn and spring.

### Part 8
On the topic of the previous discussion with regard to calculating the directions of the world based upon the seasons, <b>Shmuel said: The vernal equinox occurs only at</b> the beginning of one of <b>the four quarters of a day: Either</b> precisely <b>at the beginning of the day, or</b> precisely <b>at the beginning of the night, or at midday, or at midnight.</b>

### Part 9
Similarly, <b>the summer solstice occurs only</b> at certain times of the day: <b>Either at</b> the conclusion of <b>one and a half</b> hours <b>or seven and a half</b> hours <b>of the day or night. And the autumnal equinox occurs only</b> at certain times: <b>Either at</b> the conclusion of <b>three hours or nine hours of the day or night. And the winter solstice occurs only</b> at certain times: <b>Either at</b> the conclusion of <b>four and a half</b> hours <b>or ten and a half</b> hours <b>of the day or night.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And</b> all this is based on the principle that <b>there are only ninety-one days and seven and a half hours between</b> the beginning of <b>one season and the next,</b> as he assumed that a year is exactly 365¼ days. <b>And</b> similarly, each <b>season</b> begins precisely <b>one-half</b> planetary <b>hour past the</b> beginning of the <b>previous season.</b> There are seven heavenly bodies that are each ascendant for an hour at a time in a constant rotation: Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, and Venus. Each season begins half an hour later in this rotation than <b>the previous</b> season.

### Part 11
<b>And Shmuel said: There is no</b> instance when the <b>vernal equinox occurs in</b> the planetary hour of <b>Jupiter</b> and <b>it does not break the trees</b> with its strong winds; <b>and there is no</b> instance when <b>the winter solstice occurs in</b> the planetary hour of <b>Jupiter</b> and <b>it does not dry up the seeds. And this</b> applies only <b>where the new moon appeared either at</b> the hour of the <b>Moon or at</b> the hour of <b>Jupiter.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC