
### Part 1
<b>But the clothing of the wealthy</b> does <b>not</b> need to be three by three handbreadths in order to become ritually impure <b>for the poor</b> because even smaller pieces of cloth are significant for the poor. Therefore, the law with regard to the poor is not determined by the customary practice of the rich. So too, the law of <i>eiruv</i> pertaining to the rest of the world should not be determined by the customary practice of the Persians to eat roasted meat as a food in itself.

### Part 2
<b>And if you say:</b> Both <b>here</b> the ruling is <b>stringent,</b> and <b>there</b> the ruling is <b>stringent,</b> i.e., with regard to ritual impurity the <i>halakha</i> is stringent with respect to the poor and declares scraps of cloth that are only three by three fingerbreadths impure, but with regard to <i>eiruv</i> the <i>halakha</i> requires enough roasted meat to suffice for two meals as a food in its own right, in accordance with the practice of the Persians, then there is a difficulty: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: One may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for an ill or elderly</b> person <b>with</b> an amount of <b>food that is enough for him</b> for two meals, and if he eats less than the average person due to his sickness or age, a smaller amount of food is required in order to establish an <i>eiruv</i> on his behalf; <b>however, for a glutton,</b> we do not require food in an amount that would satisfy him but merely enough food for two meals measured according to <b>an average meal for the typical person?</b> This indicates that the <i>halakha</i> with respect to an <i>eiruv</i> is lenient and not stringent. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, this is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty with the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: <b>Did Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar</b> really <b>say this? Wasn’t it taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> pertaining to the laws of ritual impurity that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: Og, king of the Bashan,</b> or any similar giant, requires an <b>opening as</b> big as <b>his full size?</b> If a person dies in a house and it is not clear how his corpse will be removed, all of the openings in the house are considered ritually impure, as the corpse might be carried out through any one of them. If the corpse can fit through some of the openings but not through others, only the larger openings are ritually impure. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says that in the case of a giant the size of Og, king of the Bashan, one opening can only prevent the others from contracting impurity if it is large enough for Og’s corpse to fit through. This indicates that the law is determined by the measure of each particular person and not by some general measure.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what does <b>Abaye</b> say? How does he reconcile his position with regard to an <i>eiruv</i>, which maintains that we follow the customary practice of most of the world and not that of particular locales, with Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar’s ruling with regard to the corpse of a giant? The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> in the case of a giant, <b>what should we do? Should we cut</b> the corpse <b>into pieces and carry it out?</b> We have no choice but to carry it out through an opening large enough for the corpse to pass through. However, in the case of the food for the two meals of an <i>eiruv</i>, there is no such logistical constraint, and the law should be determined in accordance with the usual practice.

### Part 5
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>Do the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar, or not? Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Og, king of the Bashan,</b> requires <b>an opening of four</b> handbreadths in order to save the other openings in the house from becoming ritually impure. This indicates that the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>There,</b> we are dealing with a case <b>where there are many small openings, and there is</b> only <b>one that is four</b> handbreadths wide. Therefore, it may be assumed <b>with certainty that when one widens</b> one of the openings in order to remove the corpse from the house, <b>he will widen that</b> opening. Consequently, that opening is ritually impure while the others are not. However, if all the openings in the house are equal in size, they are all ritually impure, as we cannot know through which opening the corpse will be carried out.

### Part 7
Returning to the laws of <i>eiruv</i>, <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Rav Ashi said that Rav said: One may establish an <i>eiruv</i> with raw meat</b> because it can be eaten when necessary, even though it is not ordinarily regarded as food. <b>Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya said: One may</b> also <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i> with raw eggs.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How many</b> eggs are required for an <i>eiruv</i>? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: One. Sinai,</b> a nickname of Rav Yosef, <b>said: Two.</b>

### Part 8
We learned in the mishna: <b>One who vows that nourishment</b> is prohibited to him <b>is permitted</b> to eat <b>water</b> and salt. The Gemara infers from this: <b>It is</b> only <b>salt and water</b> that <b>are not considered nourishment, but all</b> other food <b>items are considered nourishment. Let us say</b> that <b>this is a refutation of</b> the position of <b>Rav and Shmuel. As it was Rav and Shmuel who both said: One only recites the blessing: Who creates</b> the various <b>kinds of nourishment, over the five species</b> of grain <b>alone,</b> but not over other types of food.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks a question: <b>Did we not</b> already <b>refute</b> their position <b>on one occasion</b> from a different source? The Gemara answers: Indeed, we already refuted their view, but <b>let us say</b> that <b>there is a refutation of their</b> position <b>from here as well.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Huna said:</b> We can resolve the difficulty from the mishna by saying that it is referring to someone who vows and <b>says: Anything that nourishes</b> is prohibited <b>to me.</b> In that case, <b>it is water and salt</b> that are permitted to him, <b>as they do not nourish, but all</b> other food <b>items</b> are prohibited, as they <b>do nourish.</b> This inclusive formulation includes anything that provides even a small degree of nourishment; but the particular term <i>mazon</i>, nourishment or sustenance, used in the blessing over food, is reserved only for the five species of grain.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t Rabba bar bar Ḥana say: When we were following Rabbi Yoḥanan to eat of the fruits of Genosar,</b> very sweet fruits that grow in the region of the Sea of Galilee, <b>when we were</b> a group <b>of a hundred</b> people, <b>each and every</b> person <b>would take ten</b> fruits; and <b>when we were</b> a group <b>of ten, each and every</b> person <b>would take a hundred</b> fruits for him. <b>And each hundred of these</b> fruits <b>could not fit into a three-<i>se’a</i> basket. And</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>would eat them all and</b> then <b>say: I swear that I have not</b> yet <b>tasted something that nourishes.</b> Didn’t we say that only water and salt are excluded from the category of things that nourish? The Gemara corrects the rendition of the story: <b>Say</b> that he said as follows: I have not tasted <b>sustaining food,</b> but fruit is certainly considered something that nourishes.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If one said: <b>I swear that I shall not eat this loaf, one may</b> nonetheless <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it</b> because the food used for an <i>eiruv</i> does not have to be edible for the particular individual the <i>eiruv</i> services. However, if one said: <b>This loaf</b> shall be forbidden <b>to me, one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it,</b> as this formulation indicates that he is prohibiting himself to use or benefit from the loaf in any manner.

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based upon the following <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who vows</b> not to benefit <b>from a loaf, one may</b> nonetheless <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it. What, is it not</b> referring to one <b>who said:</b> This loaf shall be forbidden <b>to me?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is only is referring to a case <b>where he said:</b> I swear that I shall not eat <b>this</b> loaf.

### Part 14
The Gemara comments: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to understand the <i>baraita</i> in this fashion, <b>as it was taught in the latter clause: When</b> do we apply this <i>halakha</i>? Only <b>when one said: I swear that I shall not taste it.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if <b>he said:</b> This loaf shall be forbidden <b>to me, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>So too, one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it.</b> But <b>if so,</b> there is a difficulty. <b>Instead of teaching</b> in the continuation of the <i>baraita</i> that if one said: <b>This loaf is consecrated</b> property, <b>one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it, as one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> with consecrated</b> objects, <b>let him make</b> an internal <b>distinction in the case</b> of a non-sacred loaf <b>itself</b> and state: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> Only where <b>one said:</b> I swear that I shall not eat <b>this</b> loaf. <b>But if one said:</b> This loaf shall be forbidden <b>to me, one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it.</b> This indicates that Rav Huna’s understanding of the <i>baraita</i> is incorrect.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you: Rather, what</b> would you say, that <b>wherever</b> one <b>said:</b> This loaf shall be forbidden <b>to me, one may establish an <i>eiruv</i></b> for him with it? If so, there is <b>a difficulty</b> from the <b>first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, which states: When do we say this? Only when one said: I swear that I shall not taste it. That indicates that if one said: This loaf shall be forbidden to me, one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it.

### Part 17
The Gemara answers that the <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete, and it teaches the following:</b> With regard to <b>one who vows</b> not to benefit <b>from a loaf, one may</b> nonetheless <b>establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it. And even if one said:</b> This loaf shall be forbidden <b>to me, it is as though he said: I swear that I shall not taste it.</b> Therefore, the loaf itself is only forbidden to him as food, but he can use it for the purpose of an <i>eiruv</i>.

### Part 18
The Gemara comments: <b>Nevertheless,</b> the <b>difficulty</b> remains <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He stated</b> his view <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer; as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If one said: <b>I swear that I shall not eat this loaf, one may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it;</b> but if he said: <b>This loaf</b> shall be forbidden <b>to me, one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>Did Rabbi Eliezer</b> really <b>say this? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>This is the principle:</b> With regard to <b>a person</b> who <b>prohibits himself from</b> eating a particular <b>food,</b> e.g., if one said: I swear that I shall not eat this loaf, <b>one may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with</b> that loaf. However, if the <b>food was prohibited to a person,</b> e.g., if he said: This loaf shall be forbidden to me, <b>one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it. Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If he said: <b>This loaf</b> shall be forbidden <b>to me, one may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it.</b> However, if he said: <b>This loaf is consecrated</b> property, <b>one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with it, as one may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for him with consecrated</b> objects. Therefore, Rabbi Eliezer does not distinguish between the two differently worded types of vows, but between a vow and consecration.

### Part 20
The Gemara answers: It must be explained that these are <b>two <i>tanna’im</i></b> who both held <b>according to Rabbi Eliezer.</b> Two later <i>tanna’im</i> disagreed with each other in reporting Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion.

### Part 21
We learned in the mishna: <b>One may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for a nazirite with wine</b> and for an Israelite with <i>teruma</i>, even though they themselves may not partake of these foods. The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna</b> was <b>not</b> taught <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Beit Shammai say: One may not establish an <i>eiruv</i> for a nazirite with wine and for an Israelite with <i>teruma</i>. Beit Hillel</b> disagree and <b>say: One may establish an <i>eiruv</i> for a nazirite with wine and for an Israelite with <i>teruma</i>. Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai: Do you not concede</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC