
### Part 1
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>to fulfill</b> a mitzva <b>one does not need intent, and here they disagree with regard to</b> the condition needed <b>to violate</b> the prohibition: <b>Do not add</b> to mitzvot of the Torah. <b>As the first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>one does not need intent to violate</b> the prohibition: <b>Do not add</b> to mitzvot. One who dons another pair of phylacteries transgresses the prohibition against adding to mitzvot even if he does not don them with the intention of fulfilling the mitzva. <b>And Rabban Gamliel holds</b> that in order <b>to violate</b> the prohibition: <b>Do not add</b> to mitzvot, <b>one needs intent</b> to perform a mitzva. Since in this case one’s intention is merely to move the phylacteries to a safer place, he may don a second pair.

### Part 2
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the dispute may be explained as follows. <b>If we were to maintain</b> that <b>Shabbat is</b> a fit <b>time for</b> donning <b>phylacteries, everyone</b> would <b>agree</b> that <b>one does not need intent to violate</b> the prohibition against adding to mitzvot, <b>nor does one need intent to fulfill</b> a mitzva. In this case, one’s intention has no bearing on his action.

### Part 3
<b>However, here, they disagree with regard to</b> the condition for <b>violating</b> the prohibition against adding to a mitzva <b>not in its</b> proper <b>time,</b> i.e., when a mitzva is performed not at its prescribed time. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that if the act of a mitzva is performed not in its proper time, <b>one does not need intent;</b> that is, even if one does not intend to perform the mitzva he nonetheless violates the prohibition against adding to mitzvot by his action alone. Consequently, in this case, a person may not don more than one pair of phylacteries. <b>And Rabban Gamliel holds that to violate</b> the prohibition against adding to a mitzva <b>not in its</b> proper <b>time, one needs intent</b> to fulfill the mitzva. Without such intent one does not violate the prohibition, and therefore in this case he may don a second pair of phylacteries.

### Part 4
With regard to this last explanation the Gemara asks: <b>If so, according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> one should <b>not even</b> don <b>one pair</b> of phylacteries. According to Rabbi Meir’s opinion, one who does so violates the prohibition against adding to mitzvot merely by donning one pair, since he is fulfilling the mitzva of phylacteries at a time when he is not commanded to do so.

### Part 5
<b>And furthermore,</b> according to this opinion, <b>one who sleeps in a <i>sukka</i> on the Eighth Day</b> of Assembly <b>should be flogged</b> for violating the prohibition against adding to mitzvot, as he adds to the mitzva of: “You shall dwell in booths for seven days” (Leviticus 23:42). Yet the Sages instituted that outside of Eretz Yisrael, Jews must observe <i>Sukkot</i> for eight days, even though one who sleeps in a <i>sukka</i> on the eighth night outside of Eretz Yisrael transgresses a Torah law. <b>Rather, it is clear as we originally answered,</b> i.e., you must accept one of the other explanations.

### Part 6
Since the topic of phylacteries was discussed, the Gemara continues to explore this issue. <b>Whom did you hear</b> who said that <b>Shabbat is</b> a fit <b>time for</b> donning <b>phylacteries?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Akiva, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the end of the section in the Torah beginning with: “Sanctify all firstborns to me” (Exodus 13:2), which deals with the mitzvot of the Paschal lamb and phylacteries: <b>“And you shall observe this ordinance in its season from year [<i>miyamim</i>] to year”</b> (Exodus 13:10), which indicates that these mitzvot apply during the <b>days</b> [<b><i>yamim</i></b>] <b>and not</b> during the <b>nights.</b> Furthermore, the letter <i>mem</i> in <b>“from year” [<i>miyamim</i>]</b> teaches: <b>But not</b> on <b>all days;</b> this <b>excludes Shabbat and Festivals,</b> on which phylacteries are not worn. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Akiva says: This ordinance is stated only with regard to the Paschal</b> lamb, and it does not refer to phylacteries at all. According to Rabbi Akiva, there is no reason to refrain from donning phylacteries on Shabbat and Festivals.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> with regard to <b>that</b> which <b>we learned</b> in a mishna that <b>the Paschal</b> lamb <b>and circumcision are positive mitzvot, let us say that</b> this statement is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b> The reason for this claim is <b>that if</b> you say this teaching is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, since he establishes</b> this verse as referring <b>to the Paschal</b> lamb, this would mean that in failure to bring this offering there <b>is also</b> the violation of <b>a negative</b> mitzva, <b>in accordance with</b> the principle <b>that Rabbi Avin</b> said that <b>Rabbi Elai said. As Rabbi Avin said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elai said: Any place</b> where <b>it is stated: Observe, lest, or do not,</b> this means <b>nothing other than a negative</b> mitzva, as these are negative terms. Consequently, the verse “You shall observe this ordinance,” which refers to the Paschal lamb, constitutes a negative mitzva.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Even if you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> holds that no negative mitzva applies to the Paschal lamb, it is not difficult, as an additional principle must be taken into account. Although it is true that the term <b>observe with regard to a negative</b> mitzva indicates the presence of another <b>negative</b> mitzva; that same term <b>observe</b> with regard to <b>a positive</b> mitzva has the force of <b>a positive</b> mitzva, as the Torah is warning adherents to take special care in the observance of a mitzva. The word observe in connection with the Paschal lamb is an example of this type of positive mitzva.

### Part 10
The Gemara returns to the issue at hand: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> really <b>hold that Shabbat is a time for</b> donning <b>phylacteries? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> I <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a person should don phylacteries on <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And it shall be for a sign for you on your arm,</b> and for a remembrance between your eyes, so that God’s law shall be in your mouth; for with a strong arm God brought you out of Egypt” (Exodus 13:9). The obligation to don phylacteries applies when Jews <b>require a sign</b> to assert their Judaism and their status as the Chosen People, i.e., during the week, <b>excluding</b> Shabbat and Festivals, <b>as they are themselves signs</b> of Israel’s status as the Chosen People and a remembrance of the exodus from Egypt. Consequently, no further sign is required on these days. This teaching proves that Rabbi Akiva maintains that Shabbat is not a fit time for donning phylacteries.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, it is this <i>tanna</i>,</b> Rabbi Natan, who maintains that Shabbat is a fit time for donning phylacteries, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who is awake at night, if he wishes he</b> may <b>remove</b> his phylacteries, and <b>if he wishes he</b> may continue to <b>don</b> them, and he need not worry about violating the prohibition against adding to mitzvot. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Natan. Yonatan HaKitoni says: One</b> may <b>not don phylacteries at night. From</b> the fact <b>that according to the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> Rabbi Natan, <b>night is</b> a fit <b>time for phylacteries,</b> it may be inferred that <b>Shabbat, too, is a time for</b> donning <b>phylacteries,</b> as Rabbi Natan evidently does not accept Rabbi Yosei HaGelili’s limitation based on the phrase: From year to year.

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this contention: This is not a conclusive proof, as <b>perhaps he holds</b> that although <b>night is</b> a fit <b>time for phylacteries, Shabbat is not</b> a fit <b>time for phylacteries. As we</b> have <b>heard that Rabbi Akiva said</b> that <b>night is a time for phylacteries,</b> because he does not accept the limitation of “from days to days,” and yet he maintains that <b>Shabbat is not a time for phylacteries,</b> as no sign is required on Shabbat. It is therefore possible that Rabbi Natan holds the same opinion.

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> we must say that <b>it is this <i>tanna</i></b> who maintains that Shabbat is a time for phylacteries, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Michal, daughter of Kushi,</b> King Saul, <b>would don phylacteries, and the Sages did not protest against her</b> behavior, as she was permitted to do so. <b>And</b> similarly, <b>Jonah’s wife would undertake the Festival pilgrimage and the Sages did not protest against her</b> practice. <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the Sages did not protest against</b> Michal’s donning phylacteries, <b>it is apparent that these</b> Sages <b>hold</b> that phylacteries <b>is a positive mitzva not bound by time,</b> i.e., it is a mitzva whose performance is mandated at all times, including nights and Shabbat. There is an accepted principle that women are obligated in all positive mitzvot not bound by time.

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>But perhaps</b> that <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC