### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda said that Shmuel said:</b> If <b>one established his Shabbat residence in a desolate city</b> whose walls are still standing, <b>according to the Rabbis he may walk through all of it</b> as though it were four cubits, <b>and</b> he may walk an additional <b>two thousand cubits beyond it.</b> If, however, <b>he</b> merely <b>placed his <i>eiruv</i> in a desolate city, he has only two thousand cubits from the place of his <i>eiruv</i>.</b> The Rabbis distinguish between one who establishes his Shabbat residence by actually being present in that location at the onset of Shabbat and one who does so by placing his <i>eiruv</i> there before Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Whether he established his Shabbat residence</b> through his physical presence <b>or he</b> merely <b>placed his <i>eiruv</i></b> there, <b>he may walk through all of it and</b> another <b>two thousand cubits beyond it.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based upon the mishna. <b>Rabbi Akiva said to</b> the Rabbis: Do <b>you not concede to me</b> that <b>one who places his <i>eiruv</i> in a cave has only two thousand cubits from the place of his <i>eiruv</i>? They said to him: When</b> does this apply? <b>When</b> the cave <b>has no residents.</b> Consequently, <b>when it has no residents</b> the Rabbis <b>concede to</b> Rabbi Akiva that one has only two thousand cubits from the place of his <i>eiruv</i>. This contradicts Rabbi Elazar’s assertion that, according to the Rabbis, even if one places his <i>eiruv</i> in the abandoned city, he may walk through all of it and another two thousand cubits beyond it.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>What is</b> the meaning of the qualification that it <b>has no residents?</b> It means that the place <b>is not fit for residence.</b> If, however, the city is suitable for habitation, it is considered like four cubits even if it is currently uninhabited.

### Part 4
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another difficulty from the following <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one established his Shabbat residence</b> through his physical presence <b>in a city, even</b> if <b>it is as large as Antioch,</b> or <b>in a cave, even</b> if <b>it is</b> particularly large, <b>like the Cave of Zedekiah, king of Judah, he may walk through all of it and</b> another <b>two thousand cubits beyond it.</b> The <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> the case of <b>a city</b> that is <b>similar to</b> that of <b>a cave: Just as a cave is</b> presumably <b>desolate,</b> i.e., uninhabited, <b>so too the city</b> must be one that <b>is desolate. And</b> only in the case where <b>he established his Shabbat residence</b> through his physical presence would <b>yes,</b> this <i>halakha</i> apply; <b>but</b> if he merely <b>placed</b> his <i>eiruv</i> there, <b>no,</b> he may not measure his two thousand cubits from the edge of the city.

### Part 5
The Gemara continues clarifying the <i>baraita</i>: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this <i>baraita</i>? <b>If you say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, why</b> did the <i>baraita</i> <b>specifically</b> teach the case of a <b>desolate</b> city? <b>Even</b> if it was <b>inhabited,</b> the same <i>halakha</i> should <b>also</b> apply, as Rabbi Akiva holds that even if one placed his <i>eiruv</i> in an inhabited city, he has only two thousand cubits from the place of his <i>eiruv</i>. <b>Rather, is it not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis? And</b> nonetheless, <b>the reason is that one established his Shabbat residence</b> through his physical presence. In such a case, <b>yes,</b> one may walk through the entire city and another two thousand cubits beyond it. <b>But</b> if one merely <b>placed</b> his <i>eiruv</i> there, he would <b>not</b> be permitted to walk more than two thousand cubits from his <i>eiruv</i>, which would contradict the opinion of Rabbi Elazar.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this argument and argues that the initial inference was incorrect. <b>Do not say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>a city</b> that is <b>similar to a cave. Rather, say</b> that it is referring to <b>a cave</b> that is <b>similar to a city: Just as the city is</b> presumably <b>inhabited, so too the cave</b> must be one that is <b>inhabited.</b> The <i>baraita</i> is then in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who said</b> that if one merely places his <i>eiruv</i> in the cave, <b>he has only two thousand cubits from the place of his <i>eiruv</i>.</b> However, if <b>one established his Shabbat residence</b> there through his physical presence, even Rabbi Akiva <b>concedes</b> that the entire cave is considered as though it were four cubits, and he may walk two thousand cubits beyond the cave.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Doesn’t the</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>teach</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies even to a cave <b>like the Cave of Zedekiah,</b> which was uninhabited? The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a cave that is <b>like the Cave of Zedekiah</b> in one respect <b>and not like the Cave of Zedekiah</b> in other respects. It is <b>like the Cave of Zedekiah</b> in that the cave is as <b>large</b> as that one. <b>And</b> it is <b>not</b> exactly <b>like the Cave of Zedekiah, as there,</b> with regard to Zedekiah’s cave, it was <b>desolate, and here</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a cave that is <b>inhabited.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara relates that <b>Mar Yehuda</b> once <b>found the residents of Mavrakhta placing their <i>eiruvin</i> in the synagogue of Beit Agovar. He said to them: Place</b> your <i>eiruv</i> <b>farther</b> into the synagogue, <b>so that more will be permitted to you,</b> as the Shabbat limit is measured from the spot where the <i>eiruv</i> is deposited. Mar Yehuda holds that even when an <i>eiruv</i> is placed in an inhabited city, the two thousand cubits are measured from the location of the <i>eiruv</i> rather than from the edge of the city.

### Part 9
<b>Rava said to him: Argumentative one! With regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b><i>eiruv</i>, nobody is concerned about this</b> opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis. Consequently, no matter where one places his <i>eiruv</i> in a city, the entire city is considered as though it were four cubits, and he is permitted to walk two thousand cubits beyond the edge of the city.

### Part 10
end of chapter

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One who resides with a gentile in</b> the same <b>courtyard, or</b> one who lives in the same courtyard <b>with one who does not accept</b> the principle of <b><i>eiruv</i>,</b> even though he is not a gentile, such as a Samaritan [<i>Kuti</i>], <b>this</b> person <b>renders it prohibited for him</b> to carry from his own house into the courtyard or from the courtyard into his house, unless he rents this person’s rights in the courtyard, as will be explained below.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: Actually,</b> the gentile <b>does not render it prohibited</b> for one to carry, <b>unless there are two Jews</b> living in the same courtyard who themselves would <b>prohibit one another</b> from carrying if there were no <i>eiruv</i>. In such a case, the presence of the gentile renders the <i>eiruv</i> ineffective. However, if only one Jew lives there, the gentile does not render it prohibited for him to carry in the courtyard.

### Part 13
<b>Rabban Gamliel said:</b> There was <b>an incident involving a certain Sadducee who lived with us in</b> the same <b>alleyway in Jerusalem,</b> who renounced his rights to the alleyway before Shabbat. <b>And Father said to us: Hurry and take out</b> your <b>utensils to the alleyway</b> to establish possession of it, <b>before he</b> changes his mind and <b>takes out</b> his own utensils so as to reclaim his rights, in which case <b>he would render it prohibited for you to</b> use the entire alleyway.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Rabban Gamliel’s father spoke to them <b>with a different formulation,</b> saying: <b>Hurry and do</b> whatever <b>you must do in the alleyway</b> prior to Shabbat, <b>before he takes out</b> his utensils <b>and renders it prohibited for you to</b> use the alleyway. In other words, you may not bring out utensils to the alleyway at all on Shabbat, as the institution of an <i>eiruv</i> cannot be used in the neighborhood of a Sadducee. This is because, even if he renounced his rights to the alleyway, he can always retract and reclaim them.