
### Part 1
<b>when they are purchased by their owner,</b> if the owner explicitly consecrated it as a burnt-offering or sin-offering when he purchased it, <b>or through the actions of the priest</b> when he offers the birds as sacrifices. Therefore, even if the women did not verbalize their intentions, it is considered as if they had made a stipulation from the outset. Therefore, this case is not an instance of retroactive designation.

### Part 2
<b>And still</b> the question may be raised: Does <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> really <b>hold</b> that <b>there is no retroactive designation? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>an <i>am ha’aretz</i>,</b> who is not known to be scrupulous in separating tithes, <b>said to a <i>ḥaver</i>,</b> one known to be meticulous in his observance of <i>halakha</i> and especially the laws of <i>teruma</i> and tithes, before the <i>ḥaver</i> went to the market to buy himself vegetables from another <i>am ha’aretz</i>: <b>Buy for me</b> as well <b>a bundle of vegetables or a cake [<i>geluska</i>],</b> the <i>ḥaver</i> <b>does not need to tithe</b> the food that he gives to the <i>am ha’aretz</i>. The only reason the food needs to be tithed is because it is <i>demai</i>, and an <i>am ha’aretz</i> is not particular about that issue. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei.</b> It can be deduced from this ruling that Rabbi Yosei accepts the principle of retroactive designation, as the <i>ḥaver</i> purchased bundles of vegetables without specifying which was for himself and which was for the <i>am ha’aretz</i>, and when he gave one to the <i>am ha’aretz</i>, it became retroactively clear that he had purchased that bundle for the <i>am ha’aretz</i> from the start, and therefore he does not need to separate tithes from it as <i>demai</i>.

### Part 3
<b>And the Rabbis say: He must tithe</b> it. Since we do not accept the principle of retroactive designation, everything that the <i>ḥaver</i> bought was bought for himself, and the fact that he later gave part of it to the <i>am ha’aretz</i> does not exempt him from his original obligation to separate tithes from the <i>demai</i>. In any case, it seems that Rabbi Yosei’s opinion in this <i>baraita</i> contradicts his opinion in the <i>Tosefta</i> cited above with regard to wine. The Gemara answers: <b>Reverse</b> the opinions in the <i>baraita</i> and say that according to Rabbi Yosei he must tithe the produce he gives to the <i>am ha’aretz</i>, while the Rabbis permit him to proceed without tithing.

### Part 4
The Gemara attempts to bring another proof. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a different <i>Tosefta</i>: In the case of <b>one who says:</b> The second <b>tithe that I have in my house shall be redeemed upon the <i>sela</i></b> coin <b>that will</b> happen to <b>come up in my hand</b> when I remove it <b>from the pouch,</b> i.e., he did not have a particular coin in mind, <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The second tithe <b>is redeemed.</b> When the coin is removed from the pouch, it is retroactively clarified that this is the coin that he had in his mind from the outset. This indicates that Rabbi Yosei accepts the principle of retroactive designation.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers again: <b>Reverse</b> the attributions, and <b>say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: He has not redeemed</b> the second tithe. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>What did you see that you reversed two</b> sources <b>because of one,</b> and made the two <i>baraitot</i> conform to the mishna, which indicates that Rabbi Yosei holds that there is no retroactive designation? Perhaps <b>I should reverse one</b> source, i.e., the mishna, <b>because of</b> the <b>two</b> <i>baraitot</i> and say that in fact Rabbi Yosei accepts the principle of retroactive designation, and it is the lone source that indicates otherwise that must be revised.

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> <i>Tosefta</i> was <b>certainly taught in reverse,</b> as <b>the latter clause states: And Rabbi Yosei concedes with regard to one who says: The</b> second <b>tithe that I have in my house shall be redeemed with the new <i>sela</i></b> coin <b>that will</b> happen to <b>come up in my hand</b> when I remove it <b>from the pouch, that he has redeemed</b> the second tithe. The Gemara makes the following inference: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it said here that he has redeemed</b> the second tithe, it can be proven <b>by inference that there,</b> in the first clause of the <i>Tosefta</i>, <b>he did not redeem</b> the second tithe. Therefore, the wording found in the earlier part of the <i>baraita</i> is clearly incorrect and must be reversed.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a question with regard to the <i>halakha</i> cited in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>This new <i>sela</i>, what are its circumstances? If</b> it is referring to a situation <b>where there are two</b> or <b>three</b> coins in his pouch, so that it is not clear which coin he is referring to, <b>and there is</b> the possibility of <b>retroactive designation, this is</b> exactly the same as <b>the first</b> case. Why does he rule here, as opposed to the earlier case, that there is retroactive designation? <b>Rather,</b> it must refer to a situation <b>where he has only one</b> coin in his pouch. But if so, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the expression: <b>Will</b> happen to <b>come up?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: In fact, it is referring to a case where one has only one coin in his pouch, and the wording of the latter clause is imprecise. <b>Since the first clause taught</b> the <i>halakha</i> using this expression: <b>Will</b> happen to <b>come up, the latter clause also taught</b> the <i>halakha</i> using this same expression: <b>Will</b> happen to <b>come up,</b> even though he was referring to the only new coin that he has in his pouch.

### Part 9
<b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: Who is this <i>tanna</i></b> who <b>does not accept</b> the principle of <b>retroactive designation even concerning rabbinic decrees? As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one person <b>said to five</b> people: <b>I am hereby establishing an <i>eiruv</i> for whichever one of you I will choose,</b> so that the person <b>I have chosen will</b> be able to <b>walk</b> two thousand cubits from the spot of the <i>eiruv</i>, whereas whomever <b>I have not chosen will not</b> be able to <b>walk</b> two thousand cubits from the location of the <i>eiruv</i>, the following distinction applies: If <b>he chose</b> the person for whom he was making the <i>eiruv</i> before Shabbat, <b>while it was still day, his <i>eiruv</i> is</b> a valid <b><i>eiruv</i>;</b> but if he only chose him <b>after nightfall, his <i>eiruv</i> is not</b> a valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b> The <i>tanna</i> of this <i>baraita</i> apparently rejects the principle of retroactive designation, even with regard to rabbinic enactments, as if that were not the case, the <i>eiruv</i> should be valid even if he only chose the person for whom he was making the <i>eiruv</i> after nightfall.

### Part 10
Rav Naḥman <b>was silent and did not say anything to</b> Rava. The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> Rav Naḥman <b>say to him</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is the opinion of a Sage <b>of the school of Ayo,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, which maintains that even with regard to an <i>eiruv</i> there is no retroactive designation. The Gemara answers: <b>He did not accept</b> Ayo’s version of Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion and considered it incorrect.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Yosef said,</b> in his unique style: Have <b>you removed the <i>tanna’im</i> from the world?</b> Is there no <i>tanna</i> who holds this position? The possibility of retroactive designation with regard to rabbinic enactments <b>is</b> a dispute among <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One said: <b>I am hereby establishing an <i>eiruv</i> for the <i>Shabbatot</i> of the entire year,</b> so that <b>if I want</b> to make use of it, <b>I will</b> be able to <b>walk</b> two thousand cubits from the <i>eiruv</i>, and <b>if I do not want</b> to do so, <b>I will not walk. If he wanted</b> to make use of the <i>eiruv</i> for a particular Shabbat <b>while it was still day, his <i>eiruv</i> is</b> a valid <b><i>eiruv</i></b> for that Shabbat. However, if he only decided <b>after nightfall</b> that he wanted the <i>eiruv</i> to be in effect, the <i>tanna’im</i> disagree: <b>Rabbi Shimon says: His <i>eiruv</i> is</b> a valid <b><i>eiruv</i>; and the Rabbis say: His <i>eiruv</i> is not</b> a valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b> This indicates that according to the Rabbis there is no retroactive designation, even with regard to <i>eiruvin</i>, while Rabbi Shimon holds that his <i>eiruv</i> is in effect because of the principle of retroactive designation.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t we hear that Rabbi Shimon does not accept</b> the principle of <b>retroactive designation</b> in the case of wine from <i>Kutim</i>? The contradiction between one ruling of <b>Rabbi Shimon and</b> another ruling of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> himself <b>is difficult.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, reverse</b> the opinions and say that it is Rabbi Shimon who holds that his <i>eiruv</i> is not valid, and therefore he can be identified as the <i>tanna</i> who holds that there is no retroactive designation at all, even with regard to rabbinic decrees.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the difficulty</b> here? <b>Perhaps it is with regard to Torah law that Rabbi Shimon does not accept</b> the principle of <b>retroactive designation, but with regard to rabbinic</b> decrees, <b>he does accept</b> the principle of retroactive designation. Therefore, it is not necessary to reverse the opinions.

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Yosef holds</b> that <b>one who accepts</b> the principle of <b>retroactive designation accepts it</b> in all cases; <b>there is no difference</b> between <b>Torah law and rabbinic</b> decrees. <b>And one who does not accept</b> the principle of <b>retroactive designation does not accept it</b> at all; <b>there is no difference</b> between <b>Torah law and rabbinic</b> decrees.

### Part 15
<b>Rava said:</b> The distinction between the case of the wine and the other cases is not related to the principle of retroactive designation. Rather, <b>there,</b> the case of the wine of a <i>Kuti</i>, <b>is different, as we require</b> that the <i>teruma</i> be <b>the first</b> of your produce, <b>whose remnants are recognizable.</b> Since <i>teruma</i> is called the first, if it is not clear which portion was separated and which portion is left over, the designation of part of the wine as <i>teruma</i> is not effective, despite the fact that Rabbi Shimon accepts the principle of retroactive designation.

### Part 16
<b>Abaye said to him:</b> Do you really think that this ruling is correct? <b>But if that is so,</b> if <b>there were two pomegranates</b> that were <b><i>tevel</i> before him, and he said: If rain falls today, this</b> pomegranate <b>shall be <i>teruma</i> for that</b> other pomegranate, <b>and if rain does not fall today, that</b> second pomegranate <b>shall be <i>teruma</i> for this</b> first one, <b>so too, whether</b> rain <b>fell or did not fall, there is no</b> significance to <b>his statement</b> because the remnants that are not <i>teruma</i> are not immediately recognizable.

### Part 17
<b>And if you say</b> that indeed, it <b>is so,</b> there is a difficulty. <b>Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna that if one says: <b>The <i>teruma</i> of this pile</b> of produce <b>and its tithes shall be inside it,</b> without specifying the location of the produce that he is designating for these purposes, <b>and</b> similarly, if one says about a pile of first-tithe produce: <b>The <i>teruma</i> of this tithe shall be inside it,</b> without specifying the location, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: He has given it a name,</b> i.e., the designation of the <i>teruma</i> and tithes take effect, even though it is impossible to distinguish between them and the permitted portion of the produce? Therefore, it is not necessary for the remnants of the act of separation to be recognizable.

### Part 18
Rava refutes this argument: <b>There,</b> with regard to a pile of produce, <b>it is different because there are</b> recognizable remnants <b>around it.</b> He specified that the <i>teruma</i> should be inside the heap, which indicates that it is in the middle of the pile, and therefore the produce on the perimeter of the pile is certainly not <i>teruma</i>, and some of the remnants of the act of separation are recognizable.

### Part 19
<b>And if you wish,</b> you can reconcile the difference between the case of separating <i>teruma</i> from wine and the other cases and <b>say in accordance with the reason that was taught</b> in the case of the wine: The Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Meir: Don’t you concede</b> that <b>perhaps the</b> leather <b>flask will burst</b> before he manages to separate the <i>teruma</i>, <b>and retroactively this</b> person would have been <b>drinking <i>tevel</i>?</b> Since he never ended up separating <i>teruma</i>, the wine remained <i>tevel</i> all along. Rabbi Meir <b>said to them: When it bursts,</b> I will consider the matter, but presently I am not concerned that the bottle might burst. Therefore, we see that these <i>tanna’im</i> do not disagree about the principle of retroactive designation but over the likelihood that the flask will burst.

### Part 20
The Gemara now asks: <b>And according to what initially entered our minds,</b> which is <b>that we require</b> <i>teruma</i> that is <b>the first, whose remnants are recognizable what did</b> the Rabbis <b>say to</b> Rabbi Meir about that? That is the objection they should have raised against him.

### Part 21
The Gemara answers: <b>This is what they said to him: According to our</b> own opinion, <b>we require</b> <i>teruma</i> that is <b>the first, whose remnants are recognizable; according to your</b> opinion,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC