
### Part 1
<b>this</b> outer house <b>becomes a gatehouse to this</b> courtyard, <b>and that</b> outer house <b>becomes a gatehouse to that</b> courtyard, and therefore the residents of the outer houses need not contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>. <b>The middle</b> house between them <b>is the house in which the <i>eiruv</i> is placed,</b> and therefore its residents <b>need not contribute bread</b> for the <i>eiruv</i>.

### Part 2
The Sage <b>Raḥava tested the</b> other <b>Sages:</b> If there were <b>two courtyards and two houses between them,</b> and a resident of <b>this</b> courtyard <b>came through this</b> house that opens to his courtyard <b>and placed his <i>eiruv</i> in that</b> house farther from his courtyard, <b>and</b> a resident of <b>this</b> other courtyard <b>came through this</b> house that opens to his courtyard <b>and placed his <i>eiruv</i> in that</b> house that opens to the other courtyard, did <b>they acquire the <i>eiruv</i> or not,</b> i.e., are the two <i>eiruvin</i> valid? <b>Do you render it a house with regard to this</b> courtyard, whose <i>eiruv</i> was placed there, <b>and a gatehouse with regard to that</b> one who passed through it in order to place his <i>eiruv</i> in the other house? <b>And</b> similarly, do you render the other house <b>a gatehouse with regard to this</b> one <b>and a house with regard to that</b> one?

### Part 3
The Sages <b>said to</b> Raḥava: <b>Neither</b> of them <b>has acquired</b> his <b><i>eiruv</i>. Whichever way you</b> look at it, it is difficult: <b>If you consider</b> either house <b>a gatehouse,</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>one who places his <i>eiruv</i> in a gatehouse, a porch, or a balcony,</b> is that <b>it is not a</b> valid <b><i>eiruv</i>.</b> And <b>if you consider</b> either one <b>a house, he would be carrying into a house for which he is not establishing an <i>eiruv</i>.</b> Since the assumption that benefits one of them harms the other, and there is no way to establish firmly the status of these houses, the residents of both courtyards fail to acquire their <i>eiruv</i>.

### Part 4
Raḥava asked: <b>What</b> makes this case <b>different from</b> the ruling of <b>Rava? As Rava said:</b> In the case of <b>two</b> people who <b>said to</b> one person: <b>Go and establish an <i>eiruv</i></b> of Shabbat limits <b>for</b> each of <b>us,</b> and <b>he established an <i>eiruv</i> for one</b> of them <b>while it was still day, and he established an <i>eiruv</i> for</b> the other <b>one during twilight,</b> and <b>the <i>eiruv</i> of the one for whom he established an <i>eiruv</i> while it was still day was eaten during twilight, and the <i>eiruv</i> of the one for whom he established an <i>eiruv</i> during twilight was eaten after nightfall, both of them have acquired their <i>eiruv</i>.</b> Twilight is of doubtful status as to whether it is considered day or night. If it is night, any <i>eiruv</i> established at that time is invalid, and if it is day, any <i>eiruv</i> eaten at that time is invalid. Rava nonetheless ruled leniently, despite the fact that two contradictory assumptions are involved, in keeping with the principle that in cases of doubt relating to an <i>eiruv</i>, the <i>halakha</i> is lenient. Consequently, with regard to the one whose <i>eiruv</i> was eaten during twilight, it is considered as though it was already night, and therefore his <i>eiruv</i> had already taken effect while it was still day before it was eaten. Conversely, with regard to the one whose <i>eiruv</i> was established during twilight, that period of time is viewed as day, and therefore his <i>eiruv</i> is valid as well.

### Part 5
The Sages respond: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> where there is <b>uncertainty</b> whether it is <b>day</b> and <b>uncertainty</b> whether it is <b>night, the matter is not noticeable,</b> as no one sees exactly when each <i>eiruv</i> was established. <b>But here,</b> where the houses are clearly distinguishable, <b>if with regard to this</b> one, who placed his <i>eiruv</i> there, it is <b>a house,</b> then <b>with regard to that</b> one, who passed through it, it should also be regarded as <b>a house.</b> And <b>if, with regard to this</b> one, who passed through it, it is <b>a gatehouse,</b> then <b>with regard to that</b> one, who placed his <i>eiruv</i> there, it should <b>also</b> be considered <b>a gatehouse.</b> Therefore, neither of them acquires his <i>eiruv</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC