
### Part 1
<b>I would have said</b> that <b>the residence of a gentile is considered a residence</b> with regard to defining an area as an alleyway. Therefore, he <b>teaches us that the</b> legal <b>status of the residence of a gentile is not considered a</b> full-fledged <b>residence</b> in this regard. <b>And if</b> Rav had taught this <i>halakha</i> only <b>from</b> the ruling <b>here,</b> with regard to gentiles, <b>I would have said</b> that <b>I do not know how many houses there</b> are. Therefore, he <b>teaches us</b> that there must be at least <b>two houses</b> and two courtyards.

### Part 2
<b>Now that Rav</b> has <b>said</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies <b>even</b> to <b>a courtyard,</b> this implies that <b>the reason for</b> the opinion of <b>Rav is that he holds: It is prohibited for an individual to establish</b> his home <b>in the place</b> where <b>a gentile</b> resides. Consequently, he is prohibited from establishing an <i>eiruv</i>, so that the difficulties of living there will force him to move.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Yosef said: If so, this is</b> why <b>I heard Rabbi Tavla say: A gentile, a gentile, two times</b> while teaching this subject, even though <b>I did not understand</b> then <b>what he</b> meant to <b>say.</b> Now I realize that he was speaking about both an alleyway and a courtyard.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>two courtyards, one</b> of which was <b>within the other,</b> and the outer one opened into the public domain, the following distinctions apply: If <b>the inner</b> courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i></b> for itself <b>and the outer</b> one <b>did not establish an <i>eiruv</i>,</b> carrying in <b>the inner one is permitted and</b> carrying in <b>the outer one is prohibited.</b>

### Part 5
If <b>the outer</b> courtyard established an <i>eiruv</i> <b>and the inner</b> one did <b>not,</b> carrying in <b>both</b> is <b>prohibited,</b> as the residents of the inner courtyard pass through the outer one, and are considered to a certain extent as residents of the courtyard who did not participate in the <i>eiruv</i>. If <b>this</b> courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself, and that</b> courtyard also <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself,</b> but they did not establish a joint <i>eiruv</i> with one another, <b>this one is permitted by itself, and that one is permitted by itself,</b> but they may not carry from one to the other.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Akiva prohibits</b> carrying in <b>the outer one</b> even in such a case, <b>as the</b> right of <b>entry</b> to the outer courtyard enjoyed by the residents of the inner courtyard <b>renders it prohibited. And the Rabbis</b> disagree and <b>say:</b> The right of <b>entry</b> enjoyed by the residents of the inner courtyard <b>does not render it prohibited.</b> Since the residents of the inner courtyard do not use the outer one other than to pass through it, and they are permitted to carry in their own courtyard, they do not render it prohibited to carry in the outer courtyard.

### Part 7
If <b>one</b> resident <b>of the outer</b> courtyard <b>forgot and did not</b> contribute to the <b><i>eiruv</i>,</b> carrying in <b>the inner</b> courtyard <b>is permitted and</b> in <b>the outer one is prohibited.</b> If one resident <b>of the inner</b> courtyard <b>forgot and did not</b> contribute to the <b><i>eiruv</i>, they are both prohibited,</b> as the right of way enjoyed by the members of the inner courtyard through the outer courtyard renders the outer one prohibited as well.

### Part 8
If the residents of both courtyards <b>put their <i>eiruv</i> in one place, and one</b> person, <b>whether</b> he was <b>from the inner</b> courtyard <b>or from the outer one, forgot and did not</b> contribute to the <b><i>eiruv</i>, they are both prohibited</b> for carrying within them, as the two courtyards are treated as one. <b>And if</b> the courtyards belonged <b>to individuals,</b> i.e., if only one person lived in each courtyard, <b>they are not required to establish an <i>eiruv</i>,</b> as this requirement applies only to a courtyard occupied by multiple residents.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> in the name of <b>Rabbi Yannai: This</b> mishna, which states that if the residents of the outer courtyard established an <i>eiruv</i> but the residents of the inner one did not, they are both prohibited from carrying, is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva, who said: Even</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted in its</b> own <b>place,</b> i.e., even someone from a courtyard in which he is permitted to carry, <b>renders</b> it <b>prohibited when</b> he is <b>not in its</b> own <b>place.</b> If he enjoys the right of entry to another courtyard he is considered like a resident of that courtyard as well, and if he does not participate in the <i>eiruv</i>, no one in that courtyard may carry. <b>However, the Rabbis say: Just as</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted</b> in its own place <b>does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry in another courtyard, <b>so</b> too, the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited</b> in his place <b>does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry in another courtyard. Consequently, if only the residents of the outer courtyard established an <i>eiruv</i>, the residents of the inner one do not render it prohibited to carry in the outer courtyard.

### Part 10
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If the residents of <b>the outer</b> courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> and</b> the residents of <b>the inner</b> courtyard did <b>not, they are both prohibited. Whose</b> opinion is this? <b>If you say</b> it is that of <b>Rabbi Akiva, why</b> discuss <b>particularly</b> the case of <b>a foot that is prohibited,</b> i.e., a case where the inner courtyard did not establish an <i>eiruv</i>? According to Rabbi Akiva, <b>even a foot that is permitted also</b> renders it prohibited to carry. Therefore, even if the residents of the inner courtyard had established an <i>eiruv</i>, they would still render it prohibited to carry in the outer courtyard. <b>Rather, is it not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis?</b> This would indicate that the Rabbis agree that one who may not carry in his own courtyard does, in fact, render it prohibited to carry in a different courtyard through which he has right of entry, contrary to Rabbi Yannai’s claim.

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>Actually,</b> this part of the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> and <b>he teaches</b> the mishna employing the style: <b>Not</b> only <b>this</b> but <b>also that.</b> In other words, he begins by teaching the <i>halakha</i> in a relatively straightforward case and then proceeds to a more complicated example. Consequently, the mishna should be understood as follows: Not only is it prohibited to carry in both courtyards if the residents of the outer courtyard established an <i>eiruv</i> and the residents of the inner one did not, but even if the residents of both courtyards established separate <i>eiruvin</i>, it remains prohibited to carry in the outer one.

### Part 12
The Gemara continues: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>this</b> courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself, and that</b> courtyard also <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself,</b> but the two courtyards did not establish a joint <i>eiruv</i> with one another, <b>this one is permitted by itself, and that one is permitted by itself,</b> but it is prohibited to carry from one courtyard to the other. <b>The reason</b> both courtyards are permitted by themselves is that the residents of the inner courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i>.</b> By inference, if they <b>did not establish an <i>eiruv</i></b> carrying in <b>both would be prohibited.</b>

### Part 13
<b>But this <i>tanna</i>, who said</b> that the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted</b> in his own place <b>does not</b> render it <b>prohibited</b> to carry, while the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited</b> in its own place <b>does</b> render it <b>prohibited</b> to carry, <b>who is this</b> <i>tanna</i>? <b>If you say</b> it is <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> there is a difficulty, as he holds that <b>even</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted</b> in its own place <b>also</b> renders it prohibited to carry in a different place. <b>Rather, is it not</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> which indicates that the Rabbis agree that the foot of one who is prohibited in its own place does, in fact, render it prohibited to carry in a different place, in contrast to the statement of Rabbi Yannai? <b>And furthermore, from the fact that the latter clause</b> that follows immediately states the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> it is clear that <b>the first clause,</b> with which Rabbi Akiva disagrees, <b>is not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara responds: The <b>entire</b> mishna in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, and it is incomplete and teaches the following:</b> If <b>this</b> courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself, and that</b> courtyard also <b>established an <i>eiruv</i> for itself,</b> but they did not establish a joint <i>eiruv</i> with one another, <b>this one is permitted by itself, and that one is permitted by itself,</b> but they may not carry from one to the other. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case <b>where</b> the inner courtyard <b>constructed a</b> small <b>partition</b> at its entrance. <b>However,</b> if <b>it did not construct a partition, the outer</b> courtyard <b>is prohibited.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva, as Rabbi Akiva prohibits</b> carrying in <b>the outer</b> courtyard <b>because the</b> right of <b>entry</b> enjoyed by the members of the inner courtyard <b>renders</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry. <b>And the Rabbis say: The</b> right of <b>entry</b> enjoyed by the members of the inner courtyard <b>does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Beivai bar Abaye raised an objection</b> based upon the final clause of the mishna: <b>And if</b> the courtyards belonged <b>to individuals,</b> i.e., if only one person lived in each courtyard, <b>they are not required to establish an <i>eiruv</i>. Doesn’t</b> this indicate that if they belong <b>to many</b> people jointly, <b>they need to establish an <i>eiruv</i>? Apparently,</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted in his</b> own <b>place does not render</b> it <b>prohibited,</b> but the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited</b> in his own place does <b>render</b> it <b>prohibited.</b> This contradicts Rabbi Yannai’s understanding of Rabbi Akiva’s opinion.

### Part 16
<b>And Ravina raised a further objection</b> from the mishna: If <b>one</b> resident <b>of the outer</b> courtyard <b>forgot and did not</b> contribute to the <b><i>eiruv</i>, the inner</b> courtyard <b>is permitted</b> for carrying <b>and the outer one is prohibited.</b> If <b>one</b> resident <b>of the inner</b> courtyard <b>forgot and did not</b> contribute to the <b><i>eiruv</i>, both</b> courtyards <b>are prohibited,</b> as the right of way enjoyed by the members of the inner courtyard through the outer courtyard renders the outer one prohibited as well. <b>The reason is that</b> one of the residents <b>forgot</b> to contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>. <b>But</b> if <b>he did not forget,</b> and each courtyard established its own valid <i>eiruv</i>, <b>both of them</b> would be <b>permitted. Apparently,</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted in his</b> own <b>place does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry, but the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited</b> in his own place does <b>render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry. This cannot be in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, as he holds that even the foot of one who is permitted in his own place renders it prohibited to carry elsewhere. Rather, it must be the opinion of the Rabbis, which proves that even they agree that the foot of one who is prohibited in his own place does render a different courtyard prohibited.

### Part 17
<b>Rather,</b> this version must be rejected, and <b>when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia he cited a different version. <b>Rabbi Yannai said: There are three disputes with regard to</b> this <b>matter. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted in his</b> own <b>place does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry elsewhere, but the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited</b> in his own place does <b>render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry. <b>Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that <b>even</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted</b> in his own place <b>renders</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry in a different place. <b>And the latter Rabbis hold</b> that <b>just as</b> the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is permitted in his</b> own <b>place does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry, <b>so</b> too, the <b>foot</b> of one <b>who is prohibited does not render</b> it <b>prohibited</b> to carry. This explanation resolves all of the difficulties posed earlier.

### Part 18
It was stated in the mishna: If the residents of both courtyards <b>put their <i>eiruv</i> in one place, and one</b> person, <b>whether</b> he was <b>from the inner</b> courtyard or from the outer one, <b>forgot</b> and did not contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>, it is prohibited to carry in both courtyards. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>one place?</b> Is the <i>halakha</i> different if the two courtyards established their <i>eiruv</i> in one place or in different places?

### Part 19
Before continuing, the Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for the ensuing discussion: <b>Outer; for itself; in the house of an individual; Ravina; where the inner one did not forget.</b>

### Part 20
<b>Rav Yehuda said that Rav said:</b> The mishna is referring to a case when the residents of both courtyards established their <i>eiruv</i> in <b>the outer</b> courtyard. <b>And why did they call it one</b> [<b><i>eḥad</i></b>] <b>place?</b> Because it is a place that is <b>designated</b> [<b><i>meyuḥad</i></b>] <b>for</b> the residents of <b>both</b> courtyards, as the members of the inner one also pass through the outer courtyard. Therefore, if a member of the outer courtyard forgot to contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>, the inner courtyard is also prohibited. Since the <i>eiruv</i> of the inner courtyard is located in the outer courtyard, the residents of the inner courtyard cannot separate themselves from the outer one. However, if the <i>eiruv</i> was deposited in the inner courtyard and a member of the outer courtyard forgot to contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>, carrying in the inner courtyard is permitted, because in that situation they can separate themselves from the outer courtyard.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC