
### Part 1
<b>For if</b> it is a ruling <b>of Rav,</b> the apparent contradiction between one statement <b>of Rav</b> and another statement <b>of Rav</b> poses <b>a difficulty in two</b> ways. The first is with regard to the fact that this alleyway opens into the public domain on two opposite sides, and the second is based on that <b>which Rav Yirmeya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> If <b>an alleyway was breached along the entire</b> length of its back wall <b>into a courtyard, and</b> likewise <b>the courtyard was breached opposite it</b> into the public domain, it is <b>permitted</b> to carry in <b>the courtyard, and</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to carry in <b>the alleyway,</b> since this alleyway is now open on two opposite sides to the public domain. <b>Why</b> should this be the ruling? In this case, <b>let it be like an alleyway that terminates in a backyard,</b> where Rav Yehuda ruled that nothing further is needed to permit carrying.

### Part 2
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>I do not know</b> in accordance with which of his teachers Rav Yehuda issued this ruling. All I know is that there was <b>an incident in a shepherds’ village</b> where <b>an alleyway terminated in a backyard, and</b> the matter <b>came before Rav Yehuda</b> for a ruling, <b>and he did not require anything</b> to render it permitted to carry in the alleyway. <b>And if,</b> as you say, <b>it is difficult</b> if we say that he issued his ruling <b>in the name of Rav, let it be</b> suggested that he issued it <b>in the name of</b> his other teacher, <b>Shmuel, and</b> then <b>there will be no difficulty.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>Now that Rav Sheshet said to Rav Shmuel bar Abba, and some say</b> that he said <b>to Rav Yosef bar Abba: I will explain to you</b> Rav’s statement with regard to an alleyway that was breached along the entire length of its back wall into a courtyard. One must make a distinction based on the nature of the case: <b>Here </b>it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the residents of the courtyard <b>established an <i>eiruv</i></b> together. In that case, Rav permits carrying in the alleyway and is not concerned with the breach into the courtyard, as the courtyard and the alleyway are treated as a single domain. <b>There</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the residents <b>did not establish an <i>eiruv</i></b> together. In that case, Rav prohibits carrying in the alleyway, because the alleyway now has new residents, i.e., the residents of the courtyard, who did not participate in the <i>eiruv</i>, and they prevent the residents of the alleyway from carrying.

### Part 4
Consequently, it can be said that Rav Yehuda’s statement with regard to an alleyway that terminates in a backyard is in accordance with the opinion of Rav, as the apparent contradiction between one statement <b>of Rav</b> and another statement <b>of Rav also</b> poses <b>no difficulty. Here,</b> where Rav Yehuda permits carrying in an alleyway that terminates in a backyard, he is referring to a case <b>where the residents of the courtyard and the residents of the alleyway established a joint <i>eiruv</i>,</b> whereas <b>here,</b> where Rav prohibits carrying in an alleyway that was breached along the entire length of its back wall into a courtyard, he is referring to a case <b>where</b> the residents of the courtyard and the residents of the alleyway <b>did not establish a joint <i>eiruv</i>.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC