
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>How old</b> does the child have to be so that one can assume that he already recognizes his mother? <b>Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Yirmeya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rav said: Three months, and Shmuel said: Thirty days, and Rabbi Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Fifty days. Rav Shimi bar Abaye said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> what <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, Rav and Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> are in dispute with regard to the difference between fifty days and three months, as it is possible that <b>each</b> baby varies <b>according to its intelligence,</b> as one baby is sufficiently developed at fifty days, while another knows his mother at only three months. <b>However, according to Shmuel, can you find a case like this,</b> a one-month-old baby who recognizes his mother?

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>When Rami bar Yeḥezkel came</b> from Eretz Yisrael, <b>he said: Do not listen to,</b> i.e., do not accept, <b>those principles that my brother Yehuda said in the name of Shmuel,</b> as Shmuel did not establish a particular time with regard to this matter. Rather, <b>this is what Shmuel said: Whenever he recognizes her,</b> i.e., there is no fixed age at which this occurs. One must check each baby to see whether he recognizes his mother.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates: <b>A certain</b> divorcée <b>came before Shmuel,</b> as she did not wish to nurse her son. <b>He said to Rav Dimi bar Yosef: Go and check her,</b> i.e., verify whether the child recognizes his mother. <b>He went, placed her in a row of women, and took her son</b> in his arms <b>and passed him near them</b> to see how the child would react. <b>When</b> the child <b>reached her, he looked at her face with joy,</b> and <b>she averted her eyes from him,</b> as she did not want to look at him. <b>He said to her: Lift up your eyes, get up and take your son,</b> as it is obvious that he knows you. The Gemara asks: If this is so, then <b>how does a blind</b> baby <b>know</b> and recognize his mother? <b>Rav Ashi said: Through smell and through the taste</b> of her milk.

### Part 4
§ Apropos the period of time during which a child nurses, the Gemara continues to debate different aspects of this matter. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A child may continue to nurse until</b> the age of <b>twenty-four months,</b> and <b>from this</b> point <b>forward,</b> if he continues to nurse, he is <b>like one who nurses</b> from <b>a non-kosher animal,</b> as a woman’s milk is forbidden to anyone other than a small child; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> A child may continue to nurse <b>even</b> for <b>four or five years,</b> and this is permitted. However, <b>if he ceased,</b> i.e., was weaned, <b>after twenty-four months and</b> then <b>resumed</b> nursing, he is <b>like one who nurses</b> from <b>a non-kosher animal.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>From this</b> point <b>forward</b> he is <b>like one who nurses from a non-kosher animal.</b> The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that the <b>milk</b> of <b>bipeds,</b> i.e., humans, <b>would be non-kosher</b> like that of a non-kosher animal, based on a <b>logical derivation: Just as</b> with regard to a non-kosher <b>animal, where you were lenient with regard to its contact,</b> meaning that it does not render people or items impure through contact when it is alive, <b>you were stringent with regard to its milk,</b> which is prohibited, even more so should this be true with regard to a person. An <i>a fortiori</i> inference would indicate that with regard to <b>a person, where you were stringent about contact,</b> as people can render other people and objects impure even when they are alive, one should be stricter. So <b>isn’t it logical that you should be stringent with regard to his milk?</b>

### Part 6
This is as <b>the verse states:</b> “But this you shall not eat, of those that only chew the cud, or of those that only part the hoof; <b>the camel, because it chews the cud</b> but does not part the hoof, it is impure for you” (Leviticus 11:4). The somewhat superfluous word “it” teaches that <b>it</b> alone <b>is impure, but</b> the <b>milk</b> of <b>bipeds is not impure; rather,</b> it is <b>kosher.</b> Furthermore, one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>I should exclude the milk</b> of humans from the prohibition against consumption, as this issue <b>does not apply equally to everyone,</b> since only women produce milk, but <b>I should not exclude</b> from the prohibition human <b>blood, which</b> does <b>apply equally to everyone.</b> Consequently, <b>the verse states “it”</b> with regard to a camel, to say that <b>it</b> alone <b>is impure,</b> whereas the <b>blood</b> of <b>bipeds is not impure,</b> but <b>rather</b> is <b>kosher.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And Rav Sheshet said</b> about this ruling: <b>There is not even a</b> rabbinic <b>command to refrain</b> from consuming human milk. Therefore, this presents a contradiction to the statement that a child who nurses beyond a certain age is like one who nurses from a non-kosher animal.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this</b> statement that the milk is permitted is referring to <b>when it</b> has been <b>removed</b> from the woman’s body, and <b>that</b> statement, that the milk is forbidden, is referring to <b>when it</b> has <b>not</b> been <b>removed.</b> Fundamentally, human milk is a permitted substance. However, it is prohibited by rabbinic law for anyone other than a very young child to nurse directly from a woman’s breasts, and one who does so is considered like one who consumes milk from a non-kosher animal.

### Part 9
<b>And the opposite</b> applies <b>to blood:</b> Human blood that has been removed from the body is forbidden, but if it has not yet been removed, it is permitted. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If some human <b>blood was on a loaf</b> of bread, one <b>scrapes off</b> the blood <b>and</b> then he may <b>eat</b> the bread. Since the blood was detached from the body, it is forbidden by rabbinic law, but if blood <b>was between</b> the <b>teeth, he may suck it</b> and swallow it <b>without concern,</b> as the blood is permitted if it has not been removed from the body.

### Part 10
<b>The Master said</b> in the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> A child may continue to nurse <b>even</b> for <b>four or five years. But isn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: Even if</b> he can carry <b>his package on his shoulder</b> he can continue to nurse? The Gemara answers: This is not a contradiction, since <b>both this and that are one,</b> the same, <b>measure,</b> and the difference between them is only semantic. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua.</b>

### Part 11
On the same topic <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Marinos says: One who is coughing</b> due to an illness that requires milk but did not have milk available <b>may suck milk</b> directly from an animal’s udders <b>on Shabbat,</b> although milking is a prohibited labor on Shabbat. <b>What is the reason? Sucking</b> the milk in this way constitutes an act of <b>extracting in an unusual manner.</b> Although milking is an example of the labor of extracting, a subcategory of the primary category of threshing, it is prohibited by Torah law only when the labor is performed in its typical manner. One who nurses from an animal is extracting the milk in an unusual manner. Such labor is prohibited by rabbinic law, <b>but in a situation</b> involving <b>pain,</b> like one who is coughing, <b>the Sages did not issue a decree. Rabbi Yosef said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Marinos.</b>

### Part 12
A ruling similar to the previous <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Naḥum of Galia says:</b> If <b>a</b> drainage <b>pipe is blocked by weeds [<i>kashkashin</i>]</b> and grass, preventing water from running through the pipe, <b>one may crush them with his foot in private</b> on Shabbat <b>without concern</b> that he is performing the labor of preparing a vessel. The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this leniency? <b>This is</b> an example of <b>repairing</b> a vessel <b>in an unusual manner,</b> since it is uncommon to fix an item without using a tool or one’s hands. Performing labor in an unusual manner is ordinarily prohibited by rabbinic decree, <b>but in a situation</b> involving financial <b>loss, the Sages did not issue a decree. Rabbi Yosef said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Naḥum of Galia.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara continues discussing the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>, which states: If the child <b>ceased</b> nursing <b>after twenty-four months and</b> then <b>resumed,</b> he is <b>like one who nurses</b> from <b>a non-kosher animal.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How long</b> must he cease nursing to be considered weaned? <b>Rav Yehuda bar Ḥaviva said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Three days. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this was not an amoraic statement, but rather a <i>baraita</i> that <b>is taught</b> by <b>Rav Yehuda bar Ḥaviva before Shmuel:</b> Weaning takes effect after <b>three days.</b>

### Part 14
§ The Gemara discusses other <i>halakhot</i> relating to nursing. <b>The Sages taught: A nursing woman whose husband died within twenty-four months</b> of her child’s birth <b>may not be betrothed and may not get married</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC