
### Part 1
<b>She takes an oath at the end</b> of their marriage, i.e., when she learns that her husband died. The oath is to the effect that he did not leave her any funds when he departed overseas, as she is claiming full payment of her marriage contract. <b>And she does not take an oath at the outset</b> of his trip overseas, when she demands support soon after his departure. <b>The sons of High Priests disagreed with</b> Ḥanan’s opinion <b>and said: She takes an oath</b> both <b>at the outset and at the end. Rabbi Dosa ben Harkinas said:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with their statement,</b> i.e., that of the sons of the High Priests. <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said</b> that <b>Ḥanan spoke well: She takes an oath only at the end.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna states that there were two judges who issued decrees [<i>gezeirot</i>] in Jerusalem. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>There were three judges</b> who adjudicated cases <b>of theft [<i>gezeilot</i>] in Jerusalem: Admon ben Gaddai, Ḥanan the Egyptian, and Ḥanan ben Avishalom.</b> The fact that the <i>baraita</i> mentions <b>three</b> judges is <b>difficult, as</b> the mishna includes only <b>two;</b> and the fact that the judges are described in the mishna as those who issue <b>decrees</b> is also <b>difficult as</b> they are described in the <i>baraita</i> as judges who adjudicate cases of <b>theft.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara continues: <b>Granted,</b> the contradiction between the statement that there were <b>three</b> judges and the statement <b>that</b> there were <b>two</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as those <b>who are important to him</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> in the mishna, <b>and</b> those <b>who are not important to him</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>does not teach</b> in the mishna. Although there were other judges, the <i>tanna</i> mentioned only those pertinent to the topic at hand. <b>However,</b> the contradiction between the ruling that refers to <b>decrees</b> and the ruling that refers <b>to theft is difficult.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> There is no contradiction, <b>as they would issue decrees concerning</b> matters of <b>theft, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to an animal that <b>severed</b> a young <b>plant</b> in the field of another, <b>Rabbi Yosei says</b> that <b>those who issue decrees in Jerusalem said:</b> For <b>a plant one year old,</b> the animal’s owner must pay <b>two silver</b> pieces; for a plant <b>two years old,</b> he pays <b>four silver</b> pieces.

### Part 5
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> between the <i>baraita</i> cited above and another <i>baraita</i>: <b>There were three</b> prominent <b>judges</b> who issued <b>decrees in Jerusalem: Admon, Ḥanan, and Naḥum.</b> In the previous <i>baraita</i>, Naḥum was not listed. <b>Rav Pappa said: Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that the third judge was <b>Naḥum? It is Rabbi Natan, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says: Naḥum HaMadi was also among those who</b> would <b>issue decrees in Jerusalem, but the Sages did not agree with</b> his opinion.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> were there <b>no more</b> judges? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Pineḥas say</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya said: There were 394 courts in Jerusalem, and a comparable number of synagogues, and a comparable number of study halls, and a comparable number of houses of teachers</b> of schoolchildren. The Gemara answers: <b>There were many judges, but when we say</b> that there were a small number, it is specifically <b>concerning those who issue decrees</b> that <b>we say</b> so.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said: Those who issue decrees in Jerusalem would take their wages, ninety-nine <i>maneh</i>,</b> equal to 9,900 dinars per year, <b>from the collection of the</b> Temple treasury <b>chamber.</b> If <b>they did not wish</b> to do so, <b>one adds</b> to their wages. The Gemara asks: What is the meaning of the phrase: If <b>they did not wish</b> to do so? Does this mean that if they desired higher wages, they were paid more? <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>we are dealing with wicked</b> people who demand wages beyond what they need? <b>Rather,</b> on the contrary, Rav Asi said that if their wages were <b>insufficient</b> for their needs, then <b>even if they did not wish</b> to receive higher wages, <b>one adds to their</b> wages so that they may devote themselves to their communal service.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: The Sage <b>Karna would take an <i>istera</i>,</b> a small coin, <b>from the innocent party, and an <i>istera</i> from the guilty party,</b> i.e., he would charge both parties that came to him for judgment, <b>and</b> then <b>he would judge their case.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But how could he do so? Isn’t it written: “And you shall take no bribe”</b> (Exodus 23:8), which indicates that a judge may not take money from either of the two litigants?

### Part 9
<b>And if you say</b> that <b>this</b> prohibition against taking a bribe <b>applies only when</b> a judge <b>does not take from both</b> parties, as there is a concern that <b>perhaps he may come to pervert the judgment</b> in favor of the party that gave him the bribe, whereas in the case of <b>Karna, since he took from both</b> parties <b>he will not come to pervert the judgment,</b> who says that the verse is referring only to those circumstances? <b>Is it permitted</b> to take a bribe even in a case <b>when one will not pervert the judgment?</b>

### Part 10
<b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And you shall take no bribe”</b> (Exodus 23:8); <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> this? <b>If</b> it comes <b>to teach that</b> one should <b>not acquit the guilty and</b> one should <b>not convict the innocent</b> due to a bribe, <b>it is already stated: “You shall not wrest judgment”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:19). <b>Rather,</b> this verse teaches that <b>even</b> if the purpose of the bribe is <b>to</b> ensure that one <b>acquit the innocent and convict the guilty, the Torah</b> nevertheless <b>says: “And you shall take no bribe.”</b> This indicates that it is prohibited for a judge to receive anything from the litigants, even if there is no concern at all that justice will be perverted.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>This applies only when one takes the money in the form of a bribe,</b> even if he does not intend to pervert the judgment, whereas <b>Karna took</b> the money <b>in the form of a salary,</b> not a bribe. The Gemara asks: <b>But is it permitted</b> to take money from litigants <b>in the form of a salary? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 58b): With regard to <b>one who takes a salary to judge</b> cases, <b>his judgments are void?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This applies only</b> when he took money as his <b>compensation for judging</b> the case, whereas <b>Karna</b> accepted the money <b>as compensation for unemployment,</b> i.e., as he could not engage in his usual work while dealing with the case, he would take compensation for this unemployment.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And is</b> it <b>permitted</b> to take money <b>as compensation for unemployment? Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Ugly is the judge who takes a salary to judge</b> cases; <b>however, his judgments are</b> valid <b>judgments?</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this <i>baraita</i>? <b>If we say</b> that it is referring to one who accepted money as his <b>compensation for judging,</b> are <b>his judgments</b> valid <b>judgments? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 58b): With regard to <b>one who takes a salary to judge</b> cases, <b>his judgments are void? Rather,</b> it must certainly be referring to a situation where he takes money as <b>compensation for unemployment, and</b> yet the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches: Ugly is the judge.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> statement that the judge is ugly <b>applies only</b> when the fact that he is taking a salary for his <b>unemployment is not evident,</b> as he was not engaged in some other type of work at the time. <b>Karna,</b> however, <b>would take</b> money for his <b>unemployment</b> when <b>it was evident</b> that he was taking time off work to judge the case, <b>as he was examining</b> people's <b>wine stores [<i>ambara</i>]</b> to see which casks would last and which were going sour, <b>and they would pay him</b> one <b>dinar</b> as a salary. Consequently, when Karna paused from his work to deal with a case, it was clear that he was losing money.

### Part 14
This <b>resembles</b> an incident involving <b>Rav Huna. When</b> people <b>would come</b> for <b>judgment before him,</b> he would <b>say to them:</b> As I am unable to take time off from my work, <b>give me a man who can draw water for me,</b> to irrigate the fields in my place, <b>and I will judge your case.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said: Come and see how blind are the eyes of those who accept bribes,</b> and how they ruin themselves. If <b>a person has pain in his eyes,</b> he <b>gives a doctor money,</b> and even then <b>it is uncertain</b> whether <b>he will be healed</b> or <b>whether he will not be healed. And</b> yet those judges <b>take</b> the <b>value</b> of <b>a <i>peruta</i>,</b> a small amount of money as a bribe, <b>and</b> actively <b>blind their eyes, as it is stated: “For a bribe blinds those who have sight”</b> (Exodus 23:8).

### Part 16
<b>The Sages taught: “For a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:19); <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> it will certainly blind the eyes <b>of fools. “And perverts the words of the righteous”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:19); <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> it will certainly pervert the statements <b>of the wicked.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Are fools and the wicked suitable for judgment,</b> i.e., to be appointed as judges? <b>Rather, this is what</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>said: “For a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise”; even</b> if he were <b>very wise but he took a bribe,</b> he <b>will not leave</b> this <b>world without</b> suffering <b>blindness of the heart,</b> i.e., he will eventually turn foolish. <b>“And perverts the words of the righteous”;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC