
### Part 1
<b>And if</b> the witness <b>is a Torah scholar,</b> then <b>even</b> if the litigant <b>himself</b> jogged the witness’s memory, the witness may testify. A Torah scholar would not testify if he did not actually remember the testimony himself, <b>as</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>involving Rav Ashi, who knew testimony</b> relating <b>to Rav Kahana.</b> Rav Kahana <b>said to</b> Rav Ashi: <b>Does the Master remember this testimony?</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him: No.</b> Rav Kahana said to him: <b>Didn’t</b> the incident transpire in <b>such and such</b> a manner? Rav Ashi <b>said to him: I don’t know. Ultimately, Rav Ashi remembered</b> the testimony and <b>testified for</b> Rav Kahana. <b>He saw that Rav Kahana was hesitant [<i>meḥassem</i>]</b> with regard to accepting his testimony, concerned that he had influenced the content of Rav Ashi’s testimony. Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Do you think</b> that <b>I am relying on you? I made an effort, and I remembered</b> the incident.

### Part 2
§ Apropos recalling testimony, the Gemara adds that <b>we learned there</b> in a mishna (<i>Oholot</i> 16:2): <b>Mounds of dirt that are near either to a city or a path, whether</b> these mounds <b>are new or whether</b> they are <b>old, are ritually impure</b> due to the concern that a corpse is buried there. With regard to <b>the</b> mounds <b>that are distant</b> from the city: If they are <b>new</b> they are <b>ritually pure,</b> as, were there a corpse buried there, someone would remember, and if they are <b>old</b> they are <b>impure.</b> The mishna elaborates: <b>What is</b> a mound that is <b>near?</b> It is one at a distance of up to <b>fifty cubits. And what is</b> a mound that is <b>old?</b> It is one that was there for more than <b>sixty years;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> A mound that is <b>near</b> is one that there is <b>no</b> mound <b>closer than it. Old</b> is referring to a mound <b>that no one remembers.</b> According to Rabbi Yehuda, the parameters are not quantifiable.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is a city and what is a path</b> in this context? <b>If you say city means an actual city and a path is an actual path</b> and the mishna is referring to any city or path, the question arises: <b>Do we presume</b> the existence of <b>ritual impurity</b> in Eretz Yisrael? <b>But didn’t Reish Lakish say</b> in explaining how the Sages, based on meager proof, deemed an area in Eretz Yisrael ritually pure where uncertainty arose with regard to its purity: <b>They found a pretext and deemed Eretz Yisrael ritually pure.</b> Apparently, one does not presume ritual impurity in Eretz Yisrael. Why, then, does the mishna declare that every mound of dirt near a city or a path is impure? <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> The word <b>city</b> in the mishna is referring to <b>a city adjacent to the cemetery, and</b> the word <b>path is</b> referring to the <b>path</b> leading <b>to the cemetery.</b> Therefore, the concern that a corpse may be buried in the mound is a reasonable one.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to a mound located adjacent to <b>the path</b> leading <b>to the cemetery,</b> there is concern that a corpse is buried in the mound, <b>as sometimes one happens</b> to go to bury the corpse on Shabbat eve <b>at twilight,</b> and to avoid desecrating Shabbat, <b>it happened that they buried</b> the corpse <b>in a mound</b> on the path. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>a city adjacent to the cemetery, everyone goes to the cemetery</b> to bury their dead. Why would anyone bury a corpse in a mound adjacent to the city?

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> The mounds could be impure, <b>since women bury their stillborn</b> babies adjacent to the city, as there is no funeral in that case, <b>and</b> because those <b>afflicted with boils</b> bury <b>their arms</b> that withered and fell from their bodies. <b>Until</b> a distance of <b>fifty cubits</b> from the city, the woman <b>goes alone</b> and buries the stillborn in a mound. <b>More</b> than that distance, <b>she takes a person with her,</b> as she fears going alone, <b>and she goes to the cemetery. Therefore, we are not presuming</b> the existence of <b>ritual impurity in Eretz Yisrael.</b> The case of the mounds is an exception, as there is basis for deeming them impure.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: Conclude from</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who established a time limit beyond which a mound is considered an old mound, that with regard to <b>testimony, until sixty years</b> have passed, it is <b>remembered,</b> and if <b>more</b> than sixty years have passed, it is <b>not remembered. And</b> the Gemara rejects that conclusion: <b>That is not</b> so. <b>There,</b> with regard to the mounds, <b>it is</b> a case <b>where</b> responsibility to attest to the status of the mound <b>was not imposed upon him,</b> and the matter is forgotten after the passage of sixty years. <b>However, here,</b> with regard to testimony in general, <b>since</b> responsibility to testify <b>was imposed upon him,</b> he remembers the testimony <b>even</b> after <b>a greater</b> period of time than sixty years has passed.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>this</b> witness whose name is signed on a document <b>says:</b> This is <b>my handwriting and this is the handwriting of my fellow</b> witness, <b>and that</b> witness <b>says: This is my handwriting and that is the handwriting of my fellow</b> witness, <b>these</b> witnesses <b>are deemed credible</b> and the document is ratified, as together they provide testimony authenticating both signatures. If <b>this</b> witness <b>says: This is my handwriting, and that</b> witness <b>says: This is my handwriting,</b> and neither testifies with regard to the signature of the other, <b>they must add another</b> witness <b>with them</b> who will authenticate the signatures of the two witnesses, as otherwise, each of the witnesses would be testifying with regard to half the sum in the document; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: They need not add another</b> witness <b>with them. Rather, a person is deemed credible to say: This is my handwriting.</b> The testimony of the two signatories about their own signatures is sufficient.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara says: <b>When you analyze</b> the reasoning for the opinions of the <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>say</b> that according <b>to</b> the <b>statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC