
### Part 1
but <b>there,</b> with regard to the blemishes specified in the mishna, <b>if she says: I</b> want <b>to be with him, we leave her</b> alone with him and do not force a divorce, whereas <b>here,</b> in the case of a woman who has not given birth, <b>even though she says: I</b> want <b>to be with him, we do not leave her</b> alone, as her husband is neglecting the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> there is the case of a husband <b>afflicted with boils, where even though she says: I</b> want <b>to be with him, we do not leave her</b> alone with him. <b>As we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>Apart from</b> a situation where her husband is <b>afflicted with boils, because</b> it <b>consumes</b> his flesh. <b>And</b> yet this <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught</b> in the same mishna as the others, which indicates that our above analysis is incorrect.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: Even so, there is a difference between these cases, as <b>there,</b> with regard to a man with boils, <b>if she says: I</b> am willing to <b>live with him</b> under the supervision <b>of witnesses;</b> that is, I will not seclude myself with him but I will nevertheless remain his wife, <b>we leave her</b> alone. However, <b>here, even though she says: I</b> will <b>live with him</b> under the supervision <b>of witnesses, we do not leave her</b> alone, but rather force him to divorce her.

### Part 3
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei said: A certain Elder from</b> among <b>the residents of Jerusalem told me</b> that there <b>are twenty-four</b> types of patients <b>afflicted with boils, and</b> with regard to <b>all of them the Sages said</b> that <b>sexual relations are harmful to them, and</b> those <b>afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i>,</b> a severe skin disease characterized by extreme weakness and trembling, <b>are harmed</b> even more <b>than all of the</b> others. The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> and how does this disease <b>come about?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>who let blood and</b> immediately afterward <b>engaged in sexual relations will have weak</b> [<b><i>vitaykin</i></b>] <b>children.</b> If <b>both of them let blood and</b> then <b>engaged in sexual relations, he will have children afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i>. Rav Pappa said</b> in response: <b>We said</b> this <b>only if he did not taste anything</b> between bloodletting and intercourse, <b>but</b> if <b>he tasted something we have no</b> problem <b>with it,</b> as it is not dangerous.

### Part 4
The Gemara inquires: <b>What are the symptoms</b> of <i>ra’atan</i>? <b>His eyes water, his nose runs, drool comes out of his mouth, and flies rest upon him.</b> The Gemara further inquires: <b>And what is his cure</b> to remove the insect found in his head, which is associated with this illness? <b>Abaye said:</b> One takes <b><i>pila</i> and ladanum</b> [<b><i>lodana</i></b>], which are types of grasses; <b>and the ground shell of a nut; and shavings of smoothed hides; and artemisia [<i>kelil malka</i>]; and the calyx of a red date palm. And</b> one <b>cooks them together and brings</b> the patient <b>into a marble house,</b> i.e., one that is completely sealed. <b>And if there is no marble house</b> available, the one performing the treatment <b>brings</b> the patient <b>into a house</b> whose walls have the thickness <b>of seven bricks and</b> one <b>small brick.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> the one performing the treatment <b>pours three hundred cups</b> of this mixture <b>on</b> the patient’s <b>head until his skull is soft, and</b> then he <b>tears</b> open the patient’s skull <b>to</b> expose <b>his brain, and brings four myrtle leaves and lifts up each</b> time <b>one foot</b> of the insect that is found on the patient’s brain, <b>and places one</b> leaf under each foot of the insect so as to prevent it from attempting to cling to his brain when it is forcibly removed, <b>and</b> subsequently <b>takes</b> it <b>with tweezers. And</b> he then <b>burns</b> the insect, <b>because if</b> he does <b>not</b> burn it, it <b>will return to him.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> would <b>announce: Be careful of the flies</b> found <b>on those afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i>,</b> as they are carriers of the disease. <b>Rabbi Zeira would not sit</b> in a spot where the <b>wind</b> blew from the direction of someone afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i>. <b>Rabbi Elazar would not enter</b> the <b>tent</b> of one afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i>, and <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi would not eat eggs from an alley</b> in which someone afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i> lived. Conversely, <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> would <b>attach himself</b> to <b>them and study Torah, saying</b> as justification the verse: “The Torah is <b>a loving hind and a graceful doe”</b> (Proverbs 5:19). <b>If</b> it <b>bestows grace on those who learn it,</b> does <b>it not protect</b> them from illness?

### Part 7
<b>When</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>was</b> on the verge of <b>dying, they said to the Angel of Death: Go</b> and <b>perform his bidding,</b> as he is a righteous man and deserves to die in the manner he sees fit. The Angel of Death <b>went</b> and <b>appeared to him.</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>said to him: Show me my place</b> in paradise. <b>He said to him: Very well.</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>said to him: Give me your knife</b> that you use to kill mortals, <b>lest you frighten me on the way. He gave it to him. When he arrived there,</b> in paradise, <b>he lifted</b> Rabbi Yehoshua so he could see his place, and <b>he showed it to him.</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>jumped</b> and <b>fell into that</b> other <b>side,</b> thereby escaping into paradise.

### Part 8
The Angel of Death <b>grabbed him by the corner of his cloak.</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>said to him: I swear that I will not come</b> with you. <b>The Holy One, blessed be He, said: If he</b> ever in his life <b>requested</b> dissolution <b>concerning an oath</b> he had taken, <b>he must return</b> to this world with the Angel of Death, as he can have his oath dissolved this time also. <b>If</b> he did <b>not</b> ever request dissolution of an oath, he need <b>not return.</b> Since Rabbi Yehoshua had in fact never requested dissolution of an oath, he was allowed to stay in paradise. The Angel of Death <b>said to him:</b> At least <b>give me my knife</b> back. However, he <b>did not give</b> it <b>to him,</b> as he did not want any more people to die. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said to him: Give</b> it <b>to him, as</b> it <b>is necessary to</b> kill <b>the created</b> beings; death is the way of the world. <b>Elijah</b> the Prophet <b>announced before him: Make way for the son of Levi, make way for the son of Levi.</b>

### Part 9
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>went</b> and <b>found</b> in paradise <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai sitting on thirteen golden stools [<i>takhtekei</i>].</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai <b>said to him: Are you the son of Levi? He said to him: Yes.</b> Rabbi Shimon said to him: Was <b>a rainbow</b> ever <b>seen in your days? He said: Yes.</b> Rabbi Shimon retorted: <b>If so, you are not the son of Levi,</b> as he is a completely righteous man. During the lifetimes of completely righteous people no rainbows are visible, as they are a sign that the world deserves to be destroyed by a flood; whereas the merit of the righteous protects the world from such things. The Gemara comments: <b>And that is not so, for there was no</b> rainbow seen <b>at all</b> during the lifetime of Rabbi Yehoshua, <b>but</b> he <b>thought: I do not want to take credit for myself</b> by presenting myself as such a righteous person.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates a similar incident: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa was a friend</b> of the Angel of Death and would see him frequently. <b>When</b> Rabbi Ḥanina <b>was</b> on the verge of <b>dying, they said to the Angel of Death: Go</b> and <b>perform his bidding. He went before him and appeared to him. He said to</b> the angel: <b>Leave me</b> for <b>thirty days until I have reviewed my studies, for they say: Happy is he who comes here,</b> to paradise, <b>with his learning in his hand. He left him,</b> and <b>after thirty days he</b> again <b>went</b> and <b>appeared to him. He said to</b> the Angel of Death: <b>Show me my place</b> in paradise. <b>He said to him: Very well.</b> Rabbi Ḥanina <b>said to him: Give me your knife, lest you frighten me on the way.</b> The Angel of Death <b>said to him:</b> Do <b>you wish to do to me as your friend</b> Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi did, and escape?

### Part 11
<b>He said to him: Bring a Torah scroll and see: Is there anything written in it that I have not fulfilled?</b> I am therefore worthy of entering Paradise alive, as did Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi. <b>He said to him: But did you attach yourself to those afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i> and study Torah,</b> as he did? The Gemara comments: <b>And even so,</b> despite the fact that he was not equal to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, <b>when he passed away a pillar of fire separated him from everyone. And</b> it <b>is learned</b> as a tradition <b>that a pillar of fire separates</b> in this manner <b>only for one in a generation or for two in a generation.</b>

### Part 12
Due to the pillar of fire they could not go near Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa to attend to his burial. <b>Rabbi Alexandri approached him</b> and <b>said: Make</b> the pillar of fire disappear <b>in honor of the Sages.</b> He did <b>not pay attention</b> to him. He said: <b>Make</b> it go away <b>in honor of your father.</b> Again he did <b>not pay attention</b> to him. Finally he said: <b>Make</b> it go away <b>in your own honor,</b> at which point the pillar <b>disappeared. Abaye said:</b> The purpose of the pillar of fire is <b>to exclude</b> him <b>from</b> the company of <b>those who have not fulfilled even one letter</b> of the Torah. <b>Rav Adda bar Mattana said to him:</b> It comes <b>to exclude</b> him <b>from the Master</b> himself, <b>who does not have a guardrail for his roof.</b> Rav Adda bar Mattana took this opportunity to rebuke Abaye. The Gemara comments: <b>And that is not so</b> as he in fact <b>did have</b> a guardrail, <b>but the wind had</b> just <b>blown it off at that time.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: For what reason are there no people afflicted with <i>ra’atan</i> in Babylonia? Because</b> the Babylonians <b>eat beets [<i>teradin</i>] and drink beer made from the <i>hizmei</i></b> plant. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: For what reason are there no lepers in Babylonia? Because they eat beets, drink beer, and bathe in the waters of the Euphrates,</b> all of which are good for the body.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC