
### Part 1
The Gemara relates: <b>Ravnai, brother of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, happened to</b> come and <b>sell sesame, and he said</b> that <b>this</b> is what <b>Shmuel said: A witness and a judge join</b> together to testify. <b>Ameimar said: How excellent is this <i>halakha</i>. Rav Ashi said to Ameimar: Due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> Rami bar Ḥama, <b>father of your mother, praised it, you also praise</b> [<b><i>mekallesat</i></b>] <b>it? Rava already refuted</b> that statement and proved it incorrect.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Safra said</b> that <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Yitzhak bar Shmuel bar Marta said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said;</b> and some say that <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>three</b> judges <b>who convened to ratify a document,</b> and <b>two</b> of them <b>recognize the signatures of the witnesses</b> on the document, <b>and one does not recognize</b> them; <b>as long as</b> the two judges <b>did not</b> yet <b>sign</b> to ratify the document, they <b>testify</b> and authenticate the signatures <b>before</b> the third judge, and based on that testimony, the third judge <b>signs</b> the document of ratification together with the first two judges. However, <b>once</b> the two judges <b>signed</b> the ratification, <b>they may not testify before him and</b> have him <b>sign</b> the ratification. The formula of the ratification is: We verified and ratified this document in a forum of three. Since when the first two judges signed the ratification, they were not a forum of three, the ratification is invalid.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And do we write</b> the ratification of a document before all of the judges verify the signatures of the witnesses? <b>But didn’t Rav Pappi say in the name of Rava: This ratification of judges that was written before the witnesses related</b> testimony <b>about their signatures is invalid,</b> even if the witnesses later authenticate their signatures, as <b>it seems like a lie,</b> since when they drafted the ratification they were not yet aware that they would be able to ratify the document? <b>Here too,</b> when the judges drafted the ratification before the third judge can verify the signatures, <b>it seems like a lie.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> emend the statement and <b>say: As long as</b> the two judges <b>did not</b> yet <b>write</b> the ratification of the document, they <b>testify</b> and authenticate the signatures <b>before</b> the third judge, and based on that testimony, the third judge <b>signs</b> the ratification together with the first two judges. However, <b>once</b> the two judges <b>have written</b> the ratification, <b>they may not testify before him and</b> have him <b>sign</b> the ratification.

### Part 5
The Gemara notes: <b>Conclude from</b> the statement of Rav Huna <b>three</b> <i>halakhot</i>: <b>Conclude from it that a witness</b> can <b>become a judge,</b> as the two judges who testified to authenticate the signatures signed the ratification as judges and were not disqualified due to a conflict of interest. <b>And conclude from it</b> that <b>judges who recognize the signatures of</b> the <b>witnesses do not require</b> other witnesses <b>to testify before them. And conclude from it</b> that in cases involving <b>judges who do not recognize the signatures of the witnesses,</b> witnesses <b>are required to testify before each and every one of them,</b> and no judge may issue a ruling based on testimony brought before the other judges.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi</b> strongly <b>objects</b> to the conclusions drawn by the Gemara. <b>Granted,</b> the fact that <b>a witness</b> can <b>become a judge we</b> can <b>conclude from</b> the statement of Rav Huna. <b>However,</b> the fact that <b>judges who recognize the signatures of witnesses do not require</b> other witnesses <b>to testify before them</b> cannot be concluded from the statement of Rav Huna. <b>Perhaps, I will say to you</b> that <b>actually</b> judges <b>require</b> witnesses to testify before them; <b>and here,</b> in this case, <b>it is different, as</b> the requirement of the <b>statement</b> of testimony <b>is fulfilled with</b> the testimony of the two judges before the <b>one</b> judge who did not recognize the signatures. However, in a case where there is no statement of testimony at all, there could be no ratification of the document.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> furthermore, with regard to the conclusion that in cases of <b>judges who do not recognize the signatures of the witnesses,</b> witnesses <b>are required to testify before each and every one</b> of them, <b>perhaps, I will say to you</b> that <b>actually,</b> in general, witnesses <b>are not required</b> to testify before each and every judge; <b>and here,</b> in this case, <b>it is different, as</b> were it not for the testimony of the two judges before the third judge, the requirement of the <b>statement</b> of testimony would <b>not be fulfilled</b> at all. In a case where there is other testimony, perhaps one may rely on the knowledge of others in order to ratify the document.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Abba sat and stated this <i>halakha</i> that a witness</b> can <b>become a judge. Rav Safra raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Abba</b> from a mishna (<i>Rosh HaShana</i> 25b): If <b>three</b> people <b>saw</b> the new moon <b>and they</b> constitute <b>a court, two</b> of them <b>should stand and seat two of their colleagues</b> to sit <b>near</b> the remaining <b>individual</b> judge. <b>And</b> the two <b>should testify before</b> the three judges, <b>and they should</b> then <b>recite</b> the standard formula for sanctifying the month: <b>Sanctified is the month, sanctified.</b> Two others must join the original judge to form a tribunal of three judges, <b>as an individual</b> judge <b>is not deemed credible</b> to sanctify the month <b>by himself. And if it enters your mind</b> to say <b>that a witness</b> can <b>become a judge, why do I</b> need <b>all this? Let</b> the three judges remain <b>seated in their place and sanctify</b> the month, as they can be both witnesses and judges.

### Part 9
Rabbi Abba <b>said to</b> Rav Safra: That mishna <b>was difficult for me</b> to understand <b>as well, and I asked Rav Yitzḥak bar Shmuel bar Marta</b> about <b>it, and Rav Yitzḥak</b> asked <b>Rav Huna, and Rav Huna</b> asked <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav, and Ḥiyya bar Rav</b> asked <b>Rav, and</b> Rav <b>said to them: Leave</b> the case of <b>testimony</b> to sanctify <b>the month, as</b> it is mandated <b>by Torah</b> law, and the guidelines are more stringent, <b>and</b> the requirement of <b>ratification of documents is</b> mandated <b>by rabbinic</b> law, where the guidelines are more lenient. In that case a witness can become a judge.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> In the case of <b>three</b> judges <b>who convened</b> as a tribunal <b>to ratify a document, and</b> a person <b>raised a challenge</b> with regard to the fitness <b>of one of them</b> to serve as a judge, thereby preventing ratification of the document, <b>as long as they did not</b> yet <b>sign</b> the ratification, the other two judges <b>may testify about</b> the acceptability of the judge whose fitness was challenged, and <b>he</b> then <b>signs</b> the ratification. However, <b>once they signed</b> the ratification, <b>they may no</b> longer <b>testify about his</b> fitness <b>and</b> thereby enable him to <b>sign</b> the ratification. Once they sign, their testimony is no longer impartial because there is a conflict of interest as they seek to avoid being associated with a tribunal tainted by an unfit judge.

### Part 11
The Gemara elaborates: With regard to <b>a challenge of what</b> sort was this <i>halakha</i> stated? <b>If</b> it was <b>a challenge</b> based on an allegation <b>of theft,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC