
### Part 1
<b>And</b> the principle is that <b>one who admits</b> that he is liable to pay <b>a fine is exempt.</b> Since the man would not have been liable to pay even if he had admitted his guilt, his denial of guilt is not considered a denial of monetary liability, and even if he swears falsely that he is not liable, he still does not become liable to bring an offering. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>when</b> the father <b>claims</b> payment in court, it is the compensation for the <b>humiliation and degradation</b> that <b>he claims.</b> His main focus is not on the fine, and therefore the denial refers to a regular monetary claim.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: If this explanation is correct, <b>with regard to what do</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree? Rav Pappa said: Rabbi Shimon holds</b> that <b>a person does not leave</b> aside <b>something that</b> is <b>fixed,</b> e.g., a fine, <b>and claim something that</b> is <b>not fixed,</b> e.g., the compensation for humiliation and degradation, which need to be assessed by the court. Consequently, a claim of rape is essentially a demand for the fine. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>the Rabbis hold</b> that <b>a person does not leave</b> aside <b>something that, if</b> the defendant <b>admits to it, he is not exempt</b> from payment, e.g., humiliation and degradation, <b>and claim something that, if</b> the defendant <b>admits to it, he is exempt</b> from payment. Consequently, they contend that the lawsuit is mainly focused on the compensation for the humiliation and degradation.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rabbi Avina raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> With regard to <b>a daughter who is sustained by</b> her <b>brothers,</b> i.e., an orphan whose brothers provide her with her sustenance from their father’s estate, in accordance with the stipulation in the marriage contract between their parents that requires the father to pay for his daughter’s sustenance from his property, <b>to whom do her earnings</b> belong?

### Part 4
Rabbi Avina explains the sides of the dilemma. One might say that the brothers <b>stand in place of</b> the <b>father: Just as there,</b> if their father is alive, <b>her earnings</b> go <b>to the father, here too her earnings</b> go <b>to the brothers. Or perhaps</b> this is <b>not similar</b> to the case of a living <b>father.</b> Why not? Because <b>there, she is sustained from his</b> own property, and therefore he is entitled to receive her earnings, whereas <b>here, she is not sustained from their</b> possessions but from the estate of their father, and consequently they should not receive her earnings.

### Part 5
Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: You</b> already <b>learned</b> the answer to this dilemma from a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 81a): <b>A widow is sustained from the property of the orphans, and her earnings are theirs.</b> This indicates that although a widow receives her sustenance from the estate of her deceased husband, in accordance with the stipulations of the marriage contract, the orphans are nevertheless entitled to her earnings. The same reasoning should apply to an orphan sustained by her brothers.

### Part 6
The Gemara refutes this argument: <b>Are</b> the two situations <b>comparable?</b> In the case of <b>his widow,</b> the deceased <b>is not</b> necessarily <b>amenable</b> to <b>her</b> living <b>in comfort.</b> Consequently, she is entitled only to the minimum guaranteed to her in the marriage contract, while her earnings go to his heirs. Conversely, with regard to <b>his daughter, he is amenable</b> and is interested <b>in her</b> living in <b>comfort,</b> and therefore he allows her to retain her earnings so that she can have the extra money.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that</b> the welfare of <b>his daughter is</b> more <b>preferable to him than</b> that of <b>his widow? But didn’t Rabbi Abba say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei said:</b> The Sages <b>established</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a widow with regard to the daughter,</b> who is also entitled to sustenance from the estate, <b>like</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a daughter with regard to</b> the <b>brothers in</b> a case of <b>a small estate</b> that is insufficient for the livelihoods of both the girl and her brothers?

### Part 8
Rabbi Abba explains: <b>Just as</b> in the case of <b>a daughter with regard to</b> the <b>brothers,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>the daughter is sustained</b> from the father’s estate, <b>and</b> if <b>the brothers</b> have nothing to eat they must go and <b>beg</b> for charity <b>at</b> people’s <b>doors, so too,</b> in the case of <b>a widow with regard to the daughter, the widow is sustained and the daughters beg</b> for charity <b>at</b> people’s <b>doors.</b> This indicates that a man is more concerned for his widow than his daughter. The Gemara explains: The two cases are not comparable. <b>With regard to degradation, one’s widow is preferable to him,</b> i.e., if one of them must be forced to go around requesting handouts, a man would rather it be his daughter than his widow. By contrast, <b>with regard to comfort,</b> the comfort of <b>his daughter is</b> more <b>preferable to him</b> than that of his widow.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yosef raised an objection</b> to Rav Sheshet’s conclusion that the orphan girl’s earnings belong to the brothers, from the mishna: With regard to <b>her earnings and</b> the lost <b>items</b> that <b>she</b> has <b>found, although she has not collected</b> them, if <b>the father died, they</b> belong to <b>her brothers.</b> Rav Yosef infers: <b>The reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i> is that she acquired her earnings <b>in</b> her <b>father’s lifetime,</b> which indicates that the money she earns <b>after the father’s death</b> belongs <b>to her. What, is it not</b> referring even <b>to</b> a daughter <b>who is sustained</b> from his estate? The Gemara refutes this claim: <b>No,</b> it deals <b>with</b> a daughter <b>who is not sustained</b> from his property but who sustains herself through her own earnings.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the mishna is speaking <b>of</b> one <b>who is not sustained</b> from his estate, <b>what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> this? It is obvious that this is the <i>halakha</i>, as <b>even according to the one who said</b> that <b>a master can say to</b> his <b>slave: Work for me but I will not feed you,</b> i.e., a master is not legally obligated to provide sustenance to his slave, <b>this applies only to a Canaanite slave, with regard to whom it is not written</b> in the Torah: <b>“With you,”</b> and therefore his master is not obligated to feed him.

### Part 11
<b>However,</b> in the case of <b>a Hebrew slave, as it is written with regard to him: “With you”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:16), which indicates that he is entitled to live with his master as an equal, the master <b>may not</b> compel the slave to serve him unless he feeds him. <b>All the more so</b> concerning <b>his daughter,</b> it cannot be the case that this young woman has to work and give her wages to the brothers if they are not obligated to sustain her at the same time.

### Part 12
<b>Rabba bar Ulla said:</b> It is <b>necessary only for the surplus.</b> The mishna is not stating that the brothers take her earnings and do not sustain her, leaving her with nothing. Rather, the question concerns a young woman whose earnings provide her with more than she needs for her sustenance, leaving her with a surplus. It is this surplus that belongs to her brothers. <b>Rava said</b> in response to Rabba bar Ulla’s explanation: Is it possible that <b>a man</b> as <b>great as Rav Yosef does not know that there is</b> an explanation according to which the mishna is referring to the <b>surplus, and</b> in his ignorance <b>he raises a refutation</b> against Rav Sheshet? This certainly cannot be the case.

### Part 13
<b>Rather, Rava said: The mishna itself</b> poses <b>a difficulty to</b> the opinion of Rav Sheshet, and this difficulty led <b>Rav Yosef</b> to his conclusion. This is <b>as</b> the mishna <b>teaches: Her earnings and</b> the lost <b>items</b> that <b>she</b> has <b>found, although she has not collected</b> them. Rava analyzes this statement: With regard to <b>items</b> that <b>she</b> has <b>found, from whom does she collect</b> them? The concept of collecting is inappropriate in this case.

### Part 14
<b>Rather, is it not</b> the case that <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>said: Her earnings</b> are <b>like items she</b> has <b>found: Just as items she</b> has <b>found in</b> her <b>father’s lifetime</b> belong <b>to</b> her <b>father,</b> and <b>after the father’s death</b> they belong <b>to her, so too,</b> the same rule applies to <b>her earnings as well: In the father’s lifetime,</b> they go <b>to the father,</b> and <b>after the father’s death</b> they belong <b>to her,</b> even when she is sustained from the inheritance. The Gemara concludes: We can <b>learn from this</b> inference that the mishna deals with her earnings themselves, not their surplus, in contrast to the interpretation of Rav Sheshet.

### Part 15
This <i>halakha</i> <b>was also stated</b> by <i>amora’im</i>, as <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> In the case of <b>a daughter who is sustained by the brothers, her earnings</b> nevertheless belong <b>to her. Rav Kahana said: What is the reason</b> for this? <b>As it is written</b> with regard to slaves: <b>“And you may make them an inheritance for your sons after you”</b> (Leviticus 25:46), from which it is inferred: It is <b>them,</b> slaves alone, that you bequeath <b>to your sons, and</b> you do <b>not</b> bequeath <b>your daughters to your sons.</b> This verse <b>teaches that a man does not bequeath a right</b> that he has over his <b>daughter to his son.</b> All the rights a man possesses over his daughter are personal rights, which are not transferable by inheritance.

### Part 16
<b>Rabba</b> strongly <b>objects to this</b> explanation that the verse is referring to a man’s rights to his daughter’s earnings: <b>But</b> one can <b>say</b> that <b>the verse is speaking of the</b> fine that a father is paid in the case of the <b>seduction of</b> his <b>daughter, and</b> the <b>fines</b> paid to him if she is raped, <b>and</b> compensation due to him for <b>injuries</b> that she suffered, and the verse indicates that these rights are not bequeathed to his heirs. <b>And Rav Ḥanina likewise</b> explicitly <b>taught</b> that <b>the verse is speaking of</b> payments a father is paid in the case of <b>the seduction of</b> his <b>daughter, and</b> the <b>fines</b> due to him if she is raped, <b>and</b> compensation for <b>injuries</b> she has suffered.

### Part 17
The Gemara questions this interpretation: With regard to <b>injuries, they are</b> the result of <b>her bodily pain,</b> and the guiding principle is that any compensation for a daughter’s physical pain does not belong to her father, who merely keeps it in trust for her. If so, the category of injuries should not have been included in this list. <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC