
### Part 1
<b>I heard</b> that with regard to the widow of <b>any</b> family <b>that has none of these</b> uncertainties associated with it, <b>one</b> allows <b>her to marry</b> members of <b>the priesthood.</b> The only uncertainty where this ruling applies is in the case of uncertain <i>ḥalal</i> status.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says in the name of Rabbi Meir, and likewise Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya would say in accordance with his statement: Who is the widow</b> whose late husband was a member <b>of a</b> priestly <b>family of questionable lineage?</b> It is a widow who marries into <b>any</b> family in <b>which</b> a person with regard to whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> whether or not he is a <b><i>ḥalal</i> was assimilated</b> among its members. Therefore, she is referred to as a widow of dough [<i>issa</i>]. Just as dough is the result of a mixture of several ingredients, this family too has a person with regard to whom there is uncertainty whether he is a <i>ḥalal</i> mixed within it.

### Part 3
The reason for the distinction between uncertain <i>ḥalal</i> status and uncertain <i>mamzer</i> status is that <b>Jews identify the <i>mamzerim</i> that are among them,</b> and there is no concern lest they assimilate into families of unflawed lineage. <b>But they do not identify the <i>ḥalalin</i> among them.</b> Therefore, there is concern lest a <i>ḥalal</i> assimilate into the family.

### Part 4
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Who is the widow</b> whose late husband was a member <b>of a</b> priestly <b>family of questionable lineage?</b> It is one who married into <b>any</b> family <b>that does not have</b> the status of being unfit, <b>neither due to</b> uncertain <b><i>mamzer</i> status, nor due to</b> uncertain <b>Gibeonite status, nor due to</b> uncertain status as <b>slaves of kings.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>However,</b> if it is due to uncertain <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> status, her marriage to a priest is deemed <b>fit.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>these</b> flaws in lineage, uncertain <i>mamzer</i> status and Gibeonite status, which render her unfit to marry a priest <b>by Torah</b> law? <b>A <i>ḥalal</i></b> also renders her unfit <b>by Torah</b> law. <b>And furthermore,</b> the <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Meir said: I heard</b> that with regard to the widow of <b>any</b> family <b>that has none of these</b> uncertainties associated with it, <b>one marries her to</b> members of <b>the priesthood. That is</b> identical to the opinion of the <b>first <i>tanna</i>.</b> If there is uncertainty with regard to one in the late husband’s family that he is a <i>mamzer</i> or a Gibeonite, she is unfit to marry a priest; if the uncertainty is with regard to <i>ḥalal</i> status, she is fit to marry a priest. What novel element does Rabbi Meir introduce?

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And furthermore, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says in the name of Rabbi Meir, and likewise, Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya would say in accordance with his statement: Who is the widow</b> whose late husband was a member <b>of a</b> priestly <b>family of questionable lineage?</b> It is a widow who marries into <b>any</b> family in <b>which</b> a person with regard to whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> whether or not he is a <b><i>ḥalal</i> was assimilated.</b> Because <b>Jews identify the <i>mamzerim</i> that are among them</b> there is no concern that they will assimilate into families of unflawed lineage, <b>but</b> Jews <b>do not identify the <i>ḥalalin</i> among them.</b> Due to the concern that a <i>ḥalal</i> assimilated into the family, the widow is unfit to marry a priest. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you say</b> in <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> that if there is uncertainty whether or not a <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> was assimilated among its members, her marriage to a priest is deemed <b>fit?</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The case of one who when called <b><i>mamzer</i> screams</b> and protests that he is being slandered, <b>and</b> when called <b><i>ḥalal</i> is silent, is</b> the subject of the dispute <b>between</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> in the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds: Anyone who</b> when others <b>call him unfit and he is silent, is unfit,</b> as his silence confirms the allegation. <b>And this is what the first <i>tanna</i> is saying: Who is the widow</b> whose late husband was a member <b>of a</b> priestly <b>family of questionable lineage,</b> who is fit to marry a priest? It is one who married into <b>any</b> family <b>that has neither</b> unfitness due to <b>silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>mamzer</i> status, nor silence</b> in response to allegations of <b>Gibeonite status, nor silence</b> in response to allegations that they are <b>slaves of kings, nor silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> status. Only a woman who was married into a family that protested in response to all these allegations is fit to marry a priest.

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Meir is saying to him:</b> Specifically, each of <b>those</b> silent in response to allegations of <i>mamzer</i> or Gibeonite status or allegations that they are slaves of kings are rendered unfit <b>because these</b> allegations <b>render him unfit</b> to marry <b>into the congregation</b> of Israel. <b>However,</b> despite <b>silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> status, her marriage to a priest is deemed <b>fit. And</b> the fact <b>that he is silent is due to his indifference,</b> as even were he deemed a <i>ḥalal</i> the only restriction would be with regard to marriage to priests.

### Part 9
<b>And Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar is saying to the first <i>tanna</i></b> who quoted <b>Rabbi Meir</b> as saying: I heard, etc. <b>If you heard that Rabbi Meir deems</b> her marriage to a priest <b>fit, in</b> a case of <b>silence</b> in response to allegations, it is <b>not</b> in a case <b>where they called him <i>ḥalal</i> and he is silent; rather,</b> it is in a case <b>where they call him <i>mamzer</i> and he is silent.</b> In that case, the reason <b>he is silent</b> is <b>that he holds:</b> The fact that one is <b>a <i>mamzer</i></b> generates <b>publicity,</b> and since he is not reputed to be a <i>mamzer</i>, he is indifferent to the allegation. <b>However,</b> in a case where he is called <b><i>mamzer</i> and he screams</b> in protest, or where he is called <b><i>ḥalal</i> and he is silent, he is unfit. And</b> the fact <b>that he is silent</b> and does not protest <b>is</b> because <b>he holds:</b> It is <b>sufficient for him that they do not expel him from the congregation</b> of Israel.

### Part 10
The Gemara notes: <b>It is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Despite the fact that with <b>silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>mamzer</i></b> one is <b>fit; silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> renders one <b>unfit. It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: Despite the fact that with <b>silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>ḥalal</i></b> one is <b>fit; silence</b> in response to allegations of <b><i>mamzer</i></b> renders one <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara explains: The contradiction between the <i>baraitot</i> is <b>not difficult. This</b> second <i>baraita</i> is the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i> in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that silence in response to allegations of <i>ḥalal</i> does not render one unfit. And <b>this</b> first <i>baraita</i> is the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that silence in response to allegations of <i>mamzer</i> is motivated by indifference and does not render him unfit; however, silence in response to allegations of <i>ḥalal</i> is an indication that the allegations are true and he is unfit.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yosei said:</b> There was <b>an incident involving a young girl who descended to fill</b> her jug with <b>water from the spring, and she was raped,</b> and the identity of the rapist was unknown. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri said: If the majority of the people of the city marry</b> their daughters <b>to</b> members of the <b>priesthood, this young girl may be married to</b> a member of the priesthood.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: In accordance with whose</b> opinion is it <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri stated</b> his opinion? <b>If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel, even in</b> a case where <b>the majority</b> of the people <b>are</b> of <b>flawed lineage as well, he deems</b> her <b>fit</b> to marry into the priesthood. <b>If</b> it is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua, even in</b> a case where <b>the majority</b> of the people <b>are</b> of <b>unflawed lineage, he deems</b> her <b>unfit</b> to marry into the priesthood. Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> Rava that <b>this</b> is what <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC