
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: The Sages <b>were assiduous?</b> It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Due to what</b> reason <b>did</b> the Sages in the mishna <b>say</b> that <b>a virgin is married on Wednesday?</b> It is so <b>that if</b> the husband <b>had a claim concerning</b> the bride’s <b>virginity, he would go early</b> the next day <b>to court</b> and make his claim. The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>But</b> if that is the reason, <b>let her marry on Sunday, as</b> then too, <b>if</b> the husband <b>had a claim concerning</b> the bride’s <b>virginity, he would go early</b> the next day <b>to court</b> and make his claim. The Gemara answers: The Sages <b>were assiduous in seeing to the well-being of Jewish women</b> and preferred Wednesday, <b>so that</b> the husband <b>would exert</b> himself <b>in</b> arranging <b>the</b> wedding <b>feast for three days, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, and on Wednesday, he marries her.</b>

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And from</b> the time of <b>danger and onward, the people adopted the custom to marry on Tuesday</b> as well, <b>and the Sages did not reprimand them. And on Monday one may not marry</b> even in time of danger. <b>However, if it is due to the coercion,</b> it is <b>permitted.</b> The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>One isolates the groom from the</b> virgin <b>bride,</b> so that he will not engage in intercourse with her for the <b>first</b> time <b>on Shabbat evening, because</b> by rupturing the hymen <b>he inflicts a wound,</b> which is a labor prohibited on Shabbat.

### Part 3
The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is</b> the <b>danger</b> mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If we say</b> it is referring to a situation where the government <b>said that a virgin who is married on Wednesday will be executed,</b> would the response be merely <b>that they adopted the custom</b> to marry on Tuesday? <b>Let them</b> totally <b>abolish</b> the ordinance to marry on Wednesday in the face of life-threatening danger.

### Part 4
<b>Rabba said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a period where the government <b>said that a virgin who is married on Wednesday will</b> submit to <b>intercourse with the prefect [<i>hegmon</i>] first.</b> The Gemara questions the formulation of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Is that</b> characterized as <b>danger? It is coercion.</b> The Gemara answers: There is also danger involved, <b>as there are virtuous women who give their lives</b> rather than allow themselves to be violated, <b>and they will come to</b> mortal <b>danger.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if so, <b>let</b> the Sages <b>instruct</b> these women <b>that</b> in cases of <b>coercion</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to submit to violation rather than sacrifice their lives, and they will not be forbidden to their husbands. The Gemara answers: The Sages cannot issue an instruction of that sort, because <b>there are licentious women</b> who would exploit the situation to engage in intercourse willingly, rendering them forbidden to their husbands. <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>there are also</b> women married to <b>priests,</b> who are rendered forbidden to their husbands even if they are raped.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the Sages completely <b>abolish</b> the ordinance to marry on Wednesday and establish marriage on a different day. The Gemara answers: <b>A decree of religious persecution [<i>shemada</i>] is likely to be abrogated, and we do not abolish a rabbinic ordinance in the face of a decree of religious persecution.</b> Rather, a lenient ruling is issued instructing them not to follow the ordinance, as long as the decree of persecution is in effect. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> what is accomplished by moving the marriage to Tuesday? The prefect <b>will come on Tuesday too,</b> to violate them. The Gemara answers: The date of the marriage is not fixed, and <b>for</b> a situation of <b>uncertainty</b> the prefect will not <b>uproot himself</b> to violate the bride.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And on Monday one may not marry</b> even in time of danger. <b>However, if it is due to the coercion, it is permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the <b>coercion</b> mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If we say it is referring to that which we mentioned</b> with regard to the decree of <i>prima nocta</i> it is difficult, as <b>there</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>calls it danger, and here he calls it coercion. Furthermore, there</b> it says that they <b>adopted the custom</b> to marry on Tuesday; <b>here</b> it states that it is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava said:</b> Coercion refers to a case <b>where they said: A general</b> and his army <b>are coming to the city</b> on Wednesday, and the concern is that the troops will appropriate the supplies for the feast. <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is a situation <b>where</b> the general <b>comes and passes</b> through, <b>let</b> them <b>postpone</b> the wedding until the following week. <b>Rather, it is necessary</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the general only in a case <b>where he comes and establishes</b> himself there. The Gemara asks: <b>In any case, let one marry on Tuesday.</b> Why does the <i>baraita</i> permit marrying on Monday? The Gemara answers: It was necessary to move the wedding to Monday because <b>his entourage [<i>asperava</i>] arrives on Tuesday.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>Due to the coercion?</b> It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If one’s bread was baked, and his animal slaughtered, and his wine diluted,</b> and all preparations for the wedding feast were complete, <b>and the father of the groom or the mother of the bride died</b> before the wedding, then before burying the deceased, which would trigger the onset of mourning, <b>one moves the corpse into a room, and the bride and groom</b> are ushered <b>to the wedding canopy</b> and they are married.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC