
### Part 1
the <b>son-in-law pledges</b> according to the amount of the dowry that the bride brings, <b>he pledges one-fifth less</b> in the marriage contract, which is the actual value of the property.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> to expand upon the mishna’s statement that the father is not required to give the second son-in-law the gift that he promised the first son-in-law, as follows. <b>The Sages taught: Needless to say,</b> this ruling applies when the <b>first</b> is <b>a Torah scholar and</b> the <b>second</b> is <b>an ignoramus,</b> since the father-in-law has a reason to refuse to give the second a dowry like the first. <b>But even</b> if the <b>first</b> is <b>an ignoramus and</b> the <b>second</b> is <b>a Torah scholar,</b> the father-in-law <b>may say: To your brother, I wanted to give</b> this dowry, but <b>to you I do not want to give</b> it, since the obligation incurred was to a specific individual.

### Part 3
The mishna discusses the relationship between the value of the dowry the bride brings in and the amount of money the groom records in the marriage contract, and various examples are illustrated, e.g., if the woman <b>pledged to bring him one thousand</b> dinars. The Gemara asks: <b>These</b> latter examples in the mishna <b>are the same as the first clause of the mishna,</b> and they all illustrate the same financial conditions. Why was it not sufficient to mention only the case of the thousand dinars? The Gemara explains: The <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> about <b>a large appraisal</b> of her substantial property, <b>and he</b> also <b>teaches</b> about <b>a small appraisal</b> in a case where she has minimal property, to illustrate that there is no halakhic difference between them. Similarly, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> about the husband’s own <b>appraisal</b> of how to assess how much she must provide, <b>and he</b> also <b>teaches</b> about the wife’s own initial <b>appraisal</b> that she did and the corresponding amount that he must write.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>she pledged to bring him money</b> and not articles to serve as a dowry, <b>her <i>sela</i>,</b> i.e., four dinars, <b>becomes six</b> dinars with respect to the husband’s obligation in the marriage contract. This follows the standard outlined in the previous mishna: The groom increases his obligation by one half since he will profit from this money. Additionally, the <b>groom accepts upon himself</b> to give <b>ten</b> dinars <b>to the account</b> for her needs, <b>for each and every hundred dinars</b> that she brings. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Everything</b> is <b>in accordance with the regional custom.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Concerning the first clause, that her <i>sela</i> becomes six dinars, the Gemara asks: <b>This is</b> identical to that which was taught in the previous mishna, that if she brings one thousand dinars in her dowry, <b>he pledges against them fifteen hundred dinars.</b> Why does the mishna cite another example to demonstrate the same principle?

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: The <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> about <b>large</b> investment <b>capital</b> and <b>taught</b> about <b>small</b> investment <b>capital. And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to relate to both situations, <b>because if he taught</b> only the case of <b>large capital, which</b> has <b>abundant profit,</b> you might think that only then does the husband add one-half. <b>However,</b> for <b>small capital, which</b> has <b>small profit,</b> you could <b>say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> to also state the principle in this mishna. <b>And</b> conversely, <b>if</b> the <i>tanna</i> had <b>taught us</b> only about <b>small capital,</b> then you might think that <b>because</b> it has <b>little expense,</b> one must add a half. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>large capital,</b> for <b>which</b> there is <b>abundant expense,</b> you could <b>say</b> that the husband need <b>not</b> add as much. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> to state both cases to teach that the husband adds one-half to the sum in any case.

### Part 7
The mishna states that the <b>son-in-law accepts upon himself</b> to give <b>ten dinars to the account.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is this <b>account? Rav Ashi said:</b> It is <b>an account</b> for expenses <b>of perfumes</b> and cosmetics. <b>And Rav Ashi said: This statement was said only</b> for women <b>in Jerusalem,</b> where the women are accustomed to using an abundance of perfume.

### Part 8
According to the mishna, the husband must give ten dinars for each and every hundred dinars that she brings. <b>Rav Ashi raises a dilemma:</b> Does this speak <b>of</b> each <b>hundred dinars that are appraised</b> in her dowry, <b>or of</b> each <b>hundred dinars that are accepted</b> by the husband in the marriage contract, which is the appraisal reduced by one-fifth?

### Part 9
<b>If you say</b> that the mishna speaks of each <b>hundred dinars that is accepted,</b> is the intent that he gives a one-time sum only on the <b>first day or</b> on <b>each day? If you say</b> that he gives it <b>every day,</b> does he give it only the <b>first week</b> of marriage <b>or each week? If you say</b> he gives it <b>each week,</b> does he give it only the <b>first month or each month? If you say</b> he gives it <b>each month,</b> does he give it only the <b>first year</b> of marriage <b>or each year?</b> The Gemara does not determine how the calculation must be rendered and with what frequency the husband is required to provide for her cosmetics, and the dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> There was <b>an incident involving</b> the <b>daughter of Nakdimon ben Guryon. When the Sages designated for her four hundred gold</b> coins <b>for her account of perfumes,</b> from her late husband’s estate, <b>for</b> use <b>on that same day, she</b> blessed them and <b>said to them: This</b> is how <b>you</b> should also <b>pledge for your</b> own <b>daughters, and they answered after her: Amen.</b>

### Part 11
Apropos the daughter of Nakdimon ben Guryon, the Gemara relates what later became of her: <b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai. When he was riding on a donkey and leaving Jerusalem, and his students were walking after him</b> to learn from him, <b>he saw a certain young woman who was gathering barley from among the dung of the animals of Arabs.</b> She was so poor that she subsisted on the undigested barley within the dung. <b>When she saw him, she wrapped herself in her hair,</b> as she had nothing else with which to cover herself, and <b>stood before him.</b>

### Part 12
<b>She said to him: My teacher, sustain me.</b> He did not recognize her, so <b>he said to her: My daughter, who are you? She said to him: I am</b> the <b>daughter of Nakdimon ben Guryon. He said to her: My daughter, the money of your father’s household, where did</b> it <b>go?</b> How did you become so poor? <b>She said to him: My teacher, is it not</b> that they <b>say such a proverb in Jerusalem: Salt for money is lacking [<i>ḥaser</i>]?</b> There is nothing with which to preserve it and prevent it from being lost. <b>And some say</b> the proverb asserts that <b>kindness [<i>ḥesed</i>]</b> is salt for money, i.e., using money for acts of kindness preserves it. He continued to ask her: <b>And</b> the money <b>of your father-in-law’s house,</b> which was used properly, for benevolent acts, <b>where is it? She said to him: This one came and destroyed that one;</b> all the money was combined, and it was all lost together.

### Part 13
<b>She said to him: My teacher,</b> do <b>you remember when you signed on my marriage contract? He said to his students: I remember that when I signed on the marriage contract of this</b> woman, <b>and I read in it,</b> it listed <b>a thousand thousands,</b> i.e., one million <b>gold dinars</b> as a dowry <b>from her father’s house, aside from that</b> which was promised her <b>from her father-in-law. Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai cried and said: How fortunate are you, Israel,</b> for <b>when</b> Israel <b>performs the will of</b> the <b>Omnipresent, no nation or tongue</b> can <b>rule over them; and when</b> Israel <b>does not perform the will of the Omnipresent, He delivers them into the hand of a lowly nation. Not</b> only are they delivered <b>into the hand of a lowly nation, but even into the hand of the animals of a lowly nation,</b> as in the pitiful instance of Nakdimon’s daughter.

### Part 14
The recorded incident implies that Nakdimon lost all of his wealth after having failed to use it for acts of kindness. The Gemara asks: <b>And did not Nakdimon ben Guryon perform charity? Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They said about Nakdimon ben Guryon</b> that <b>when he would leave his home</b> to go <b>to the study hall,</b> there were <b>fine woolen garments</b> his attendants <b>would</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC