
### Part 1
<b>Because Rav Zevid is a great man,</b> and due to his piety and humility he would not challenge the ruling, <b>you twist the judgment against him? Didn’t Rav Kahana say: Rava raises a dilemma</b> with regard to this issue <b>and did not resolve</b> it, so how did you rule that she may retain her worn clothes? The Gemara summarizes: <b>Now that it was not stated</b> and concluded <b>this way or that way, if she seized</b> an item of her possessions, <b>we do not take it away from her,</b> but if she <b>did not seize</b> it, <b>we do not give</b> it to <b>her.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara adds another <i>halakha</i> with regard to a rebellious woman: <b>And we delay her bill of divorce</b> for <b>twelve months</b> of <b>the year</b> and do not give her a bill of divorce until then. <b>And during those twelve months</b> of <b>the year she does not</b> receive <b>sustenance from</b> her <b>husband.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Tuvi bar Kisna said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The court <b>writes a letter of rebellion about a betrothed woman</b> who is rebelling against her husband. This letter is a court order to deduct value from the marriage contract. <b>But it does not write a letter of rebellion about a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i></b> who does not want to enter into levirate marriage. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>It is the same to me</b> if she is <b>a betrothed woman or a married woman,</b> and <b>even</b> if she is <b>a menstruating woman,</b> and <b>even</b> if she is <b>ill, and even</b> if she is <b>a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as the contradiction can be resolved in the following way: <b>Here,</b> where there is no distinction between a betrothed woman and a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>, it refers to a case where <b>he asked</b> to marry <b>her</b> and she is refusing; <b>there,</b> where there is a distinction, the case is where <b>she asked</b> to marry <b>him</b> and he is refusing. <b>As Rav Taḥalifa bar Avimi said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: If he asked,</b> the court <b>responds to his</b> request and gives her the status of a rebellious woman, <b>but if she asked, it does not respond to her</b> request and does not add to her marriage contract.

### Part 5
The Gemara inquires: <b>In what</b> manner <b>did you establish that which Shmuel</b> said, that one writes a letter of rebellion about a betrothed woman but not about a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>? <b>If</b> it is a situation where <b>she asked</b> to marry him and he did not want, then why phrase <b>this:</b> The court <b>writes a letter of rebellion about a betrothed woman,</b> which indicates that the bill is written against her. It <b>should have</b> said instead: Write a letter of rebellion <b>for a betrothed woman,</b> meaning it is written on her behalf against her husband. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as the text is imprecise. <b>Teach</b> the statement instead this way: <b>For a betrothed woman.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>,</b> for whom a letter of rebellion is not written against her husband? <b>Because we say to her: Go away; you are not commanded</b> to procreate. Therefore, although she cannot get married, he cannot be compelled to perform an act that the Torah does not specifically command him to perform. The Gemara challenges this answer: If this is the reasoning, then in the case of <b>a betrothed woman, too, let us say to her: Go away; you are not commanded. Rather,</b> the case where a letter of rebellion is issued must be referring to a woman who <b>comes with a claim, saying: I want a staff in</b> my <b>hand and a hoe for burial,</b> i.e., I want children who will support me in my old age and attend to my burial after my death. This claim is valid, and therefore the court issues a letter of rebellion against the husband.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>So too here,</b> if she is <b>a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i> who comes with a claim,</b> why shouldn’t the court listen to her? <b>Rather,</b> the Gemara retracts the explanation that she asked him to marry her. Instead, say that both <b>this and that</b> are discussing situations <b>where he asks</b> her and she rebels, and the question from the <i>baraita</i> on Shmuel’s statement is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that said that the court writes a letter of rebellion about a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>, is referring to a case where the <i>yavam</i> asked her <b>to perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> and she refused. <b>There,</b> Shmuel’s statement that the court does not write it, is referring to a case where he asked <b>to consummate the levirate marriage, as Rabbi Pedat said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: If</b> the <i>yavam</i> <b>asked her to perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> and she refused, the court <b>responds to him. If he asked to perform levirate marriage,</b> the court <b>does not respond to him.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> with regard to the request <b>to consummate the levirate marriage, that</b> if a woman refuses the court <b>does not</b> write a letter of rebellion against her? <b>Because we say to him: Go and marry another woman.</b> He is not required to marry her specifically, if she does not agree to the marriage. Therefore, her refusal is not deemed rebellion. The Gemara challenges that answer: If so, with regard to a request <b>to perform <i>ḥalitza</i> also, let us say to him: Go and marry another woman.</b> The difference between the two cases is still not clear.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that the reason is because <b>he says: Since she is attached to me they will not give me another</b> wife. As long as he has not performed <i>ḥalitza</i>, he may have a problem finding another wife, as a potential wife will be concerned that he has a woman attached to him and may eventually enter levirate marriage with him. This is a valid claim, and therefore the court writes a letter of rebellion against her if she refuses <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>here too,</b> when she refuses a request to consummate the levirate marriage, he may say: <b>Since she is attached to me they will not give me another.</b> Why then doesn’t the court write a letter of rebellion in this case? <b>Rather,</b> one must say that <b>this and that</b> are both discussing a case <b>where he asked to consummate the levirate marriage. And it</b> is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in Shmuel’s statement, where the court writes a letter of rebellion, it is <b>in accordance</b> with <b>the first mishna. There,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, where it doesn’t write one, it is <b>in accordance</b> with <b>the ultimate</b> version of the <b>mishna.</b>

### Part 11
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 13a): <b>The mitzva of levirate marriage precedes the mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> This <i>halakha</i> <b>originally</b> applied <b>when</b> people <b>would intend</b> to perform the levirate marriage <b>for the sake of the mitzva.</b> At that time, it was customary to compel a woman to enter levirate marriage. If she refused, the court wrote a letter of rebellion about her. However, <b>now that</b> people <b>do not intend</b> to enter levirate marriage <b>for the sake of the mitzva,</b> but may have other intentions, the Sages <b>said: The mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i> precedes the mitzva of levirate marriage.</b> Shmuel’s statement that the court does not write a letter of rebellion about a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i> is in accordance with the ultimate version of the mishna.

### Part 12
§ The mishna asks: <b>Until when does he reduce</b> her marriage contract? And in that context it states that, according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, the sums involved are calculated in <i>terapa’ikin</i> and not in dinars. The Gemara asks: <b>What are <i>terapa’ikin</i>? Rav Sheshet said: An <i>asteira</i>,</b> a small coin. <b>And how much is an <i>asteira</i>? A half of a dinar. This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Three <i>terapa’ikin</i>, which are nine <i>ma’as</i>, a <i>ma’a</i> and a half for each day,</b> multiplied by six for the six days of the week.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosef said to Shmuel: What is different</b> when she is the one rebelling against <b>him, that we give him</b> compensation <b>for Shabbat,</b> as her marriage contract is reduced by seven dinars a week, which is one dinar per day including Shabbat, and <b>what is different</b> for <b>her that we do not give her</b> compensation <b>for Shabbat</b> but rather only for six days? The Gemara explains: When it is <b>she who</b> is fined and her marriage contract <b>is reduced,</b> it <b>does not appear to be Shabbat wages,</b> money paid for services rendered on Shabbat, which is prohibited. Whereas when it is <b>he who</b> is fined and compelled to <b>add</b> additional money every day to her marriage contract,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC