
### Part 1
<b>Rather, Ulla derives</b> the fact that one pays and is not flogged by means of a verbal analogy between the terms <b>for</b> and <b>for.</b> The verse <b>states</b> with regard to rape: “And the man who lay with her shall give to the father of the young woman fifty shekels of silver, and to him she shall be as a wife, <b>because [<i>taḥat</i>] he tormented her”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:29), <b>and it states there,</b> with regard to injury: <b>“An eye for [<i>taḥat</i>] an eye”</b> (Exodus 21:24). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to injury, one <b>pays money</b> and <b>is not flogged,</b> so too, in <b>any</b> case <b>where there is</b> liability to both pay <b>money and</b> receive <b>lashes,</b> one <b>pays money</b> but <b>is not flogged.</b>

### Part 2
§ In proposing a different resolution to the apparent contradiction between the mishna here that rules that one pays a fine for raping his sister and the mishna in <i>Makkot</i> that rules that one is flogged in that case, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even if you say</b> that both <i>mishnayot</i> are referring to <b>his sister</b> who is <b>a young woman, there</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the witnesses <b>forewarned him,</b> and therefore the rapist is flogged; <b>here,</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the witnesses <b>did not forewarn him.</b> Since no lashes are administered without forewarning, the rapist pays the fine.

### Part 3
The Gemara observes: <b>Apparently, Rabbi Yoḥanan maintains</b> that in <b>any</b> case <b>where there is</b> liability to both pay <b>money and</b> receive <b>lashes, and</b> the witnesses <b>forewarned him, he is flogged</b> but does not <b>pay money.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where does Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> derive <b>this</b> principle? The Gemara explains that he derives it from that which <b>the verse states</b> with regard to one sentenced to lashes in the court: “The judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before him, <b>according to the measure of his wickedness”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:2), from which it is inferred: <b>For one</b> act of <b>wickedness,</b> i.e., punishment, <b>you can render him liable, but you cannot render him liable for two</b> acts of <b>wickedness. And juxtaposed to</b> this it states: <b>“Forty he shall strike him”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:3), indicating that the punishment that is administered when one is liable to receive two punishments is lashes and not payment.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what of the case of <b>one who injures another where there is</b> liability to both pay <b>money and</b> receive <b>lashes,</b> in which case one <b>pays money</b> but <b>is not flogged? And lest you say</b> that <b>this applies only when</b> the witnesses <b>did not forewarn him, but if they forewarned him</b> before he struck his friend he <b>is flogged</b> but <b>does not pay money, didn’t Rabbi Ami say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If one <b>struck</b> another with <b>a blow that</b> does <b>not</b> cause damage that amounts to <b>the value of a <i>peruta</i>,</b> he is <b>flogged?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of that case? <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where</b> the witnesses <b>did not forewarn him, why is he flogged?</b> No lashes are administered without forewarning. <b>Rather, obviously</b> it is a case <b>where they forewarned him, and the reason</b> he is flogged is that <b>there is not</b> damage that amounts to <b>the value of a <i>peruta</i>.</b> The damages are not quantifiable. The Gemara infers: However, if <b>there is</b> damage that amounts to <b>the value of a <i>peruta</i>,</b> he <b>pays money</b> and <b>is not flogged,</b> even though he was forewarned.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers that the fact that conspiring witnesses pay money can be explained <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Rabbi Ile’a said</b> in a different context: <b>The Torah explicitly amplified</b> the case of <b>conspiring witnesses</b> to include liability <b>for payment.</b> The Torah employed language indicating that conspiring witnesses who testified falsely in order to render one liable for payment must pay the sum and are not flogged. <b>Here, too,</b> with regard to injury, <b>the Torah explicitly amplified</b> the case of <b>one who injures another</b> to include liability <b>for payment.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And where is this</b> statement <b>of Rabbi Ile’a stated?</b> The Gemara answers that it is stated <b>concerning this</b> mishna (<i>Makkot</i> 4a). If witnesses said: <b>We testify that so-and-so owes another two hundred dinar, and</b> these witnesses <b>were discovered</b> to be <b>conspiring</b> witnesses; <b>they are flogged and pay, as the source [<i>shem</i>] that brings them to</b> liability to receive <b>lashes does not brings them to</b> liability for <b>payment.</b> Each liability has an independent source; the source for lashes is: “You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor,” while the source for payment is: “You shall do unto him as he conspired” (Deuteronomy 19:19). This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Anyone who pays is not flogged.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> with regard to that mishna, the Gemara asks: <b>Let us say,</b> on the contrary, that <b>anyone who is flogged does not pay. Rabbi Ile’a said: The Torah explicitly amplified</b> the case of <b>conspiring witnesses for payment,</b> not lashes. The Gemara asks: <b>Where did the Torah amplify</b> the case of conspiring witnesses? The Gemara explains: <b>Now, since it states</b> with regard to conspiring witnesses: <b>“And you shall do unto him as he conspired to do unto his brother”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:19); <b>why do I</b> require the Torah to state in his punishment: <b>“A hand for a hand”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:21)? This indicates that the punishment that takes precedence is one in which there is <b>an item that is given from hand to hand, and what is that</b> item? It is <b>money.</b>

### Part 7
The same can be said with regard to <b>one who injures another. Now, since it states:</b> “And a man who places a blemish upon his counterpart, <b>as he has done so shall be done to him”</b> (Leviticus 24:19), <b>why do I</b> require the Torah to state: “As one who places a blemish upon a man, <b>so shall be placed [<i>yinnaten</i>] upon him”</b> (Leviticus 24:20)? This teaches that this is referring to <b>an item that involves giving [<i>netina</i>], and what is that</b> item? It is <b>money.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> the same <i>halakha</i> <b>as Ulla,</b> that where there is liability to both pay money and receive lashes, one pays money but is not flogged? The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> if that were the case, <b>you have rendered moot</b> the prohibition <b>“The nakedness of your sister…you shall not uncover”</b> (Leviticus 18:9) in that contrary to the standard prohibitions, no lashes would be administered for its violation.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC