
### Part 1
<b>And Rav Sheshet, son of Rav Idi, says: Conclude from the statement of Rav Kahana</b> that <b>witnesses who said: Our statement was</b> a statement of <b>trust,</b> and the document we signed was a document of trust, <b>are not deemed credible. What is the reason? Since</b> that document <b>is an injustice, they</b> would <b>not sign</b> a document of <b>injustice.</b> Their contention that they signed the document would incriminate them and is therefore not accepted.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It is prohibited for a person to keep a repaid document within his house, due to</b> the fact <b>that the verse states:</b> “And <b>let not injustice dwell in your tents”</b> (Job 11:14). Even if he does not use the document to collect payment, the concern is that it might fall into the hands of one who will use it illegally to collect payment. <b>In the West,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say in the name of Rav:</b> With regard to the first half of the verse: <b>“If iniquity be in your hand, put it far away”</b> (Job 11:14), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>a document of trust and a document of security [<i>passim</i>].</b> With regard to the second half of the verse: <b>“And let not injustice dwell in your tents,” this</b> is referring to <b>a repaid document.</b>

### Part 3
They note: With regard to <b>the one who said</b> that <b>a repaid document</b> is the injustice referred to in the verse, <b>all the more so a document of trust</b> is an injustice and may not be kept, as a document of trust is fundamentally false. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the one who said</b> that a <b>document of trust</b> is the injustice referred to in the verse, <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>a repaid document,</b> perhaps it is permitted to keep it, <b>as, at times</b> people <b>keep it</b> and do not return it to the borrower. This is because in those cases it serves as security <b>for the coins of the scribe,</b> whose fee has not yet been paid by the borrower, who is legally responsible to pay the scribe for writing the document.

### Part 4
On a similar note <b>it is stated,</b> with regard to keeping items with potential to lead to transgression: With regard to a Torah <b>scroll that is not proofread</b> and therefore contains errors, <b>Rabbi Ami says: It is permitted to keep it</b> without emending the mistakes for <b>up to thirty days,</b> and <b>from that time onward it is prohibited to keep it, as it is stated:</b> “And <b>let not injustice dwell in your tents”</b> (Job 11:14).

### Part 5
§ <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>witnesses who say: Our statement was</b> a statement of <b>trust</b> and we signed a document of trust, <b>are not deemed credible.</b> Similarly, witnesses who said: <b>Our statement was</b> a statement accompanied by <b>a declaration</b> by the person who is rendered a debtor by this document that he was coerced into the agreement, thereby invalidating the document, <b>are not deemed credible. Mar bar Rav Ashi said</b> that witnesses who said: <b>Our statement was</b> a statement of <b>trust, are not deemed credible,</b> but witnesses who said: <b>Our statement was</b> a statement accompanied by <b>a declaration, are deemed credible. What is the reason</b> for the difference between the cases? <b>This</b> document, which was accompanied by a declaration, <b>may be written,</b> as it is written under duress. <b>And this</b> document of trust <b>may not be written,</b> as it is fundamentally unjust.

### Part 6
<b>Rava raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman:</b> In a case where the witnesses say: <b>Our statement was a conditional</b> statement, i.e., they verify their signatures, but add that the transaction was contingent upon fulfillment of an unwritten condition, <b>what is</b> the ruling? Perhaps it is similar to the cases of a statement accompanied by a <b>declaration and</b> a statement of <b>trust.</b> In those latter cases, <b>this is the reason</b> that their statement is rejected, <b>as</b> in doing so <b>they undermine the document, and</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>too, he undermines the document. Or perhaps a condition is a different matter,</b> as it does not necessarily undermine the document. Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: When</b> people <b>come before us for judgment</b> in this latter case, <b>we say to them: Go and fulfill your conditions, and</b> then <b>descend</b> before us <b>for judgment.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: What is the ruling in a case where one <b>witness says:</b> There is a <b>condition</b> attached to the transaction <b>and</b> one <b>witness says: There is no condition? Rav Pappa says: Both are testifying that it is a valid document, and that</b> witness <b>who says:</b> There was a <b>condition</b> attached, <b>is</b> only <b>one</b> witness whose testimony challenges that validity. <b>And the statement of one</b> witness <b>has no</b> validity <b>in a place</b> where there are <b>two</b> witnesses.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua,</b> strongly <b>objects to this: If</b> it is <b>so</b> that testifying that there is a condition is considered to undermine the document, then <b>even</b> if <b>both</b> of the witnesses testify that there was a condition, their testimony should <b>also</b> not be accepted. Once they testified that the document is valid, they cannot give additional testimony that contradicts their original testimony. <b>Rather, we say: These</b> two witnesses <b>are coming to undermine their testimony</b> that the document is valid. These are not two separate testimonies, one that the document is valid and one with regard to the condition. Rather, the second testimony revokes the first. Similarly, <b>this</b> single witness <b>is coming to undermine his testimony as well.</b> Therefore, there is only one witness testifying that the document is valid. The Gemara concludes: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua,</b> and the testimony of even one witness who says that there was a condition attached to the transaction is accepted.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>two</b> witnesses were <b>signatories on a document and they died, and two</b> strangers <b>from the marketplace came and said: We know that this is their handwriting, but they were coerced</b> into signing the document, <b>or</b> if they said that <b>they were minors</b> when they signed the document, or if they said that <b>they were disqualified witnesses</b> when they signed the document, <b>these</b> strangers <b>are deemed credible,</b> as the mouth that prohibited and ratified the document is the mouth that permitted and undermined the document. <b>However, if there are</b> other <b>witnesses</b> who testify <b>that it is their handwriting, or if their handwriting emerges from another place, from a document that one challenged and</b> that <b>was deemed valid in court, these</b> witnesses from the marketplace are <b>not deemed credible</b> and their testimony does not undermine the validity of the document.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if the testimony of these witnesses is not accepted, is that to say <b>that we collect</b> debts with that document <b>as</b> one would collect debts <b>with a valid document? And why</b> would that be the case? <b>Aren’t</b> the <b>two</b> signatories whose signatures were ratified <b>and</b> the <b>two</b> witnesses from the marketplace whose testimony invalidates the document contradictory witnesses? Therefore, the document cannot be used to collect payment.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Sheshet said: That is to say</b> that <b>contradiction</b> of their testimony <b>is the first</b> stage in <b>rendering</b> them <b>false, conspiring witnesses,</b> in the sense that certain restrictions that apply to the latter apply to the former as well.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC