
### Part 1
intercourse with women for which one is <b>liable for</b> violating a <b>positive</b> mitzva, e.g., <b>an Egyptian</b> convert <b>and an Edomite</b> convert (see Deuteronomy 23:8–9). If he raped a first- or second-generation Egyptian or Edomite convert, even Rabbi Yeshevav agrees that the child is not a <i>mamzer</i>, as the betrothal takes effect. On the other hand, it is prohibited for him to sustain her as a wife.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> works out <b>well according to Rabbi Yeshevav if he is coming to reject the opinion of Rabbi Simai.</b> If Rabbi Yeshevav merely takes issue with Rabbi Simai, who said that all offspring of forbidden relations are <i>mamzerim</i> according to Rabbi Akiva except for those resulting from relations between a widow and a High Priest, then it may <b>well</b> be explained that Rabbi Yeshevav holds that Rabbi Akiva rules that betrothal does not take effect and that there is <i>mamzerut</i> when one violates the prohibitions of the priesthood. <b>However, if he is stating his own opinion,</b> independent of Rabbi Simai’s statement, his ruling is more comprehensive and leads to the conclusion that in the case of relations with <b>anyone who does not have</b> the possibility of permitted <b>relations among the Jewish people, the child is a <i>mamzer</i>, and</b> this is true <b>even</b> of women for relations with whom one is <b>liable for</b> violating <b>positive</b> mitzvot, e.g., Egyptian or Edomite converts. In that case, <b>what is</b> the difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Shimon HaTimni and Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> in the case of <b>a non-virgin</b> raped <b>by a High Priest. And</b> the Gemara asks: Here, too, she is a woman for relations with whom one is liable for violating a positive mitzva, as the High Priest fails to fulfill the mitzva “But a virgin of his own people shall he take to wife” (Leviticus 21:14). If Rabbi Akiva rules that betrothal does not take effect when a positive mitzva is violated, <b>what is different</b> about this case? The Gemara answers: It is different <b>because it is a positive</b> mitzva <b>whose</b> application <b>is not equal for all.</b> There are two lenient aspects to this mitzva: It is a positive mitzva and not a prohibition, and it applies only to the High Priest and not to all Jews. Even Rabbi Yeshevav would agree that according to Rabbi Akiva, a child born from relations between a High Priest and a non-virgin is not a <i>mamzer</i>. However, the High Priest may not sustain the woman as his wife. Therefore, this case is the practical difference between the statements of Shimon HaTimni and Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Everyone agrees with regard to one who engaged in</b> forced <b>intercourse with a menstruating woman that he pays</b> the <b>fine.</b> He elaborates: <b>According to the one who says</b> that the criterion is whether <b>there is betrothal,</b> for <b>this</b> woman <b>too there is betrothal. According to the one who says</b> that the criterion is whether the woman is <b>suitable for</b> him to <b>sustain, this</b> woman <b>is suitable for</b> him to <b>sustain.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> the mishna’s ruling that one who has relations with his sister is liable to pay the fine comes <b>to exclude</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Neḥunya ben HaKana, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Neḥunya ben HaKana would render Yom Kippur like Shabbat with regard to payment</b> for damages. <b>Just as</b> one who intentionally desecrates <b>Shabbat is liable to</b> receive the <b>death</b> penalty <b>and</b> is therefore <b>exempt from</b> the obligation of <b>payment</b> for damages caused while desecrating Shabbat, <b>so too,</b> one who intentionally desecrates <b>Yom Kippur is liable to</b> receive the <b>death</b> penalty <b>and</b> is therefore <b>exempt from</b> the obligation of <b>payment</b> for damages caused while desecrating Yom Kippur.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Neḥunya ben HaKana? Abaye said: It states</b> the word <b>harm at the hands of man,</b> in the verse “But if any harm follow, then you shall give a soul for a soul” (Exodus 21:23) and <b>it states</b> the word <b>harm at the hand of Heaven,</b> in the verse in which Jacob states: “My son shall not descend with you…and harm befalls him on the way” (Genesis 42:38). <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>harm that is stated at the hands of man,</b> e.g., one who kills and is liable to be executed, one is <b>exempt from the</b> associated <b>payment, so too,</b> with regard to <b>harm that is stated at the hand of Heaven,</b> one is <b>exempt from the</b> associated <b>payment.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Adda bar Ahava</b> strongly <b>objects to this: From where</b> is it derived <b>that when Jacob is warning his sons</b> he is warning them <b>about cold and heat [<i>tzinim paḥim</i>], which are at the hand of Heaven? Perhaps</b> he was warning them <b>about a lion and thieves, which are</b> harm <b>at the hands of man,</b> meaning that unlike heat and cold, these dangers are not calibrated by God. The Gemara refutes this: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>Jacob warned</b> them <b>about this</b> harm at the hand of man, but <b>about that</b> harm at the hand of Heaven <b>he did not warn</b> them? <b>Jacob warned</b> them <b>about all</b> potentially harmful <b>matters</b> that might befall Benjamin, not merely one particular form of catastrophe.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And are cold</b> and <b>heat at the hand of Heaven? Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All</b> matters are <b>at the hand of Heaven except for cold</b> and <b>heat, as it is stated: “Cold</b> and <b>heat are on the path of the crooked, he who guards his soul shall keep far from them”</b> (Proverbs 22:5)? This indicates that cold and heat are forms of harm caused by man, from which one can protect himself. <b>And furthermore, are a lion and thieves</b> forms of harm <b>at the hands of man? But didn’t Rav Yosef say, and similarly,</b> didn’t <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teach</b> a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From the day that the Temple was destroyed, although the Sanhedrin was abolished</b> the <b>four death</b> penalties <b>were not abolished?</b> The Gemara asks: Were they <b>not abolished?</b> It is clear <b>that they were abolished,</b> as today there is neither Sanhedrin nor capital punishment. <b>Rather,</b> it means that although there are no court-imposed executions,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC