
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> is the <b>seizure</b> of a debtor’s assets by a creditor, though there are others who have a more immediate right to the assets, <b>not effective at all? Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman said: And this,</b> that Rabbi Akiva agrees that the seizure of assets is effective, is the case <b>provided that one seized</b> the property <b>from</b> the debtor while he was <b>alive.</b> However, after his death the assets belong to the heirs.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Tarfon,</b> who holds that whoever first takes possession of the produce has acquired it, <b>where was</b> this produce <b>placed?</b> The Gemara presents a dispute: There is the opinion of <b>Rav and Shmuel, who both say: And this,</b> that whoever first takes possession of the produce has acquired it, is the <i>halakha</i> <b>provided that</b> the produce is <b>arranged in a pile and placed in the public domain.</b> Since the public domain is not a suitable location for an act of acquisition, anyone can take the produce and acquire it. <b>However,</b> if it is situated <b>in an alley [<i>simta</i>],</b> a place adjacent to the public domain that is rarely frequented by the public, the produce does <b>not</b> belong to the first one who obtains it. Because an acquisition can be performed in an alley, any items that had belonged to the deceased are immediately acquired by the heirs. <b>And</b> there is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish, who both say: Even</b> if one seizes produce left <b>in an alley,</b> he acquires it.

### Part 3
The Gemara relates: There were <b>judges</b> who <b>judged</b> a case of this kind <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon, and Reish Lakish reversed their action.</b> He dismissed the judges’ decision and restored the money to the heirs, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> criticized his ruling and <b>said to him: You acted</b> in this case <b>like</b> one acts with regard to a ruling <b>of Torah</b> law, where any incorrect action taken by the court must be corrected.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that they disagree about this: That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that if one <b>erred in a matter</b> that appears in the <b>Mishna,</b> the decision is <b>revoked. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that if one <b>erred in a matter</b> that appears in the <b>Mishna,</b> the decision is <b>not revoked.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara refutes this suggestion: <b>No,</b> it can be explained that according to <b>everyone,</b> where the judge <b>erred in a matter</b> that appears in the <b>Mishna,</b> the decision is <b>revoked, and here they disagree about this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> in his disputes with <b>his colleague, but not</b> in his disputes with <b>his teacher,</b> and Rabbi Tarfon was Rabbi Akiva’s teacher. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva <b>even</b> in his disputes with <b>his teacher.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone</b> agrees that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> in his disputes with <b>his colleague but not</b> in his disputes with <b>his teacher. And here they disagree about this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that <b>Rabbi Tarfon was</b> Rabbi Akiva’s <b>teacher, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that Rabbi Tarfon <b>was his colleague.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone</b> agrees that Rabbi Tarfon <b>was</b> Rabbi Akiva’s <b>colleague, and here they disagree about this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that the principle that the law is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva <b>was stated</b> as the <b><i>halakha</i>. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that what <b>was stated</b> was that <b>one is inclined</b> to follow the opinion of Rabbi Akiva. Therefore, although Rabbi Akiva’s opinion is followed <i>ab initio</i>, the <i>halakha</i> was never established conclusively in accordance with it. As such, if judges went against the principle that the <i>halakha</i> follows Rabbi Akiva in opposition to his colleague, the Sages do not revoke their decision.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b>The relatives of Rabbi Yoḥanan seized a cow of orphans from an alley</b> because the orphans’ father owed them money. <b>They came before Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> for judgment, and <b>he said to them:</b> It <b>is well</b> that <b>you seized</b> the cow and it is yours, in accordance with the ruling of Rabbi Tarfon. <b>They</b> subsequently <b>came before Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish,</b> who <b>said to them: Go</b> and <b>return</b> the cow to the orphans. <b>They</b> again <b>came before Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> complaining that Reish Lakish had told them they must give back the cow, in opposition to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s ruling. <b>He said to them: What can I do, as one whose</b> stature <b>corresponds to my</b> stature <b>disagrees with me,</b> and I cannot dismiss his opinion.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates another incident: There was <b>a certain herdsman</b> caring for the cattle <b>of orphans from whom</b> a creditor <b>seized an ox</b> as payment for a debt of the orphans’ father. The <b>creditor said: I seized it from</b> the herdsman <b>while</b> the debtor was still <b>alive.</b> In such a case, the action is effective even according to Rabbi Akiva, as stated earlier. <b>And the herdsman said: He seized it after</b> the debtor’s <b>death. They came before Rav Naḥman</b> for a ruling. Rav Naḥman <b>said to</b> the herdsman: Do <b>you have witnesses that he seized</b> the ox <b>from you? He said to him: No.</b> Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b> In that case, <b>since</b> the claimant <b>can say: It</b> is <b>in my possession</b> because <b>it was purchased</b> by me, as there is no proof that he gained possession of the ox unlawfully, <b>he can also say: I seized it from</b> the herdsman <b>while</b> the deceased was still <b>alive.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Reish Lakish say</b> that <b>moving livestock,</b> e.g., sheep and oxen, provide <b>no presumption</b> of ownership to whoever is in possession of them? Since they wander from place to place, a person cannot claim that his mere possession of livestock demonstrates ownership, because it may have wandered into his property on its own. The Gemara answers: <b>An ox is different</b> from other livestock, <b>as</b> it <b>is handed over to a shepherd,</b> who does not let it wander off. Consequently, possession of an ox does establish a presumption of ownership.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates another incident: The members of <b>the house of the prince</b> of Eretz Yisrael <b>seized</b> hold of <b>a maidservant of orphans in an alley,</b> as payment for a debt owed to them by the orphans’ father. <b>Rabbi Abbahu and Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappi and Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa were sitting</b> as judges, <b>and Rabbi Abba was sitting with them.</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to them:</b> It <b>is well</b> that <b>you seized</b> the maidservant. <b>Rabbi Abba said to</b> the judges: Just <b>because they are</b> members of <b>the house of the prince, will you curry favor with them</b> by rendering an incorrect verdict? Isn’t it the <i>halakha</i> that there were <b>judges</b> who <b>judged</b> a case of this kind <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Tarfon, and Reish Lakish reversed their action,</b> indicating that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Tarfon?

### Part 12
The Gemara relates another incident: A man called <b>Yeimar bar Ḥashu was owed money by a certain man</b> who <b>died and left</b> behind <b>a boat.</b> Yeimar bar Ḥashu <b>said to his agent: Go</b> and <b>seize</b> the boat <b>for me.</b> The agent <b>went</b> and <b>seized it. Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, encountered him. They said to him: You are seizing</b> assets <b>for a creditor in a situation</b> where your action will cause <b>a disadvantage for others,</b> as the debtor owed money to other people as well. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that <b>one who seizes</b> assets <b>for a creditor in a situation</b> that will result in <b>a disadvantage for others</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC