
### Part 1
<b>And an epileptic is considered like a hidden blemish,</b> for it is possible that nobody is aware of her ailment. The Gemara comments: <b>And this applies</b> only <b>if</b> the sickness comes <b>at regular intervals,</b> as the woman and her family can conceal her illness. <b>But</b> if the attacks do <b>not</b> appear <b>at regular</b> intervals and can occur at any time, this <b>is considered like a visible blemish,</b> as it is impossible that her condition is unknown to others.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>a man who developed blemishes</b> after marriage, the court <b>does not force him to divorce</b> his wife. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said <b>with regard to minor blemishes. However, with regard to major blemishes,</b> which will be defined later in the Gemara, the court <b>does force him to divorce</b> her.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda teaches</b> the mishna in accordance with the version quoted above: The man <b>developed</b> blemishes after marrying his wife. Conversely, <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav teaches:</b> The man <b>had</b> blemishes prior to the marriage. The Gemara clarifies the difference between the two opinions: <b>The one who says</b> that the man who <b>developed</b> blemishes after marriage does not have to divorce his wife says that the same <i>halakha</i> applies <b>all the more so</b> to one who <b>had</b> blemishes beforehand, <b>as she was aware</b> of them <b>and accepted</b> them. However, <b>the one who says</b> that the mishna is referring to one who <b>had</b> blemishes prior to his marriage would say that only in that case he is not compelled to divorce her, <b>but</b> if <b>they developed</b> after the marriage this is <b>not</b> the <i>halakha</i>, as she did not marry him under such conditions.

### Part 4
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> This is said <b>with regard to minor blemishes, but with regard to major blemishes</b> the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> her. The Gemara poses a question: <b>Granted, according to the one who says</b> that the correct version is: <b>Developed</b> blemishes, <b>this is</b> the reason <b>that there is a difference between major and minor</b> blemishes, as only major blemishes are grounds for divorce. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that the correct version is: <b>Had</b> blemishes, <b>what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> whether they were <b>major</b> blemishes, and <b>what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> whether they were <b>minor</b> ones? Either way, <b>she was aware</b> of them <b>and accepted</b> them.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: In the case of major blemishes she can claim <b>that she</b> initially <b>thought that she could accept</b> a husband with such blemishes, <b>but now</b> that she is married she realizes that she <b>cannot accept</b> such an arrangement. The Gemara inquires: <b>And what are</b> these <b>major blemishes</b> of a husband that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel considers grounds for divorce? <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel explained: For example,</b> if <b>his eye was blinded,</b> or <b>his hand cut off, or his leg broken.</b>

### Part 6
<b>It was stated: Rabbi Abba bar Yaakov</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. Rava</b> said that <b>Rav Naḥman said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the statement of the Rabbis</b> that there is no difference between minor and major blemishes.

### Part 7
The Gemara poses a question: <b>And did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> actually <b>say so,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> follows Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel? <b>But Rabba bar bar Ḥanna said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Wherever Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel taught in our Mishna, the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with him, apart from</b> three cases: The <i>halakha</i> of <b>a guarantor</b> (<i>Bava Batra</i> 173b); the <i>halakha</i> he stated with regard to the divorce case in <b>Sidon</b> (<i>Gittin</i> 74a); and the <b>latter</b> of his disputes with the Rabbis with regard to the halakhot of <b>evidence</b> (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 31a). Since Rabbi Yoḥanan issued a statement that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel in all but three exceptional cases, why would it be necessary for him to issue a special ruling in the present discussion? The Gemara answers: <b>They are <i>amora’im</i>, and</b> they disagree <b>with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> Rabbi Abba bar Yaakov maintains that Rabbi Yoḥanan did not issue a general directive, but rather provided a separate ruling for each case.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these</b> are the defects <b>for which</b> the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> her: One <b>afflicted with boils; or one who has a polyp; or one who</b> works as <b>a gatherer, or one who</b> works as <b>a melder of copper, or one who</b> works as <b>a tanner</b> of hides, all of whose work involves handling foul-smelling materials. <b>Whether</b> he <b>had</b> these defects <b>before they</b> got <b>married, or whether they developed after they</b> got <b>married,</b> the court forces them to divorce. <b>And with regard to all of these, Rabbi Meir said: Even though he stipulated with her</b> ahead of time that he suffers from this particular ailment or this is his line of work, <b>she can</b> nevertheless demand a divorce and <b>say: I thought I could accept</b> this issue <b>but now</b> I realize <b>I cannot accept</b> it.

### Part 9
<b>And the Rabbis say:</b> If she initially agreed <b>she must accept it against her will, apart from</b> a situation in which her husband is <b>afflicted with boils.</b> In that case the Rabbis concede that he must divorce her, <b>because</b> the disease <b>consumes</b> his flesh when they engage in marital relations. The mishna relates an additional account: <b>An incident</b> occurred <b>in Sidon involving a certain tanner who died</b> childless, <b>and he had a brother</b> who was also <b>a tanner.</b> This brother was required to enter into levirate marriage with the widow. <b>The Sages said: She can say: I could accept</b> living with a tanner <b>for your brother but I cannot accept it for you,</b> and therefore he must perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with her.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara inquires about several unclear terms which appear in the mishna: <b>What is one who has a polyp? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> This is one who has <b>a</b> foul <b>odor of the nose. It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> A polyp is <b>a</b> foul <b>odor of the mouth. Rav Asi teaches the reverse,</b> that Shmuel is the one who said a polyp is odor of the mouth. <b>And he provided a mnemonic</b> device <b>for</b> his opinion: <b>Shmuel did not close his mouth from our entire chapter,</b> meaning that he studied it and commented on it extensively. This statement was formulated in a way that contains a hint that Shmuel’s opinion involves the mouth.

### Part 11
The mishna taught, in the list of defects for which the husband is forced to divorce his wife: <b>Or one who</b> works as <b>a gatherer.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>a gatherer? Rav Yehuda said: This</b> is referring to <b>one who gathers dog excrement</b> for use in tanning. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A gatherer, this</b> is <b>a tanner.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning, the mishna</b> itself <b>should present a difficulty for you,</b> as it states: <b>One who</b> works as <b>a gatherer, or one who</b> works as <b>a melder of copper, or one who</b> works as <b>a tanner</b> of hides, which indicates that the mishna holds that the gatherer and the tanner are not the same.

### Part 12
The Gemara explains: <b>Granted, the mishna</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> as one can say that <b>here,</b> where the tanner is listed separately from the one who gathers, it is referring <b>to a large</b>-scale <b>tanner,</b> and <b>there,</b> when the <i>baraita</i> states that a gatherer is a tanner, it is speaking <b>of a</b> small-scale <b>tanner. But according to Rav Yehuda it is difficult.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A gatherer, this</b> is <b>a tanner, and some say: This</b> is <b>one who gathers dog excrement.</b> Rav Yehuda follows this latter opinion.

### Part 13
The mishna teaches: <b>And a coppersmith and a tanner.</b> The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>a coppersmith? Rav Ashi said: A kettle smith,</b> that is, one who beats copper in order to make kettles; his handling of copper leaves him with a bad odor. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥanna said: This is one who hews copper from its source</b> in the ground. The Gemara comments: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥanna: Who is a coppersmith? This is one who hews copper from its source.</b>

### Part 14
§ As the mishna discusses situations in which the court forces the husband to divorce his wife, the Gemara mentions a similar case. <b>Rav said:</b> A husband <b>who says: I will not sustain</b> my wife <b>and I will not provide a livelihood</b> for her, <b>must divorce</b> her <b>and give her</b> the payment of her <b>marriage contract. Rabbi Elazar went</b> and <b>recited</b> this <b><i>halakha</i> before Shmuel.</b> Shmuel <b>said: Feed [<i>akhsuha</i>] barley,</b> animal fodder, <b>to Elazar.</b> In other words, he has spoken nonsense, as <b>rather than forcing him to divorce</b> her, it would be better for them <b>to force him to sustain</b> his wife.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rav</b> respond to this argument? He bases his ruling on the principle that <b>a person does not reside in a basket,</b> i.e., in close quarters, <b>with a snake.</b> In other words, a woman cannot share her life with a man who provides for her needs only when compelled to do so by the court. The Gemara relates: <b>When Rabbi Zeira ascended</b> to Eretz Yisrael, <b>he found Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet sitting and reciting</b> this <i>halakha</i> of Rav’s <b>in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan. He said to him: On account of this</b> matter <b>they fed Elazar with barley in Babylonia.</b>

### Part 16
§ The Gemara continues to discuss cases in which a husband is compelled to divorce his wife. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said:</b> The court <b>forces</b> men to divorce their wives <b>only</b> if they were married <b>to</b> women <b>unfit</b> to marry them. <b>When I recited this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>before Shmuel, he said:</b> This applies to cases such as, <b>for example, a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest, a divorcée or a <i>yevama</i> who underwent <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>]</b> married <b>to a common priest, a daughter born from an incestuous or adulterous relationship [<i>mamzeret</i>], or a Gibeonite woman</b> married <b>to an Israelite,</b> or <b>a daughter of an Israelite</b> married <b>to a Gibeonite or to a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> In all of these cases the marriage is prohibited by Torah law. <b>But</b> if someone <b>married a woman and stayed with her</b> for <b>ten years and she did not give birth,</b> although he is guilty of neglecting the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply, the court <b>does not force him</b> to divorce her.

### Part 17
<b>And Rav Taḥalifa bar Avimi</b> said that <b>Shmuel said: Even</b> in the case of someone who <b>married a woman and stayed with her</b> for <b>ten years and she did not give birth,</b> the court <b>forces him</b> to divorce her, as he is in violation of a positive mitzva. The Gemara poses a question: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: <b>And these are</b> the defects <b>for</b> which the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> his wife: One <b>afflicted with boils or one who has a polyp. Granted, according to Rav Asi,</b> only cases in which the court compels a divorce <b>by rabbinic</b> law <b>are taught</b> in the mishna, but those that are <b>by Torah</b> law, such as a widow married to a High Priest, <b>are not taught. However, according to Rav Taḥalifa bar Avimi, let</b> the mishna also <b>teach</b> that if he <b>married a woman and stayed with her</b> for <b>ten years and she did not give birth,</b> the court <b>forces him</b> to divorce her, as this is also a rabbinic enactment.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as in <b>this</b> case the mishna discusses someone who is forced to divorce his wife <b>by verbal</b> means alone, but in <b>that</b> case it is referring to compelling him <b>by</b> beating him with <b>rods.</b> Although the court does compel a man to divorce his wife if she has not had children, the court does so only by speaking with him. <b>Rabbi Abba strongly objects to this:</b> Can there be a <i>halakha</i> of coercion by verbal means alone? But the verse states: <b>“A servant will not be corrected by words”</b> (Proverbs 29:19). <b>Rather, Rabbi Abba said:</b> Both <b>this and that</b> are referring to coercion <b>by</b> beating him with <b>rods,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC