
### Part 1
<b>and</b> with regard to <b>this</b> woman, <b>because her</b> marriage <b>did not generate publicity, the</b> effect of the <b>majority is undermined.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> in fact, the marriage of <b>anyone who is married</b> as <b>a virgin generates publicity,</b> and the marriage of this woman did not generate publicity, <b>when witnesses come, what of it? These are false witnesses,</b> as their testimony runs counter to the presumption governing all marriages. <b>Rather, Ravina said</b> that it is not a universal presumption, but a majority. The marriage of <b>most</b> women <b>who are married</b> as <b>virgins generates publicity, but</b> for <b>this</b> woman, <b>since her</b> marriage <b>did not generate publicity, the</b> effect of the <b>majority is undermined.</b> Therefore, the testimony that she went out of her father’s house to her wedding with a <i>hinnuma</i> overrides the lack of publicity.

### Part 3
§ It was stated in the mishna: <b>If there are witnesses that she went out</b> of her father’s house to her wedding <b>with a <i>hinnuma</i>,</b> or with her hair uncovered, in a manner typical of virgins, payment of her marriage contract is two hundred dinars. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> since she collects payment without producing her marriage contract, <b>let us be concerned</b> that <b>she might produce witnesses in this court and collect</b> payment, <b>and then produce</b> her <b>marriage contract in that</b> other <b>court and collect with it</b> payment a second time. <b>Rabbi Abbahu said: This indicates</b> that <b>one writes a receipt</b> indicating that the woman received payment. Were the woman to attempt to collect payment of her marriage contract a second time, her husband would produce the receipt. <b>Rav Pappa said: We are dealing</b> in the mishna <b>with a place where one does not write a marriage contract.</b> It is only in a case where there is no concern lest she produce her marriage contract that she collects payment based on the testimony of witnesses.

### Part 4
<b>And there are</b> some <b>who teach</b> the dispute between Rabbi Abbahu and Rav Pappa with regard <b>to the <i>baraita</i></b> that says: In a case where a woman <b>lost her marriage contract</b> or <b>concealed her marriage contract</b> and she claims that she is unable to find it; or <b>her marriage contract was burned,</b> and there is no proof with regard to the sum to which she is entitled; or practices performed exclusively at the weddings of virgins were performed at her wedding, e.g., people <b>danced before her,</b> or <b>played before her,</b> or <b>passed before her a cup of</b> good <b>tidings or a cloth of virginity; if she has witnesses with regard to any one of these</b> practices, <b>her marriage contract is two hundred</b> dinars.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> since she collects payment without producing her marriage contract, <b>let us be concerned</b> that <b>she might produce witnesses in this court and collect</b> payment, <b>and then produce</b> her <b>marriage contract in that</b> other <b>court and collect</b> payment <b>with it</b> a second time. <b>Rabbi Abbahu said: This indicates</b> that <b>one writes a receipt</b> indicating that the woman received payment. Were the woman to attempt to collect payment of her marriage contract a second time, her husband would produce the receipt. <b>Rav Pappa said: We are dealing</b> in the mishna <b>with a place where one does not write a marriage contract.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> how could Rav Pappa say that the <i>baraita</i> is dealing with a place where one does not write a marriage contract? <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in that <i>baraita</i>: If a woman <b>lost her marriage contract?</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> her husband <b>wrote her</b> a marriage contract contrary to the local custom. The Gemara asks: If he wrote her a marriage contract, the concern remains that <b>ultimately she</b> will <b>produce</b> the marriage contract <b>and collect</b> payment <b>with it</b> a second time. The Gemara answers: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>lost?</b> The woman <b>lost</b> her marriage contract <b>in the fire.</b> In that case, there is no longer any concern.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, that is</b> the case of: Her marriage contract <b>was burned,</b> listed separately in the <i>baraita</i>. <b>And furthermore, what is there to say</b> with regard to the case of <b>concealed,</b> where the concern that she will collect payment twice remains? <b>And furthermore,</b> if burned comes to explain the meaning of lost, <b>why do I</b> need the <i>baraita</i> to list the case of <b>lost</b> at all? It would have been sufficient for the <i>baraita</i> to mention the case of a burned marriage contract. <b>Rather,</b> the meaning of the <i>baraita</i> is: The legal status of <b>any</b> case where the woman claims that <b>she lost</b> her marriage contract <b>is like</b> that of a case <b>where she concealed</b> it <b>before us, and we give her</b> payment of her marriage contract <b>only when the witnesses say that her marriage contract was burned.</b> Otherwise, even if witnesses testify that the practices characteristic of the wedding of a virgin were performed at her wedding, she does not collect payment of her marriage contract.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: <b>The one who teaches this</b> dispute between Rabbi Abbahu and Rav Pappa with regard <b>to the <i>baraita</i>, all the more so</b> would he teach it with regard <b>to the mishna.</b> Applying Rav Pappa’s opinion to the mishna does not necessitate the emendation and reinterpretation necessitated by its application to the <i>baraita</i>. <b>However, the one who teaches this</b> dispute with regard <b>to the mishna</b> would <b>not</b> teach it then with regard <b>to the <i>baraita</i>, in accordance with the difficulty</b> raised there, as the plain meaning of the <i>baraita</i> is that it is a place where one writes a marriage contract.

### Part 9
With regard to that same passage in the mishna: <b>If there are witnesses</b> that she went out of her father’s house to her wedding with a <i>hinnuma</i>, or with her hair uncovered, in a manner typical of virgins, payment of her marriage contract is two hundred dinars, the Gemara asks: <b>But let us be concerned lest she</b> first <b>produce witnesses</b> that she went out with <b>a <i>hinnuma</i>, in this court, and collect</b> payment, <b>and then produce witnesses</b> that she went out with <b>a <i>hinnuma</i>, in that court, and collect</b> payment a second time. The Gemara answers: <b>In a place where it is not possible</b> to guarantee that she will not collect her marriage contract more than once in any other way, <b>certainly we write a receipt,</b> even according to the opinion that as a rule, one does not write a receipt.

### Part 10
§ It is taught in that <i>baraita</i>: Or <b>passed before her a cup of</b> good <b>tidings.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is a cup of good tidings? Rav Adda bar Ahava says: A cup of <i>teruma</i> wine is passed before</b> the virgin bride, <b>meaning</b> that <b>this</b> woman <b>would have been eligible to eat <i>teruma</i></b> had she married a priest. <b>Rav Pappa</b> strongly <b>objects to</b> this: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>a widow does not eat <i>teruma</i></b> if she marries a priest? Clearly she does. Therefore, what is the proof from <i>teruma</i> that she is a virgin? <b>Rather, Rav Pappa says:</b> The cup of <i>teruma</i> is passed before her to indicate that <b>this bride is first,</b> as she has not yet engaged in intercourse, <b>like <i>teruma</i></b> that <b>is</b> the <b>first</b> gift separated from the produce.

### Part 11
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The custom is that <b>one passes a barrel of wine before her. Rav Adda bar Ahava said: One passes a sealed</b> barrel of wine <b>before a virgin, and one passes an open</b> barrel of wine <b>before a non-virgin.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> is that necessary? <b>Let us pass</b> the sealed barrel <b>before the virgin, and before the non-virgin let us not pass</b> a barrel <b>at all.</b> Why is it necessary to publicize the fact that she is a non-virgin? The Gemara explains: It is necessary, as, <b>at times</b> there could be a case where a non-virgin unilaterally <b>seized two hundred</b> dinars as payment for her marriage contract <b>and said: I was a virgin, and</b> the fact <b>that they did not pass</b> a sealed barrel <b>before me was due to circumstances beyond their control.</b> In order to prevent deceit of that kind, an open barrel is passed before the non-virgin, so that people will remember that she is not a virgin.

### Part 12
§ <b>The Sages taught: How does one dance before the bride,</b> i.e., what does one recite while dancing at her wedding? <b>Beit Shammai say:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC