
### Part 1
<b>this</b> principle, that one cannot pay in lieu of execution, <b>applies only when one</b> intentionally <b>killed him in an upward motion, for which no atonement is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for its unwitting</b> performance. <b>However,</b> with regard to one who intentionally <b>killed him in a downward motion, for which atonement,</b> i.e., exile, <b>is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for its unwitting</b> performance, <b>say: Let us take money from him and exempt him.</b> Therefore, the phrase “any <i>ḥerem</i>” <b>teaches us</b> that even in that case there is no payment in lieu of execution.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said to him: That</b> principle <b>is derived</b> from that which the Sage <b>of the school of Ḥizkiyya taught, as</b> the Sage <b>of the school of Ḥizkiyya taught:</b> The verse juxtaposes the cases of <b>one who smites a person, and one who smites an animal</b> (Leviticus 24:21).

### Part 3
<b>Just as in</b> the case of one <b>who smites an animal, you did not distinguish between</b> one who did so <b>unwittingly and</b> one who did so <b>intentionally; between</b> one who acted <b>with intent and one who</b> acted <b>with no intent; between</b> one who smites <b>in</b> the course of <b>a downward motion and</b> one who smites <b>in</b> the course of <b>an upward motion;</b> and in all those cases it is not <b>to exempt</b> him from paying <b>money but rather to obligate him to</b> pay <b>money; so too in</b> the case of one <b>who smites a person: Do not distinguish between</b> one who did so <b>unwittingly and</b> one who did so <b>intentionally; between</b> one who acted <b>with intent and one who</b> acted <b>with no intent; between</b> one who smites <b>in</b> the course of <b>a downward motion and</b> one who smites <b>in</b> the course of <b>an upward motion;</b> and in all those cases it is not <b>to obligate him</b> to pay <b>money but rather to exempt him</b> from paying <b>money.</b> Apparently, one who kills another in any manner is exempt from payment, and therefore no additional verse is required to derive that principle.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rami bar Ḥama said</b> that the phrase “any <i>ḥerem</i>” (Leviticus 27:29) is <b>necessary, as it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that one who is liable to be executed is exempt from payment, <b>applies only</b> in a case <b>where one blinded</b> another’s <b>eye and killed him with</b> that same blow. <b>However,</b> in a case <b>where one blinded</b> another’s <b>eye and killed him by</b> means of a <b>different</b> blow, <b>say: Let us take money from him</b> to pay the damage inflicted to the eye. Therefore, the verse teaches that this is not the case. <b>Rava said to him: This</b> case of one who blinded another’s eye and killed him <b>is also derived from</b> that which <b>another <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>the school of Ḥizkiyya</b> taught, <b>as</b> the Sage <b>of the school of Ḥizkiyya taught</b> that the verse states: <b>“An eye for an eye”</b> (Exodus 21:24), from which it may be inferred, <b>but not an eye and a life for an eye.</b> When he gives his life for killing another while blinding him, he need not pay the worth of the eye as well.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> after the Gemara rejected the above explanations, <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The phrase “any <i>ḥerem</i>” is nonetheless <b>necessary,</b> as <b>it might enter your mind to say: Since it is a novel element that the Torah introduced with regard to</b> the payment of <b>a fine,</b> which is not payment for any damage caused but is a Torah decree, in that case, <b>even though he is killed he pays</b> the fine. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that one who is executed is exempt from payment of the fine. The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabba, who said</b> that this is indeed the <i>halakha</i>: Since <b>it is a novel element that the Torah introduced with regard to</b> the payment of <b>a fine, even though he is killed he pays</b> the fine, <b>what does</b> he <b>do with this</b> phrase: <b>“Any <i>ḥerem</i>”?</b> The Gemara answers: Rabba <b>holds</b> with regard <b>to</b> this matter <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> who disagrees with <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya</b> and explains that the phrase “Any <i>ḥerem</i>” teaches that the vow one takes to donate the valuation of one being taken to his execution is not binding.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>a young woman who was betrothed and divorced,</b> and then raped, <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: She does not</b> receive payment of a <b>fine</b> for her rape. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: She</b> receives payment of a <b>fine</b> for her rape <b>and her fine</b> is paid <b>to herself,</b> not her father, as since she was betrothed and divorced she is no longer subject to her father’s authority.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili?</b> It is as <b>the verse states:</b> “If a man finds a young woman who is a virgin <b>who was not betrothed”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:28), from which it may be inferred: If <b>she was betrothed she does not have</b> a <b>fine</b> for rape. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> explain this verse? The Gemara answers that the verse states: If it is a young woman <b>who was not betrothed,</b> the fine is paid <b>to her father,</b> from which it may be inferred: If <b>she was betrothed,</b> the fine is paid <b>to</b> the betrothed woman <b>herself.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But if</b> that is <b>so,</b> that the inference from the verse is that the fine is levied on one who rapes <b>a young woman and not</b> on one who rapes <b>a grown woman, so too,</b> there is the <i>halakha</i> in the latter case that the fine is paid <b>to</b> the grown woman <b>herself.</b> Similarly, with regard to the inference that the fine is levied on one who rapes <b>a virgin and not</b> on one who rapes <b>a non-virgin, so too,</b> there is the <i>halakha</i> that in the latter case the fine is paid <b>to</b> the non-virgin <b>herself.</b> A distinction of that kind has never been encountered. <b>Rather,</b> with regard to a grown woman and a non-virgin, the rapist is <b>completely</b> exempt from paying the fine; <b>here too,</b> with regard to a betrothed woman, the rapist is <b>completely</b> exempt from paying the fine.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that <b>this</b> verse: <b>“Who was not betrothed,” is required by him</b> to teach another <i>halakha</i> <b>that is taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>. <b>“Who was not betrothed”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:28) comes to <b>exclude a young woman who was betrothed and divorced</b> and establish <b>that she does not</b> receive payment of a <b>fine</b> for her rape; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili. Rabbi Akiva says: She</b> receives payment of a <b>fine</b> for her rape, <b>and her fine</b> goes <b>to her father,</b> contrary to the ruling attributed to Rabbi Akiva in the mishna. <b>And</b> ostensibly, no verse is required to derive this <i>halakha</i>, as <b>logic dictates</b> that it is so: <b>Since her father is entitled to the money of her betrothal</b> if she is betrothed before she becomes a grown woman, <b>and</b> likewise <b>her father is entitled to the money of her fine; just as the money of her</b> subsequent <b>betrothal</b> as a young woman, <b>even though she was betrothed and divorced,</b> is paid <b>to her father, so too, the money of her fine, although she was betrothed and divorced,</b> is paid <b>to her father.</b>

### Part 10
<b>If so,</b> and the <i>halakha</i> can be logically inferred, <b>why does the verse state: “Who was not betrothed”?</b> This verse is <b>free,</b> as it is superfluous in its own context, <b>and</b> it is written <b>to liken</b> another case to it, <b>and to derive from it a verbal analogy: It is stated here</b> with regard to a woman who was raped: <b>“Who was not betrothed,” and it is stated below:</b> “And if a man seduce a virgin <b>who was not betrothed”</b> (Exodus 22:15). <b>Just as here,</b> with regard to rape, the Torah specifies that the payment is <b>fifty</b> silver pieces (Deuteronomy 22:29), <b>so too below,</b> with regard to seduction, the payment is <b>fifty. And just as below,</b> with regard to seduction, the payment is in <b>shekels,</b> as it is written: “He shall weigh [<i>yishkol</i>] money” (Exodus 22:16), <b>so too here,</b> the payment is in <b>shekels.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Akiva, what did you see</b> that led you to utilize the phrase: <b>“Who was not betrothed” for a verbal analogy, and</b> the term <b>“virgin” to exclude a non-virgin</b> from the fine?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC