
### Part 1
the <i>tanna</i> taught us a <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to all of them,</b> not only a man of leisure or a laborer. He asked him: <b>But</b> with regard to a sailor <b>it said</b> that the set interval for conjugal relations is <b>six months;</b> why, then, should he have to divorce her if he vowed to forbid these relations for only a week? He answered him: It is well known that <b>one who has bread in his basket is not comparable to one who does not have bread in his basket.</b> On a fast day, one who does not have bread available in his basket suffers more than one who does have bread available and knows that he will be able to eat later. In this case as well, when a woman knows that marital relations are forbidden to her due to a vow, her suffering from waiting for her husband to return is increased.

### Part 2
<b>Rabba bar Rav Hanan said to Abaye: If a donkey driver</b> who is already married wants to <b>become a camel driver, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is he permitted to change his profession in order to earn more money from his work, even though this will mean he reduces the frequency with which he engages in conjugal relations with his wife? <b>He answered him: A woman prefers a <i>kav</i>,</b> i.e., modest means, <b>with conjugal relations to ten <i>kav</i> with abstinence.</b> Consequently, he is not allowed to change his profession without her permission.

### Part 3
§ The mishna stated: For <b>sailors,</b> the set interval for conjugal relations is <b>once every six months. This is the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rav Berona said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer. Rav Adda bar Ahava said</b> that <b>Rav said: This is the statement of Rabbi Eliezer, but the Rabbis say: Students may leave</b> their homes <b>to study Torah</b> for as long as <b>two or three years without permission</b> from their wives. <b>Rava said: The Sages relied on Rabbi Adda bar Ahava’s</b> opinion <b>and performed an action</b> like this <b>themselves,</b> but the results were sometimes fatal.

### Part 4
This is <b>as</b> it is related <b>about Rav Reḥumi, who would commonly</b> study <b>before Rava in Meḥoza: He was accustomed to come</b> back <b>to his home every</b> year on the <b>eve of Yom Kippur. One day he was</b> particularly <b>engrossed in</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> he was studying, and so he remained in the study hall and did not go home. <b>His wife was expecting him</b> that day and continually said to herself: <b>Now he is coming, now he is coming.</b> But in the end, <b>he did not come. She was distressed</b> by this and <b>a tear fell from her eye.</b> At that exact moment, Rav Reḥumi <b>was sitting on the roof. The roof collapsed under him and he died.</b> This teaches how much one must be careful, as he was punished severely for causing anguish to his wife, even inadvertently.

### Part 5
§ <b>When</b> is <b>the</b> ideal <b>time for Torah scholars</b> to fulfill their conjugal obligations? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The appropriate time for them is <b>from Shabbat eve to Shabbat eve,</b> i.e., on Friday nights. Similarly, it is stated with regard to the verse <b>“that brings forth its fruit in its season”</b> (Psalms 1:3): <b>Rav Yehuda said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rav Huna, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rav Naḥman: This</b> is referring to one <b>who engages in marital relations,</b> bringing forth his fruit, <b>from Shabbat eve to Shabbat eve.</b>

### Part 6
It is related further that <b>Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> and <b>son-in-law of Rabbi Yannai, would go and sit in the study hall, and every</b> Shabbat eve <b>at twilight he would come to his house. When he would come,</b> Rabbi Yannai <b>would see a pillar of fire preceding him</b> due to his sanctity. <b>One day he was engrossed in</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> he was studying, and he stayed in the study hall and did not return home. <b>When Rabbi Yannai did not see that sign</b> preceding him, <b>he said to</b> the family: <b>Turn his bed over,</b> as one does at times of mourning, since he must have died, reasoning that <b>if Yehuda were alive he would not have missed his set interval</b> for conjugal relations and would certainly have come home. What he said <b>became “like an error that proceeds from a ruler”</b> (Ecclesiastes 10:5), <b>and</b> Yehuda, son of Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>died.</b>

### Part 7
It is related further that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>arranged for his son</b> to marry a daughter of <b>the household of Rabbi Ḥiyya. When he came to write the marriage contract, the girl died. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: Is there, Heaven forbid, some disqualification</b> in these families, as it appears that God prevented this match from taking place? <b>They sat and looked into the families’</b> ancestry and found that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>was descended from Shefatya ben Avital,</b> the wife of David, whereas <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya was descended from Shimi, David’s brother.</b>

### Part 8
<b>He went and arranged for his son</b> to marry a daughter <b>of the household of Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra. They agreed for him</b> that they would support him for <b>twelve years to go to study in the study hall.</b> It was assumed that he would first go to study and afterward get married. <b>They passed</b> the girl <b>in front of</b> the groom and when he saw her <b>he said: Let it be</b> just <b>six years. They passed her in front of him</b> again and <b>he said to them: I will marry her</b> now <b>and then go</b> to study. <b>He was</b> then <b>ashamed</b> to see <b>his father,</b> as he thought he would reprimand him because when he saw the girl he desired her and could not wait. His father placated him and <b>said to him: My son, you have your Maker’s perception,</b> meaning you acted the same way that God does.

### Part 9
The proof for this is that <b>initially it is written: “You bring them and plant them</b> in the mountain of Your inheritance, the place that You, O Lord, have made for You to dwell in” (Exodus 15:17), which indicates that God’s original intention was to build a Temple for the Jewish people after they had entered Eretz Yisrael. <b>And ultimately it is written: “And let them make Me a Sanctuary, that I may dwell among them”</b> (Exodus 25:8), i.e., even while they were still in the desert, which indicates that due to their closeness to God, they enjoyed greater affection and He therefore advanced what would originally have come later.

### Part 10
After his wedding <b>he went and sat for twelve years in the study hall. By the time he came back his wife had become infertile,</b> as a consequence of spending many years without her husband. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: What</b> should we <b>do? If he will divorce her,</b> people <b>will say: This poor woman waited</b> and hoped <b>for naught. If he will marry another woman</b> to beget children, people <b>will say: This one,</b> who bears him children, <b>is his wife and that one,</b> who lives with him, <b>is his mistress.</b> Therefore, her husband <b>pleaded</b> with God <b>to have mercy on her and she was cured.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai went to the study hall at the end of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai’s wedding feast.</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>said to him: Wait for me until I</b> can <b>come with you,</b> after my days of celebration are over. However, since he wanted to learn Torah, <b>he did not wait</b> and <b>went and sat for twelve years in the study hall. By the time he came back, all the paths of his city had changed and he did not know how to go to his home.</b>

### Part 12
<b>He went</b> and <b>sat on the bank of the river and heard people calling to a certain girl: Daughter of Ḥakhinai, daughter of Ḥakhinai, fill your pitcher and come up. He said: I can conclude from this that this is our daughter,</b> meaning his own daughter, whom he had not recognized after so many years. <b>He followed her</b> to his house. <b>His wife was sitting and sifting flour. She lifted her eyes up, saw him</b> and recognized him, <b>and her heart fluttered</b> with agitation and <b>she passed away</b> from the emotional stress. Rabbi Ḥananya <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the universe, is this the reward of this poor woman? He pleaded for mercy for her and she lived.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Bisa went and sat for twelve years in the study hall. When he came</b> back to his house, <b>he said: I will not do what the son of Ḥakhinai,</b> who came home suddenly with tragic consequences for his wife, <b>did. He went and sat in the study hall</b> in his hometown, <b>and sent</b> a message <b>to his house</b> that he had arrived. While he was sitting there <b>his son Rabbi Oshaya,</b> whom he did not recognize, <b>came and sat before him.</b> Rabbi Oshaya <b>asked him</b> questions about <b><i>halakha</i>, and</b> Rabbi Ḥama <b>saw that the <i>halakhot</i> of</b> Rabbi Oshaya <b>were incisive,</b> i.e., he was very sharp. Rabbi Ḥama <b>was distressed and said: If I had been here</b> and had taught my son <b>I would have had a child like this.</b>

### Part 14
Rabbi Ḥama <b>went in to his house</b> and <b>his son went in</b> with him. Rabbi Ḥama then <b>stood up before him</b> to honor a Torah scholar, since <b>he thought</b> that <b>he wanted to ask him a matter of <i>halakha</i>. His wife said to him: Is there a father who stands up before his son?</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Rami bar Ḥama read</b> the verse <b>about him: “A threefold cord is not quickly broken”</b> (Ecclesiastes 4:12). <b>This</b> is referring to <b>Rabbi Oshaya, son of Rabbi Ḥama bar Bisa,</b> as he represented the third generation of Torah scholars in his family.

### Part 15
The Gemara further relates: <b>Rabbi Akiva was the shepherd of ben Kalba Savua,</b> one of the wealthy residents of Jerusalem. The <b>daughter</b> of Ben Kalba Savua <b>saw that he was humble and refined. She said to him: If I betroth myself to you, will you go to the study hall</b> to learn Torah? <b>He said to her: Yes. She became betrothed to him privately and sent him</b> off to study. <b>Her father heard</b> this and became angry. <b>He removed her from his house</b> and took a <b>vow</b> prohibiting her from <b>benefiting from his property.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>went</b> and <b>sat for twelve years in the study hall. When he came</b> back to his house <b>he brought twelve thousand students</b> with him, and as he approached <b>he heard an old man saying to</b> his wife: <b>For how long</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC