
### Part 1
Rav Pappa <b>saw that</b> Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>was not amenable</b> to the idea of entering the house. <b>He said to him: What is</b> on <b>your mind?</b> Do you not wish to enter <b>due to that</b> which <b>Shmuel said to Rav Yehuda: <i>Shinnana</i>, do not be</b> a partner <b>in the transfer of an inheritance even from a bad son to a good son, as it is not known what seed will come from him?</b> Perhaps the bad son will father worthy children. <b>And all the more so,</b> one should not be a partner in the transfer of an inheritance <b>from a son to a daughter.</b>

### Part 2
Rav Pappa continued: Are you worried that your arrival will pressure Abba of Sura to give his daughter a more substantial dowry? But <b>this too is an ordinance of the Sages,</b> that a father must provide a dowry for his daughter. This is <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai,</b> as quoted above, that the Sages enacted this matter so that a man should take the initiative and write an agreement to give his daughter a dowry as large as the portion of his possessions that his son will receive as an inheritance. Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>said to him: This applies only</b> if the man gives <b>of his own</b> free <b>will,</b> but should one <b>force him as well?</b> Rav Pappa <b>said to him: Did I say to you that you should enter and force him? I</b> merely <b>said</b> that you should <b>enter, but do not force him. He said to him: My</b> very <b>entrance is</b> an act that will effectively <b>force him,</b> as he will increase her dowry in my honor.

### Part 3
Eventually, Rav Pappa <b>forced</b> Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>and he entered. He was silent, and sat</b> without uttering a word. Abba of Sura <b>thought</b> that Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>was angry</b> with him for his failure to grant his daughter a suitable dowry. <b>He</b> therefore <b>wrote</b> down in the marriage contract <b>all that he had</b> as her dowry, to appease him. <b>Ultimately,</b> when he observed that Yehuda was still silent, Abba of Sura <b>said to him: Even now the Master will not talk? By the Master’s life, I have left nothing for myself.</b>

### Part 4
Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>said to him: If</b> you are acting <b>for my</b> sake, <b>that which you wrote is also not amenable to me.</b> Finally understanding his wishes, Abba of Sura <b>said to</b> Yehuda bar Mareimar: <b>Now too, I will retract,</b> as I acted in error. Yehuda bar Mareimar <b>said to him: I did not speak</b> so that you <b>should turn yourself into</b> the kind of person <b>who retracts</b> once he gives his word. You should uphold your agreement, but the agreement was not to my liking.

### Part 5
§ <b>Rav Yeimar the Elder raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman:</b> If a wife <b>sold her marriage contract to her husband,</b> i.e., she sold him the right not to have to pay her the marriage contract if they divorce or if she is widowed, does <b>she have the marriage document concerning male children, or</b> does <b>she not have the marriage document concerning male children? Rava said to him: And you can raise</b> the same <b>dilemma</b> with regard to a wife <b>who forgoes</b> her right to her marriage contract. Does she retain the marriage document concerning male children in this case?

### Part 6
Rav Yeimar <b>said to him: Now,</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>one who sells</b> her marriage contract <b>is a dilemma for me. As, although there is</b> room <b>to say</b> that <b>the money forced her,</b> and <b>that I say</b> that she <b>is like one who is struck</b> with <b>a hundred strikes [<i>ukelei</i>] of a hammer [<i>ukela</i>],</b> i.e., she needed liquid assets at the time and therefore she sold her marriage contract unwillingly, even so, I am still willing to entertain the possibility that she has sold the marriage document concerning male children. Then, with regard to <b>one who forgoes</b> her marriage contract, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to raise the dilemma?

### Part 7
<b>Rava said:</b> It <b>is obvious to me</b> that if a wife <b>sells her marriage contract to others,</b> not to her husband but to someone else who is willing to pay at the present time for the chance to collect the money stated in her marriage contract if she is later divorced or widowed, <b>she</b> still <b>has the marriage document concerning male children. What is the reason? The money forced her</b> to sell, and she did not mean to renounce all her rights. It is likewise clear to me that <b>one who forgoes</b> the right to collect <b>her marriage contract</b> from <b>her husband does not have the marriage document concerning male children. What is the reason? She has forgiven it</b> all and has no intention of claiming anything from her husband.

### Part 8
However, <b>Rava raised a dilemma</b> about the following case: With regard to <b>one who sells her marriage contract to her husband,</b> is she <b>considered like one who sells to others,</b> i.e., she has not relinquished the marriage document concerning male children, <b>or is she considered like one who forgoes</b> her right to collect her marriage contract from <b>her husband,</b> i.e., she has forfeited everything? <b>After he raised the dilemma he subsequently resolved it: One who sells her marriage contract to her husband is considered like one who sells to others,</b> as she is assumed to have done so due to financial constraints.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Idi bar Avin raised an objection:</b> We learned in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 87b) that if a woman’s husband went overseas, and after hearing the testimony of one witness that he was dead the woman married again, and then her first husband returned, both husbands must divorce her, and she does not receive payment of her marriage contract from either man. That mishna proceeds to state that if <b>she died, neither</b> the <b>heirs of this</b> one, the first husband, <b>nor</b> the <b>heirs of that</b> one, the second husband, <b>inherit</b> the sum stipulated in <b>her marriage contract. And we discussed</b> the following question: With regard to <b>a marriage contract, what is its purpose?</b> In other words, the mishna just said that she is not entitled to a marriage contract, so how can it even be suggested that the heirs might inherit it?

### Part 10
<b>And Rav Pappa said:</b> This is referring to <b>the marriage document concerning male children.</b> Not only does she forfeit her marriage contract, but she also loses the right to the marriage document concerning male children, as her sons do not inherit from her at all. Rav Idi bar Avin explains his objection. <b>But</b> if, according to the above statement, a wife who sells her marriage contract has not relinquished the marriage document concerning male children, <b>why</b> does the mishna in <i>Yevamot</i> state that none of the woman’s heirs inherit the proceeds of her marriage contract? <b>Here too,</b> in that mishna, <b>let us say</b> that her <b>desire</b> to marry another man <b>forced her</b> to marry her second husband. Why should she forfeit the marriage document concerning male children?

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>There it is a penalty</b> with <b>which the Sages penalized her.</b> In other words, the reason is not that she automatically forfeits the marriage document concerning male children, along with the marriage contract itself. Rather, her loss of the marriage document concerning male children is one of several penalties the Sages imposed upon her for remarrying on the basis of the testimony of a single witness without conducting her own thorough investigation into her husband’s fate. Therefore, one cannot learn from that <i>halakha</i> with regard to the issue at hand.

### Part 12
<b>Ravin bar Ḥanina sat before Rav Ḥisda, and he sat and said</b> the following <i>halakha</i> <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar: One who forgoes her</b> right to collect her <b>marriage contract</b> from <b>her husband does not</b> receive her <b>sustenance</b> from him. Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: Had you not said</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>to me in the name of a great man, I would have said to you</b> that this is an injustice, in accordance with the verse <b>“who rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house”</b> (Proverbs 17:13). After she relinquishes to her husband her right to her marriage contract, which was a favor to her husband, she loses her sustenance as well.

### Part 13
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Naḥman was sitting, and Ulla and Avimei bar Rav Pappi</b> were sitting as well, <b>and Rav Ḥiyya bar Ami was sitting with them,</b> when <b>a certain man came</b> before them <b>whose betrothed</b> wife <b>had died. They said to him: Go</b> and <b>bury</b> her, <b>or give her</b> heirs the sum stipulated in <b>her marriage contract. Rav Ḥiyya said to them,</b> in surprise at their response: But <b>we learned</b> that with regard to <b>one’s betrothed wife</b> he <b>neither</b> assumes the status of <b>an acute mourner nor becomes ritually impure for her</b> if he is a priest, <b>and similarly, she neither</b> assumes the status of <b>an acute mourner nor becomes ritually impure for him.</b> If <b>she died he does not inherit</b> from <b>her,</b> and if <b>he died she collects</b> payment of <b>her marriage contract.</b>

### Part 14
Rav Ḥiyya infers the following from this statement: The <b>reason</b> for this <i>halakha</i> is that <b>he died,</b> from which it may be inferred that if <b>she died she does not have a marriage contract,</b> nor any of the stipulations of a marriage contract. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that her marriage contract is canceled upon her death? <b>Rav Hoshaya said:</b> The reason is <b>that I do not read with regard to her</b> the condition stated in the marriage contract: <b>When you marry another he may take what is written for you,</b> as she cannot marry another.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia he said that <b>Reish Lakish said: A betrothed woman who died does not have a marriage contract. Abaye said to</b> the scholars who recited this <i>halakha</i> in Ravin’s name: <b>Go,</b> and <b>say to</b> Ravin:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC