
### Part 1
<b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehuda maintain</b> that a captive woman <b>remains in her</b> state of <b>sanctity? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a female <b>convert who converted and saw</b> the flow of menstrual <b>blood</b> on that same day, <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Deeming <b>her</b> impure from the <b>hour</b> that she saw the menstrual flow <b>is sufficient for her.</b> There is no decree of retroactive impurity on objects that she touched earlier, due to the concern that the blood flow might have started earlier. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Her</b> legal status <b>is like</b> that of <b>all</b> of <b>the</b> Jewish <b>women, and she</b> therefore <b>transmits impurity</b> retroactively <b>for a twenty-four hour period</b> following her conversion, or <b>from examination to examination,</b> i.e., from the last time she examined herself.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> a convert <b>is required to wait three months</b> after her conversion before marrying a Jew, due to the concern that she is pregnant, leading to confusion whether the child was conceived before or after her conversion; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei permits her to be betrothed and to be married immediately.</b> Clearly, Rabbi Yehuda is concerned that she engaged in sexual relations prior to her conversion. Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Rav Pappa bar Shmuel: <b>Are you raising a contradiction</b> from the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a convert to</b> that of <b>a captive</b> woman? <b>A convert does not protect herself</b> from engaging in sexual relations before conversion, whereas <b>a captive protects herself,</b> as she is conscious of the sanctity of the Jewish people and does not want to be violated.

### Part 3
<b>And</b> Rav Pappa bar Shmuel <b>raised a contradiction from</b> one <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a captive to</b> another <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a captive, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The convert, or the captive</b> woman <b>or the</b> gentile <b>maidservant, who were redeemed, converted, or emancipated</b> when they were <b>more than three years and one day</b> old, <b>are required to wait three months</b> before marrying; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei permits</b> these women <b>to be betrothed and to be married immediately.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yehuda is concerned that she engaged in sexual relations prior to her redemption, contradicting his opinion here. Rav Yosef <b>was silent,</b> unable to respond.

### Part 4
Later, Rav Yosef <b>said to him: Have you heard anything with regard to this</b> matter? Rav Pappa bar Shmuel <b>said to him: This</b> is what <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> Rabbi Yehuda is referring to a captive <b>whom</b> witnesses <b>saw engage in intercourse.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what is the rationale</b> for the ruling of <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> that she may marry immediately? Shouldn’t he be concerned lest she is pregnant? <b>Rabba said: Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that <b>a woman who engages in</b> promiscuous <b>sexual relations has relations with</b> a contraceptive <b>resorbent</b> at the entrance of her womb, so <b>that she will not become pregnant.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, a convert</b> uses the resorbent; <b>since it is her intention to convert, she protects herself</b> from pregnancy. <b>A captive too</b> uses the resorbent because <b>she does not know where they are taking her,</b> and she does not want to become pregnant. <b>A maidservant</b> uses the resorbent <b>too, as she heard from her master</b> that he intends to free her, and she seeks to avoid confusion with regard to the lineage of her offspring. <b>However,</b> with regard a maidservant who <b>emerges</b> from slavery <b>with</b> the extraction by her master of her <b>tooth or</b> her <b>eye, what is there to say?</b> She has no advance knowledge that she will be freed and therefore would not take precautions to avoid becoming pregnant, and Rav Sheshet explained that this is a case where she was seen engaging in sexual relations.

### Part 6
<b>And if you say</b> that with regard to <b>any</b> situation that occurs <b>on its own,</b> without advance knowledge, <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> concedes to Rabbi Yehuda and <b>did not say</b> that it is permitted for her to marry immediately, that cannot be so. There is the case of <b>a raped or seduced</b> woman, which happens <b>on its own</b> without advance knowledge, <b>and it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A raped woman and a seduced woman must wait three months</b> before marrying; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda; Rabbi Yosei permits</b> these women <b>to be betrothed and to be married immediately.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rather, Rabba said:</b> The rationale for the ruling of Rabbi Yosei is not because the woman uses a contraceptive resorbent that she inserts before engaging in relations. Rather, <b>Rabbi Yosei holds: A woman</b> who <b>engages in</b> promiscuous <b>sexual relations turns over</b> at the conclusion of the sexual act so <b>that she will not become pregnant.</b> Therefore, even if she engaged in unplanned sexual relations, she can take steps afterward to prevent unwanted pregnancy. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, Rabbi Yehuda respond to this contention? The Gemara answers: <b>We are concerned lest</b> the semen remain in her womb because <b>she did not turn over properly,</b> and she will become pregnant.

### Part 8
§ The mishna states that one liable to receive the death penalty is exempt from payment, <b>as it is stated: “And yet no harm follow, he shall be punished, etc.”</b> (Exodus 21:22). The Gemara asks: <b>And is this</b> principle <b>derived from here?</b> Actually, <b>it is derived from there:</b> “And to be beaten before his face <b>according to the measure of his iniquity”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:2). From the term: His iniquity, it is inferred: <b>You can hold</b> one who performs one action <b>liable for one iniquity,</b> i.e., punishment for violating one prohibition, <b>but you do not hold him liable for two iniquities,</b> i.e., punishments for violating two prohibitions.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> of these derivations, from the verse “And yet no harm follow” is stated <b>with regard to</b> one who performed an action for which he is liable to receive the <b>death</b> penalty <b>and</b> to pay <b>money,</b> and the liability to be executed exempts him from payment. <b>And one</b> of these derivations, from the verse “According to the measure of his iniquity,” is stated <b>with regard to</b> one who performed an action for which he is liable to receive <b>lashes and</b> to pay <b>money,</b> and he receives only one punishment. The Gemara elaborates: <b>And</b> both derivations <b>are necessary, as if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>death and money,</b> one would assert that the exemption from payment is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that there is loss of life,</b> the ultimate punishment, leaving no room for additional punishment; <b>however,</b> in the case of <b>lashes and money, where there is no loss of life, say no,</b> there is no exemption and he is flogged and pays.

### Part 10
<b>And if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>lashes and money,</b> one would assert that the exemption from payment is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <b>prohibition</b> that he violated <b>is not severe,</b> as it is punishable by lashes, and for violating a prohibition that is not severe one does not receive two punishments. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>death and money, where</b> the <b>prohibition</b> that he violated <b>is severe, say no,</b> he is not exempt from receiving two punishments. Therefore, it was <b>necessary</b> for the Torah to teach both derivations.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Meir, who said</b> that one <b>is flogged and pays</b> in cases where he violated a prohibition punishable by both, <b>why do I</b> require <b>two</b> derivations teaching that one does not receive the death penalty and pay? The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> derivation is <b>with regard to death and money,</b> exempting one liable to be executed from payment,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC