
### Part 1
By contrast, with regard to <b>her earnings and</b> the lost <b>items</b> that <b>she</b> has <b>found, although she has not collected</b> them, e.g., she had yet to receive her wages, if <b>the father died they</b> belong <b>to</b> her <b>brothers.</b> These payments are considered the property of their father, as he was entitled to them before he passed away.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the mishna <b>teaching us? We</b> already <b>learned</b> this in a mishna (<i>Ketubot</i> 39a): <b>The seducer pays three types of indemnity and the rapist</b> pays <b>four. The seducer pays</b> compensation for his victim’s <b>humiliation and degradation and</b> for the <b>fine</b> the Torah imposes on a seducer. <b>A rapist adds an additional</b> payment, <b>as he pays</b> compensation for <b>the pain</b> she suffered. The Gemara answers: It <b>is necessary for</b> the mishna to teach that the money is given <b>to her father.</b> The Gemara asks: It <b>is also obvious</b> that the money goes <b>to her father, from</b> the fact <b>that a seducer pays</b> these types of indemnity, <b>as, if</b> one claims that the money goes <b>to her, why does a seducer pay</b> her at all? After all, <b>he acted with her consent,</b> how can she then claim compensation?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary for</b> the mishna to mention these cases in order to address the case where she <b>stood for judgment</b> before her father died, and then he died before collecting payment. In this case, there is <b>a dispute between Rabbi Shimon and the Rabbis</b> as to whether the sons inherit these payments from the father or whether the money belongs to the young woman.

### Part 4
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Shevuot</i> 36b) that if someone said to another: <b>You raped</b> my daughter, <b>or: You seduced my daughter, and</b> the other <b>says: I did not rape and I did not seduce,</b> to which the father replied: <b>I administer an oath to you, and</b> the defendant <b>said: Amen, and afterward he admitted</b> that he had raped or seduced the man’s daughter, he is <b>obligated</b> both in the payments of a rapist or a seducer as well as an additional one-fifth, and he must bring an offering for swearing falsely that he did not owe the money.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Shimon exempts</b> him, <b>as he does not pay</b> the <b>fine on his own</b> admission. The accused individual is not considered to have taken a false oath in denial of a monetary charge because he would not have been obligated to pay the fine on the basis of his own admission of guilt. The Rabbis <b>said to him: Although he does not pay</b> the <b>fine on his own</b> admission, <b>indeed he does pay</b> compensation for <b>the humiliation and degradation on his own</b> admission. Consequently, he has denied a monetary claim, and therefore his false oath obligates him to add one-fifth and to bring an offering. This concludes the mishna.

### Part 6
In light of this mishna, <b>Abaye raised a dilemma before Rabba:</b> With regard to <b>one who says to another: You raped</b> my daughter, <b>or: You seduced my daughter, and I made you stand in judgment</b> for your actions, <b>and you were found obligated</b> to pay <b>me money</b> but you did not do so, <b>and</b> the defendant <b>says: I did not rape, or: I did not seduce, and you did not make me stand in judgment, and I was not found obligated</b> to pay <b>you money, and</b> the defendant <b>took an oath</b> that he was telling the truth <b>and</b> subsequently <b>admitted</b> his guilt, <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 7
Abaye explains the two sides of the dilemma: <b>Since he stood trial</b> and was found liable, <b>is</b> this considered a regular <b>monetary</b> obligation, <b>and</b> therefore <b>he is liable to</b> bring the <b>offering</b> for taking a false <b>oath</b> to deny a monetary claim? <b>Or perhaps</b> one can argue that <b>although he stood trial</b> and the court ordered him to pay, the payment <b>is</b> in essence <b>a fine.</b> Rabba <b>said to him:</b> Since he has already stood trial, <b>it is</b> considered a regular <b>monetary</b> payment, <b>and he is liable to</b> bring the <b>offering of an oath.</b>

### Part 8
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rabba from the following <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that in the case of <b>one who says to another: You raped</b> my daughter, <b>or: You seduced my daughter, and he says: I did not rape</b> her, <b>or: I did not seduce</b> her, or if he claimed: <b>Your ox killed my slave, and he says:</b> It <b>did not kill</b> him, <b>or if his slave said to him: You knocked out my tooth, or: You blinded my eye</b> and you are therefore obligated to emancipate me, <b>and he says: I did not knock</b> it <b>out, or: I did not blind</b> your eye, <b>and he takes an oath but</b> later <b>admitted</b> to the truth of the accusation, one <b>might</b> have thought that he <b>should be liable</b> to bring an offering for a false oath denying a monetary claim.

### Part 9
Therefore, with regard to the offering for a false oath in denial of a monetary claim, <b>the verse states:</b> “If anyone sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord <b>and deal falsely with his neighbor in a matter of a deposit or of a pledge or of a robbery or have oppressed his neighbor, or have found that which was lost and deal falsely with it, and swear to a lie”</b> (Leviticus 5:21–22). <b>Just as</b> all these <b>matters</b> listed in the verse <b>are unique</b> in <b>that they are monetary</b> obligations equal in value to the loss one has caused another individual, <b>so too,</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>all</b> obligations <b>that are monetary</b> claims, which <b>excludes these</b> payments of a rapist, a seducer, and the like, <b>as they are fines.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC