
### Part 1
<b>and I forced them to feed him,</b> for which he is grateful. The Gemara interprets this incident in light of the issue at hand: <b>Granted, if you say</b> that this was <b>not</b> according to the <b><i>halakha</i>,</b> i.e., the man’s sons had the right to refrain from sustaining him, <b>due to that</b> reason Rabbi Yonatan had to <b>force them</b> to feed their father; <b>but if you say</b> this is the <b><i>halakha</i>,</b> i.e., the man’s sons were required to sustain him, why did he <b>need to force them</b> to provide the sustenance of their own accord? The court could have simply requisitioned the necessary amount from the property. This shows that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Ile’a.

### Part 2
§ Apropos the ordinances instituted by the Sages in Usha, the Gemara cites another one. <b>Rabbi Ile’a said: In Usha</b> the Sages <b>instituted</b> that <b>one who dispenses</b> his money to charity <b>should not dispense more than one-fifth. That</b> opinion <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who scatters should not scatter more than one-fifth, lest he</b> render himself destitute and <b>need</b> the help <b>of</b> other <b>people. And an incident</b> occurred <b>involving a certain</b> individual <b>who sought to dispense more than one-fifth</b> of his property as charity, <b>and his friend did not let him</b> act upon his wishes. <b>And who</b> was this friend? <b>Rabbi Yeshevav. And some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yeshevav</b> was the one who wanted to give too much charity, <b>and his friend did not let him</b> do so, <b>and who was</b> the <b>friend? Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Naḥman said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov</b> who said: <b>What is the verse</b> that alludes to this maximum amount of charity? <b>“And of all that You shall give me, I will surely give a tenth of it [<i>aser a’asrenu</i>] to You”</b> (Genesis 28:22). The double use of the verb that means to donate one-tenth indicates that Jacob, who issued this statement, was actually referring to two-tenths, i.e., one-fifth.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But the latter tenth is not similar to the first tenth,</b> as it would be one-tenth of what remained after the first tenth had been removed. Consequently, the two-tenths would not equal one-fifth of the original total. The Gemara answers that <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> Since the verse could have said: I will surely give one-tenth [<i>aser a’aser</i>], and instead stated: <b>“I will</b> surely give <b>a tenth of it [</b><i>aser <b>a’asrenu</b></i><b>],”</b> it thereby alludes to the fact <b>that the latter</b> tenth is <b>like the first one.</b>

### Part 5
With regard to the above statements concerning the Sages’ ordinances in Usha, <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi said: And these <i>halakhot</i> continually decrease.</b> The first statement was stated by Rabbi Ile’a, quoting a statement by Reish Lakish in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina. The second <i>halakha</i> was delivered by Rabbi Ile’a in the name of Reish Lakish, while the third was taught by Rabbi Ile’a without quoting another Sage. <b>And</b> this is <b>your mnemonic</b> for the order of these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>Minors wrote and dispensed.</b> This alludes to the ruling requiring a father to support his children while they are minors, the ruling about one who wrote a document granting all of his property to his sons, and the ruling about one who dispenses large sums to charity.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Yitzḥak said: In Usha</b> the Sages <b>enacted that a person should treat his son gently,</b> even if he does not want to study, <b>until</b> his son is <b>twelve years</b> old. <b>From this</b> point <b>forward he harasses him</b> in all aspects of <b>his life</b> in order to force him to study. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rav say to Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat,</b> who taught children: With regard to a child <b>less than six years old, do not accept</b> him; if he is <b>six years old, accept</b> him <b>and stuff him like an ox,</b> i.e., just as an ox is force-fed, you should force the students to study Torah.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: There is no contradiction here, as <b>yes,</b> one must <b>stuff him like an ox</b> and teach him intensively; <b>however,</b> if the student refuses to learn, one <b>does not harass him</b> in all aspects of <b>his life until after</b> he is <b>twelve years</b> old. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that this is <b>not difficult</b> for a different reason: <b>This</b> <i>halakha</i>, which prescribes forcing the students to study from the age of six, is referring <b>to</b> the <b>Bible,</b> whereas <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i>, that one should not harass a boy to study until he is twelve, is referring <b>to</b> the <b>Mishna.</b>

### Part 8
This is <b>as Abaye said:</b> My foster <b>mother told me</b> that <b>a six-year-old</b> is ready <b>for Bible</b> study and <b>a ten-year-old</b> is mature enough <b>to</b> study <b>Mishna.</b> Additionally, <b>a thirteen-year-old</b> is sufficiently developed <b>to fast for twenty-four hours</b> like any other adult. <b>And</b> as <b>for a girl,</b> she must start observing fasts when she is <b>twelve years old.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara cites another statement of Abaye in the name of his foster mother. <b>Abaye said:</b> My <b>mother told me</b> that <b>a six-year-old</b> child <b>who is stung by a scorpion on the day that</b> he <b>completes six</b> years <b>will not live</b> without emergency treatment. <b>What is his cure? The bile of a white vulture in beer. One should rub him</b> with this mixture <b>and make him drink</b> it. She further said to him: A one-<b>year-old</b> child <b>who is stung by a hornet on the day that</b> he <b>completes a year will not live</b> without emergency treatment. <b>What is his cure? Palm-tree fiber in water.</b> Again, <b>one should rub him</b> with it <b>and make him drink</b> it.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ketina said: Anyone who brings his son</b> to school when he is <b>younger than six years old</b> will <b>run after him and not catch him.</b> In other words, he will worry about his welfare for a long time afterward, as the child will be weakened by his studies. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>his friends</b> will <b>run after him</b> in their studies <b>and not catch him,</b> i.e., his early start will enable him to be far more successful. The Gemara comments: <b>And both are</b> correct; he will <b>weaken</b> physically <b>and learn</b> well. <b>If you wish, say</b> that these two statements can be reconciled differently: <b>This</b> case is dealing <b>with a weak</b> child, who should not be brought to school at such a young age, whereas <b>that</b> statement is referring <b>to a healthy</b> boy, who can go to school at a tender age and succeed in his studies.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: In Usha</b> the Sages <b>instituted</b> that in the case of <b>a woman who sold</b> her <b>usufruct property,</b> which is property that belongs to her but whose produce belongs to her husband, <b>in her husband’s lifetime, and</b> then she <b>died, the husband</b> can <b>repossess</b> it <b>from the purchasers.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef found Rabbi Abbahu standing</b> among the <b>congregation [<i>ukhlusa</i>] of Usha. He said to him: Who is the Master</b> who disseminated <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> that was instituted in <b>Usha? He said to him: Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina. He learned it from</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>forty times, and</b> from that point onward he remembered it so well that <b>it seemed to him as though it were placed in his pocket.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara discusses a point related to one of the ordinances of Usha. The verse states: <b>“Happy are they who keep justice, who perform charity at all times”</b> (Psalms 106:3). <b>But is it possible to perform charity at all times?</b> Is one always in the presence of paupers? Therefore, <b>our Rabbis in Yavne taught, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Eliezer: This is</b> referring to <b>one who sustains his sons and daughters when they are minors.</b> As stated above, he is not formally obligated to support them, and therefore when he does so, it is a form of charity that he gives on a constant basis. <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: This is</b> referring to <b>one who raises an orphan boy or an orphan girl in his house,</b> takes care of them, <b>and marries them off.</b>

### Part 13
The Sages likewise expounded the verse: <b>“Wealth and riches are in his house, and his charity endures forever”</b> (Psalms 112:3). How can one’s wealth and riches remain in his house while his charity endures forever? <b>Rav Huna and Rav Ḥisda</b> disputed this issue. <b>One said: This</b> is referring to <b>one who studies Torah and teaches it.</b> He loses nothing of his own, while his charity toward others will endure. <b>And one said: This is one who writes</b> scrolls of <b>the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings, and lends them to others.</b> The books remain in his possession, but others gain from his charity.

### Part 14
With regard to the verse: <b>“And see your son’s sons; peace be upon Israel”</b> (Psalms 128:6), <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: Once your children</b> have <b>children</b> of their own, there is <b>peace upon Israel, as they will not come</b> to require <b>the ritual through which the <i>yavam</i> frees the <i>yevama</i> of her levirate bonds [<i>ḥalitza</i>] or levirate marriage,</b> which are necessary only if a man dies childless. <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said: Once your sons</b> have <b>sons</b> there will be <b>peace upon the judges of Israel, as</b> relatives <b>will not come to quarrel</b> with the judges over the inheritance.

### Part 15
§ The Gemara returns to the mishna: <b>This exposition was expounded</b> by <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> ben Azarya <b>before the Sages</b> in the vineyard of Yavne: Just as the sons inherit only after the father’s death, so too, the daughters are sustained from his property only after their father’s death.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC