
### Part 1
The Gemara asks another question: <b>But say</b> that in a case <b>where she returns to her father’s house,</b> she <b>returns</b> to the <b>previous matter,</b> i.e., her former status, as though she had never left her father’s authority. <b>Rava said: That</b> question <b>has already been resolved</b> by <b>the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 2
This is <b>as</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: “But the vow of a widow or of a divorcée, everything with which she has bound her soul shall stand against her”</b> (Numbers 30:10). <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> this? <b>Is it not</b> already known that if she is widowed or divorced <b>she has</b> already <b>been removed from the category</b> of one under the authority of her <b>father and she has</b> likewise <b>been removed from the category</b> of one under the authority of her <b>husband?</b> Who, then, could possibly nullify her vows?

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> this is referring to a case <b>where the father delivered</b> his daughter <b>to the husband’s messengers or where the father’s messengers delivered</b> her <b>to the husband’s messengers, and she was widowed or divorced on</b> her <b>way</b> to the wedding canopy. <b>How do I consider her?</b> Is she a member of <b>her father’s house, or</b> a member of <b>her husband’s house?</b> Her status is entirely unclear. <b>Rather,</b> this verse comes <b>to tell you: Since she has left her father’s domain</b> for <b>a short time</b> her father <b>is no longer able to nullify</b> her vows, as she is considered a widow or a divorcée in all regards. The same applies to the issue at hand: She retains the status of a married woman even if she returns to her father’s house.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Pappa said: We, too, learn</b> this principle in a mishna (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 66b): <b>One who has intercourse with a young woman betrothed</b> to another <b>is liable</b> to stoning <b>only if she is a virgin, a young woman, betrothed, and she is in her father’s house.</b> The Gemara analyzes this mishna: <b>Granted,</b> the term <b>young woman</b> indicates that this punishment does <b>not</b> apply if she is <b>a grown woman;</b> similarly, this punishment applies only if she is <b>a virgin, but not</b> if she is <b>a non-virgin,</b> and only if she is <b>betrothed, but not</b> if she is <b>a married woman.</b> However, when the mishna states that she is <b>in her father’s house, what</b> does that phrase come <b>to exclude?</b> Does it <b>not</b> serve <b>to exclude</b> a case when <b>the father delivered</b> her <b>to the husband’s messengers,</b> indicating that in such a case the punishment of stoning no longer applies?

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: We, too, learn</b> this principle in another mishna (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 89a): With regard to <b>one who has intercourse with a married woman, once she has entered her husband’s authority for marriage, even though she has not had intercourse</b> with him, <b>one who has intercourse with her is</b> punished <b>by strangulation,</b> which is the punishment for adultery with a married woman. It is clear that this <i>halakha</i> applies if <b>she merely entered the husband’s authority</b> for the purpose of marriage, even if they have not yet entered the wedding canopy. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from here</b> that this is so.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A father is not obligated to</b> provide <b>his daughter’s sustenance. This exposition was expounded</b> by <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya before the Sages in the vineyard of Yavne:</b> Since the Sages instituted that after the father’s death, <b>the sons inherit</b> the sum of money specified in their mother’s marriage contract, <b>and the daughters are sustained</b> from their father’s estate, these the two <i>halakhot</i> are equated: <b>Just as the sons inherit only after the father’s death,</b> not during his lifetime, <b>so too, the daughters are sustained</b> from his property <b>only after their father’s death.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the mishna’s statement that a father is not obligated to provide his daughter’s sustenance, the Gemara infers: <b>It is with regard to</b> providing <b>his daughter’s sustenance that he is not obligated, but with regard to</b> providing <b>his son’s sustenance, he is obligated.</b> Furthermore, with regard to <b>his daughter, too, there is no obligation,</b> and therefore the court cannot compel him to provide sustenance for his daughter, <b>but there is a mitzva,</b> i.e., it is proper, for him to do so. With this interpretation in mind, <b>whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>not Rabbi Meir, nor Rabbi Yehuda, nor Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka.</b>

### Part 8
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, it is <b>a mitzva to sustain daughters,</b> and the same applies by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>to sons, who are engaged in</b> the study of <b>Torah.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>a mitzva to sustain sons,</b> and the same applies by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>with regard to daughters, due to</b> the <b>dishonor</b> they will suffer if they are forced to go around begging. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says:</b> It is <b>an obligation to sustain the daughters after their father’s death; however, during their father’s lifetime</b> both <b>these and those,</b> sons and daughters alike, <b>are not sustained.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara restates its question: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna? If</b> you say it is <b>Rabbi Meir, didn’t he say</b> that providing sustenance even to one’s <b>sons</b> is merely <b>a mitzva,</b> not an obligation? <b>If</b> the mishna expresses the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, didn’t he say</b> that providing sustenance to one’s <b>sons</b> is <b>also a mitzva,</b> not an obligation? <b>If</b> it is <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka,</b> according to his opinion <b>there is not even a mitzva</b> to provide sustenance for one’s daughters. Consequently, none of opinions of the <i>tanna’im</i> of the <i>baraita</i> fits the ruling of the mishna.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers that the mishna can be explained in several different ways. <b>If you wish, say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir; if you wish, say</b> that it follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda;</b> and <b>if you wish, say</b> it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara explains in detail: <b>If you wish, say</b> it is <b>Rabbi Meir, and this is what he said</b> in the mishna: <b>A father is not obligated to</b> provide <b>his daughter’s sustenance, and the same is true with regard to</b> providing sustenance for <b>his son.</b> This indicates that <b>there is a mitzva,</b> though not an obligation, to provide for <b>his daughter,</b> and by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference it is a mitzva with regard <b>to the sons. And</b> the reason <b>that</b> the mishna <b>teaches</b> only the case of <b>his daughter,</b> and omitted any mention of sons, is not because a father is obligated to feed his sons. Instead, it <b>teaches us this:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC