
### Part 1
<b>how the incident itself happened.</b> What are the particulars of your exchange that brought about this end result? <b>He said to him: Such and such was</b> the <b>incident,</b> and Rav Anan related the details to Mar Ukva. <b>He said to him: A man who does not know what a <i>marzeiḥa</i> is sends</b> a letter <b>to Rav Huna</b> addressing him as <b>Huna, our friend?</b> It is not your place to take such liberties in your correspondence with him, and Rav Huna was justifiably offended. The Gemara explains: <b>What is a <i>marzeiḥa</i>? A mourner, as it is written: “For so says the Lord: Enter not into the house of mourning [<i>marze’aḥ</i></b>], neither go to lament, neither bemoan them” (Jeremiah 16:5).

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said</b> concerning the same topic: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that a mourner sits at the head? As it is stated: “I chose out their way, and sat as chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that would comfort [<i>yenaḥem</i>] the mourners”</b> (Job 29:25). The Gemara challenges the proof: The word <b><i>yenaḥem</i> implies</b> one comforting <b>others</b> and not the mourner being comforted. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> Since it is written without vowels, the word can be read <b>as</b> if <b>it were written “would be comforted [<i>yinnaḥem</i>],”</b> which describes the mourner who is being comforted.

### Part 3
<b>Mar Zutra said:</b> That the mourner sits at the head may be derived <b>from here: “And the revelry [<i>mirzaḥ</i>] of those who stretched themselves shall pass away [<i>sar</i>]”</b> (Amos 6:7). The word <i>mirzaḥ</i> may alternatively be read as two distinct words: Bitter [<i>mar</i>] and flustered [<i>zaḥ</i>], and the word <i>sar</i> has a homonym that means ruler. Read this way, the verse indicates: One who is <b>bitter and flustered,</b> i.e., the mourner, <b>is made</b> the <b>ruler of those who sit,</b> i.e., the visitors who come to comfort him and sit with him. Therefore, he sits at the head.

### Part 4
The Gemara reports the conclusion of the earlier discussion: Rava said: <b>The <i>halakha</i></b> is that one may collect from the inheritors <b>from real estate and not from movable property, whether for sustenance, whether for</b> the <b>marriage contract,</b> or <b>whether for support,</b> referring to the dowry.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who transfers money</b> by means of a third party <b>for his daughter</b> to purchase a field after she marries, is the daughter allowed to assert control over the money? <b>If she says</b> after she marries: <b>My husband is trustworthy for me,</b> so give him the money to buy the property for me, her wishes are not honored. <b>The third party should execute</b> the agency <b>that was entrusted in his power;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The daughter has authority: <b>And were it only a field and she wanted to sell it, it</b> could be <b>sold immediately.</b> Just as she would have authority to control the field, she may control the money assigned for her. The mishna qualifies: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? With</b> respect to <b>an adult woman. But with</b> respect to <b>a minor girl,</b> any <b>action of a minor girl is nothing</b> from a legal standpoint; a minor would have no authority in this matter.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> (6:9): In the case of <b>one who transfers money</b> by means of a third party <b>for his son-in-law, in order to purchase with it a field for his daughter, and she says: Let</b> the money <b>be given</b> directly <b>to my husband</b> to invest as he sees fit, whether or not the court heeds her depends upon the circumstances. If she makes her appeal <b>from</b> the beginning of <b>the marriage</b> and onward, <b>she has</b> the <b>authority</b> to dictate the terms. If she makes her appeal <b>from</b> the time of <b>the betrothal</b> until the marriage, <b>the third party should execute</b> the agency <b>that was entrusted in his power;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With respect to <b>the adult woman, whether</b> the statement is <b>from the marriage or from the betrothal, she has authority.</b> In the case of <b>a minor girl, whether from</b> the time of <b>the marriage or from the betrothal, the third party should execute</b> the agency <b>that was entrusted in his power.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: In the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yosei, <b>what is</b> the practical difference <b>between them? If we say: The practical difference between them</b> pertains to the authority of <b>a minor girl from</b> the time of the <b>marriage</b> and onward, <b>as Rabbi Meir holds she has authority, and Rabbi Yosei comes to say that also, even from</b> the time of <b>the marriage, yes, an adult woman</b> may dictate terms, but <b>a minor girl</b> may <b>not,</b> this answer is untenable.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>Say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>But with</b> respect to <b>a minor girl,</b> any <b>action of a minor girl is nothing. But who teaches this? If we say it is Rabbi Yosei, but you</b> already <b>learn</b> this principle <b>from the first clause, as Rabbi Yosei said: And were it only a field and she wanted to sell it, it</b> could be <b>sold immediately.</b> This is true of adults: In the case of <b>an adult woman, who is capable of selling, yes,</b> her sale is valid. However, in the case <b>a minor girl, who is not capable of selling, no,</b> her sale is invalid.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> the latter clause <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir. And</b> the mishna <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching: The third party should execute</b> the agency <b>that was entrusted in his power. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? From the betrothal. However, from the marriage she has the authority</b> to dictate terms. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? For an adult woman. However, for a minor girl,</b> any <b>action of a minor girl is nothing.</b> Rabbi Meir agrees that a minor does not have the authority to transfer the money to her husband. What, then, is the practical difference between them? <b>Rather,</b> the <b>practical difference between them is</b> with regard to <b>an adult woman from</b> the time of <b>betrothal</b> until the marriage. Rabbi Meir holds that before marriage, she does not have the authority, and Rabbi Yosei holds that she does.

### Part 10
<b>It was stated</b> that the matter was debated by <i>amora’im</i>: <b>Rav Yehuda</b> said that <b>Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei. Rava</b> said that <b>Rav Naḥman said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 11
§ Once, it was decided to appoint Rabbi Yoḥanan to be head of the yeshiva over another candidate, the Sage Ilfa, because the latter was not in the vicinity. Suspecting that some would interpret this appointment as a sign that he was less qualified than Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>Ilfa suspended himself from the mast [<i>iskarya</i>] of a ship [<i>makhuta</i>]. He said:</b> If <b>there is</b> someone <b>who comes, who tells me a matter</b> taught in a <i>baraita</i> <b>of the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Oshaya, and I do not resolve it</b> and demonstrate that the same teaching can be derived <b>from a mishna, I will fall from the mast and drown.</b>

### Part 12
<b>A certain older man came</b> and <b>taught</b> before <b>him</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 6:10): With regard to <b>one who says</b> upon his deathbed: <b>Give a shekel to my sons for</b> each <b>week,</b> the court assesses the sons’ needs. <b>And</b> if it is <b>appropriate</b> that the court <b>gives them a <i>sela</i>,</b> which is worth two shekels, the court <b>gives them a <i>sela</i>.</b> Had the father known they would need the additional money, he would not have begrudged them. <b>But if he said: Give them only a shekel,</b> the court <b>gives them only a shekel.</b> Because their father spoke explicitly, there is no room to question his intentions. If they need more, they should take charitable aid. <b>And if he said: If they die</b> without inheritors, <b>others should inherit in their stead,</b> then <b>whether he said: Give</b> a shekel <b>or whether he said: Don’t give</b> more than a shekel, the court <b>gives them only a shekel,</b> since it is clear that he wants the inheritance to be doled out in such a way that it will remain intact for whoever will receive it. The older man asked Ilfa where this <i>halakha</i> is indicated in the Mishna.

### Part 13
Ilfa <b>said to him:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC