
### Part 1
<b>and one</b> derivation is <b>with regard to death and lashes,</b> exempting one liable to be executed from lashes. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> both verses <b>are necessary, as if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>death and monetary</b> payment, one would assert that the exemption from payment is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that we do not administer one</b> punishment <b>to his body and one to his money. However, with regard to death and lashes, that both this,</b> death, <b>and that,</b> lashes, are administered <b>to his body, say it is an extended death</b> penalty <b>and let us administer</b> lashes and then the death penalty <b>to him</b> so that his death will ensue from affliction.

### Part 2
<b>And if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>death and lashes,</b> one would assert that the exemption from lashes is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that we do not administer two</b> punishments <b>to his body. However,</b> with regard to <b>death and money, where one</b> is administered <b>to his body and one</b> is administered <b>to his money, say: Let us administer</b> both <b>to him.</b> Therefore, both verses are <b>necessary,</b> to teach that one receives only one punishment in both cases.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks with regard to the verse <b>“And you shall take no ransom for the life of a murderer,</b> who is guilty of death” (Numbers 35:31), which means that one does not take payment from a person sentenced to death, <b>why do I</b> require this verse, if that principle was already derived from another verse? The Gemara explains <b>that the Merciful One says: Do not take money from him and exempt him from</b> the <b>death</b> penalty. Similarly, the following verse: “And <b>you shall take no ransom for him that is fled to his city of refuge”</b> (Numbers 35:32), <b>why do I</b> require this verse? The Gemara explains <b>that the Merciful One says: Do not take money from him and exempt him from exile.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And why do I</b> require <b>two verses</b> to teach the same principle? The Gemara explains: <b>One</b> verse refers <b>to</b> one who killed <b>unwittingly, and one</b> verse refers <b>to</b> one who killed <b>intentionally.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> both verses <b>are necessary, as if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>an intentional</b> murderer, one would assert that payment is not accepted <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <b>prohibition</b> that <b>he</b> violated <b>is severe. However,</b> with regard to <b>an unwitting</b> killer, <b>where</b> the <b>prohibition is not severe, say no,</b> he may pay in lieu of exile. <b>And if</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> this <i>halakha</i> only with regard to <b>an unwitting</b> killer, one would assert that payment is not accepted <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that there is no loss of life,</b> as the killer is not executed, and therefore, there is no reason to allow payment in lieu of exile. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>an intentional</b> killer, <b>where there is loss of life,</b> as he will be executed, <b>say no,</b> he may pay in lieu of execution. Therefore, both verses are <b>necessary.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks with regard to the following verse: <b>“And no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it”</b> (Numbers 35:33), which also indicates that he cannot be exempted by money, <b>why do I</b> require another verse to teach that one cannot absolve himself from the death penalty by means of payment?

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>It is necessary to</b> teach <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the matter of the calf that is beheaded. If a corpse whose murderer is unknown is found between two towns, the elders of the town nearest to the corpse bring a heifer and behead it in a riverbed, after which they pray for atonement for this murder. The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that if the calf was beheaded and the murderer was found thereafter,</b> it is derived <b>that one does not exempt him</b> from punishment? It is <b>as it is stated: “And no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed therein,</b> but by the blood of him that shed it” (Numbers 35:32), from which it is inferred: And not by the blood of the calf.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: What about the following verse, from the conclusion of the chapter of the heifer: The verse <b>“And so shall you put away the innocent blood from your midst”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:9) appears to be teaching the very same <i>halakha</i>, that a murderer must be executed. <b>Why do I</b> need it? The Gemara answers that <b>it is necessary to</b> teach <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> with regard to <b>those executed by sword,</b> e.g., murderers, their execution <b>is</b> administered <b>from the neck,</b> and nowhere else? <b>The verse states: “And so shall you put away the innocent blood from your midst”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:9), <b>likening all spillers of blood to the beheaded calf</b> brought for an unresolved murder. <b>Just as there,</b> the calf is beheaded <b>from the neck, so too, murderers</b> are beheaded <b>from the neck.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, just as there,</b> in the case of the beheaded calf, it is beheaded <b>with a cleaver [<i>kofitz</i>] and at the nape of the neck, here too</b> the court executes murderers <b>with a cleaver and at the nape of the neck. Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said</b> that <b>the verse says: “And you shall love your neighbor as yourself”</b> (Leviticus 19:18), from which it is derived: <b>Choose for him an agreeable death.</b> It is prohibited to abuse a guilty person while executing him, and chopping off his head with a cleaver is an unseemly death. The murderer is beheaded from the neck, not with a cleaver, and not by the other methods employed in beheading the calf.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks with regard to the following verse: <b>“Anything dedicated [<i>ḥerem</i>], that may be dedicated of men, shall not be redeemed;</b> he shall surely be put to death” (Leviticus 27:29), which is interpreted here as: Anyone sentenced to be executed shall not be redeemed; this appears to teach the same <i>halakha</i> as above, so <b>why do I need</b> it? The Gemara explains: <b>It is necessary</b> to teach <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to</b> one <b>taken to be executed, and one</b> person <b>said: His valuation is upon me</b> to donate to the Temple, <b>that he did not say anything</b> and his vow is not binding?

### Part 10
It is derived <b>as it is stated: “Anything dedicated [<i>ḥerem</i>], that may be dedicated of men [<i>yoḥoram</i>], shall not be redeemed”</b> (Leviticus 27:29). This verse is taken to mean that anything dedicated, through which a man who is condemned [<i>yoḥoram</i>] is valuated, shall not be redeemed, as the person in question is already considered dead. One <b>might</b> think that <b>even before his verdict</b> is issued this should be <b>so,</b> and that one who said: The valuation of so-and-so on trial for murder is upon me, said nothing of consequence. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “That may be dedicated <b>of men,”</b> implying “of men,” <b>but not entire men.</b> If it is valuation of an entire man, one not yet sentenced to death, it is binding. If it is valuation of a partial man, one sentenced to death, it is not binding.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya,</b> who <b>said</b> that even a person taken to his execution <b>is valuated,</b> and the vow is binding, <b>because</b> the <b>money</b> of <b>his</b> valuation <b>is fixed.</b> The sum of the valuation established in the Torah is not based on the worth of the individual; rather, there is a fixed sum determined by age and gender. Therefore, one may be valuated as long as he is alive. According to that opinion, the question remains with regard to <b>this</b> verse: <b>“Anything dedicated,” what does</b> he derive from <b>it?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>He requires it</b> to teach <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says: Because we found with regard to those executed at the hand of Heaven,</b> and not through court-administered execution, <b>that they give money and their</b> sins <b>are atoned, as it is stated:</b> “The ox shall be stoned, and its owner shall also be put to death. <b>If there be laid upon him a ransom</b> then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatsoever is laid upon him” (Exodus 21:29–30). One whose ox kills a person is essentially liable to receive the death penalty at the hand of Heaven, and pays money instead. You <b>might</b> think that <b>even</b> with regard to those liable to receive the death penalty <b>at the hands of man</b> it is <b>so,</b> and one can pay in lieu of execution. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Dedicated of men shall not be redeemed”</b> (Leviticus 27:29). One who is executed by man cannot be redeemed with money.

### Part 13
<b>And I have</b> derived this restriction <b>only</b> with regard to prohibitions punishable by <b>severe</b> penalties of <b>death,</b> e.g., striking one’s father, <b>for which no atonement is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for their unwitting</b> violation. However, with regard to prohibitions punishable by <b>less severe</b> penalties of <b>death,</b> e.g., performing labor on Shabbat, <b>for which atonement,</b> a sin-offering, <b>is designated</b> in the Torah <b>for their unwitting</b> violation, <b>from where</b> is it derived that there is no payment in lieu of execution? <b>The verse states: “Anything dedicated,”</b> to include all prohibitions punishable by court-administered execution.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And didn’t you incidentally learn</b> the following conclusion <b>from</b> the verse <b>“And you shall take no ransom</b> for the life of a murderer, who is guilty of death” (Numbers 35:31): <b>Do not take money from him and exempt him</b> from death? <b>Why,</b> then, <b>do I</b> require the phrase: <b>Any <i>ḥerem</i>? Rami bar Ḥama said:</b> It is <b>necessary,</b> as <b>it might enter your mind to say</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC