
### Part 1
Once again the Gemara explains the sides of the dilemma: <b>Since</b> the Sages penalized the mother and declared that <b>she does not have a marriage contract,</b> the daughter <b>does not have sustenance</b> either, as her sustenance is guaranteed by her mother’s marriage contract. <b>Or perhaps,</b> with regard to <b>her mother, who violated a prohibition, the Sages penalized her</b> by depriving her of her marriage contract, whereas in the case of the daughter, <b>who did not violate a prohibition, the Sages did not penalize her.</b> Once again the Gemara states that the dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
<b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> In the case of the <b>daughter of a betrothed woman,</b> i.e., a man betrothed a woman, fathered a daughter with her, and then died, does the daughter <b>have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from his estate, <b>or</b> does <b>she not have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance? Since</b> the mother <b>has a marriage contract,</b> as in this case the man wrote her a marriage contract after betrothing her, it may be argued that the daughter <b>has</b> the right to receive sustenance. <b>Or perhaps, since the Sages did not enact</b> any requirement for a man to provide his wife with <b>a marriage contract until the time of marriage,</b> the stipulations of the marriage contract do not apply until then, and therefore the daughter of this woman <b>does not have</b> the right to receive sustenance. Again, the Gemara states that the dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>the daughter</b> of <b>a raped</b> woman, i.e., a man raped a young woman, married her, had a child, and died, does <b>she have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from her father’s estate <b>or</b> does <b>she not have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from his estate? The Gemara comments: <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, do not raise this dilemma, as he said</b> that a raped woman <b>has a marriage contract of one hundred dinars,</b> and therefore she is entitled to the stipulations of a marriage contract, one of which is that if she has a daughter with her husband, the daughter receives sustenance from the husband’s estate.

### Part 4
Rather, <b>let the dilemma be raised according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that the <b>money of her fine fulfilled</b> his obligation to provide <b>her</b> with a <b>marriage contract,</b> i.e., since she has already received the fine in compensation for the rape, she is not entitled to further payment in the form of a marriage contract. According to this opinion, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 5
The Gemara elaborates: It may be argued that <b>since</b> the mother <b>does not have a marriage contract,</b> the daughter <b>does not have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from her father’s estate. <b>Or perhaps</b> one should consider the following: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the marriage contract</b> was enacted? <b>So that</b> his wife <b>will not be demeaned in his eyes such that</b> he will easily <b>divorce her. And this one,</b> his rape victim, <b>he cannot divorce her</b> by Torah law, as it is stated: “He may not send her away all his days” (Deuteronomy 22:29). It was therefore unnecessary for the Sages to require that he provide the woman with a marriage contract. However, the reasons for the stipulations included in a marriage contract, e.g., that his daughter receives sustenance from his estate, still apply in this case. Consequently, the Sages stipulated that these provisions still be granted. Yet again the Gemara states that the dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 6
§ The mishna taught that one of the stipulations of a marriage contract is: <b>You will sit in my house</b> and be sustained from my property all your days as a widow. <b>Rav Yosef taught: In my house, and not in my hovel [<i>bikati</i>].</b> If there is no room for her in his house, the heirs are not obligated to allow her to stay there. <b>However,</b> even in this case, <b>she has</b> the right to receive her <b>sustenance</b> from the heirs. <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi said: She does not even have</b> the right to receive her <b>sustenance,</b> as she is entitled to sustenance only when she lives in her husband’s house. If she resides elsewhere, for whatever reason, she does not receive this payment. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> If a man <b>proposed to marry</b> a widow <b>and she agreed,</b> even if she has not yet married him, <b>she no</b> longer <b>has</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from the heirs of her previous husband. The Gemara comments: It may be inferred from here that if she had <b>not agreed,</b> even if the man had proposed marriage, <b>she</b> still <b>has</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance. Rav Anan said: It was explained to me personally by Mar Shmuel</b> that the <i>halakha</i> varies in different cases. If <b>she said:</b> I will not marry you <b>due to so-and-so, my</b> deceased <b>husband,</b> i.e., she still feels connected to him, <b>she</b> still <b>has</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from his estate. However, if she refused the offer <b>because</b> the men who approached her are <b>people who are unsuitable for her, she does not have</b> the right to continue to receive <b>sustenance,</b> as she has shown that in principle she is willing to remarry.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> If <b>she engaged in licentious sexual relations she does not have</b> the right to continue receiving <b>sustenance</b> from his estate, as she is not acting in a manner befitting a widow. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> If <b>she painted</b> her eyes <b>and dyed</b> her hair she has clearly done so to attract men for the purposes of marriage, and therefore <b>she does not have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from her husband’s estate.

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: According to <b>the one who says</b> that a widow who <b>engaged in licentious sexual relations</b> loses her sustenance, <b>all the more so</b> if <b>she painted</b> her eyes <b>and dyed</b> her hair she loses her sustenance, as her intention to marry is evident. However, according to <b>the one who says</b> that if a widow <b>painted</b> her eyes <b>and dyed</b> her hair she forfeits her right to receive sustenance from her husband’s estate, this ruling applies only to that particular situation. <b>However,</b> if <b>she engaged in licentious sexual relations she</b> still <b>has</b> the right to receive sustenance from his estate. <b>What is the reason?</b> Her evil <b>inclination forced her,</b> i.e., she did not make a decision to remarry but merely succumbed to temptation.

### Part 10
The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with all of these statements. Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>is, in accordance with that which Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: One who claims</b> the payment specified in <b>her marriage contract in court does not have</b> the right to continue receiving <b>sustenance,</b> as she has thereby demonstrated her desire to sever her ties with her late husband.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does she <b>not</b> receive sustenance? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who sold her marriage contract, or used her marriage contract as collateral, or established her marriage contract as designated repayment [<i>apoteiki</i>] for</b> a debt owed to <b>another</b> individual, <b>she does not have</b> the right to receive <b>sustenance</b> from her husband’s estate? The Gemara infers from this <i>baraita</i>: In <b>these</b> cases, <b>yes,</b> she forfeits her right to continue to receive sustenance. <b>However,</b> in the case of a widow who <b>claims</b> her marriage contract, <b>no,</b> she does not lose the right to continue to receive sustenance.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers that this argument is incorrect, and one should make the following inference instead: In <b>these</b> cases listed in the <i>baraita</i>, she forfeits her marriage contract <b>whether</b> she took the action <b>in court</b> or <b>whether</b> she did <b>not</b> do so <b>in court.</b> However, with regard to <b>one who claims</b> her marriage contract, if she issues this claim <b>in court, yes,</b> she loses the right to continue to receive her sustenance, but if her claim was <b>not</b> issued <b>in court, no,</b> she has not forfeited this right.

### Part 13
§ The mishna taught: <b>And the residents of Jerusalem</b> and of the Galilee <b>would</b> write the marriage contract <b>in this manner,</b> i.e., that if the woman is widowed, she may remain in her husband’s house and receive her sustenance from his property throughout her widowhood. Conversely, the residents of Judea would write that she may live in his house and be sustained from his estate until the heirs decide to give her the marriage contract. <b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> argued over this issue. <b>Rav said</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the custom of <b>the residents of Judea, and Shmuel said</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the custom of <b>the residents of the Galilee</b> and Jerusalem.

### Part 14
The Gemara comments: <b>Babylonia and all</b> of its surrounding <b>towns [<i>parvadaha</i>] act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav; Neharde’a and all</b> of its <b>towns act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b> The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain woman of Meḥoza who was married to</b> a man from <b>Neharde’a. They came before Rav Naḥman</b> to discuss her marriage contract. <b>He heard from her voice that she was from Meḥoza,</b> whose residents had a distinctive accent.

### Part 15
Rav Naḥman <b>said to them: Babylonia and all</b> of its <b>towns act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav. They said to him: But she is marrying</b> a resident of <b>Neharde’a. He said to them: If so, Neharde’a and all</b> of its <b>towns act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And until where</b> is the boundary of <b>Neharde’a? Up to</b> any place <b>where the <i>kav</i></b> measurement <b>of Neharde’a is used.</b> The entire area that utilizes the system of Neharde’a measurements is considered part of its surroundings for the purposes of this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 16
§ <b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> also argued about the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a widow. Rav said:</b> When she receives the payment of her marriage contract, the court <b>appraises</b> the clothes <b>that are upon her</b> and deducts their value from the payment she receives. <b>And Shmuel said</b> that the court <b>does not appraise</b> the clothes <b>that are upon her. Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin said: And the reverse</b> is the case <b>with regard to a hired worker.</b> With regard to a hired laborer who lived with his employer and the latter bought clothes for him, Rav and Shmuel disagreed as to whether these garments are appraised and their value deducted from the worker’s salary when he leaves his employer’s service. However, in this case Rav claims that his clothes are not appraised, whereas Shmuel maintains that they are appraised.

### Part 17
Conversely, <b>Rav Kahana</b> would <b>teach: And likewise with regard to a hired worker,</b> their respective opinions are the same in this case as well. Rav rules that one appraises the garments, while Shmuel claims that one does not. <b>And he would apply a mnemonic</b> device for Rav’s opinion: <b>An orphan and a widow, disrobe and remove</b> them. In other words, Rav maintains that both a widow and a hired worker, dubbed an orphan due to his typical poverty, should disrobe, as it were, when the court evaluates the payment to which they are entitled.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Naḥman said: Even though we learned in a mishna in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Arakhin</i> 24a): With regard to <b>both one who consecrates his property and one who valuates himself</b> by donating his fixed value to the Temple, the Temple treasurer has the right to take <b>neither his wife’s clothing, nor his children’s clothing, nor</b> new <b>dyed</b> clothing <b>that he dyed</b> specially <b>for them,</b> even if they have yet to wear them, <b>nor new sandals that he bought for them.</b> This mishna is apparently in accordance with the opinion of Shmuel that a woman’s garments are not considered her husband’s property.

### Part 19
<b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: Once we have learned a mishna in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel, why is the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav? He said to him: It would seem [<i>likhora</i>]</b> that this mishna agrees <b>with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel</b> when it is <b>skimmed through</b> and read superficially. However, <b>when you examine it</b> you will see that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is</b> in fact <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav.</b>

### Part 20
<b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>When he bought her</b> these clothes he did so <b>with the intention that she should stand before him</b> and wear them when she is with him. <b>He did not buy</b> them for <b>her with the intention that she should take</b> them <b>and leave</b> him. The reason for the mishna’s ruling is in fact that the husband acquires the clothes on behalf of his wife, but this applies only if she is living with him. Consequently, if she is living with him, the treasurer has no right to them. However, if she leaves him, she has no right to them, in accordance with the opinion of Rav.

### Part 21
§ The Gemara relates: The <b>daughter-in-law of the house of the son of Elyashiv was claiming</b> payment of <b>her marriage contract from the orphans,</b> and <b>she was</b> in the process of <b>bringing them to the court.</b> The orphans <b>said</b> to her: It is <b>demeaning for us that you should go</b> dressed <b>in this manner,</b> in house clothes. We would rather you come in more suitable attire. <b>She went</b> and <b>dressed and covered herself with all of her clothes. They came before Ravina, who said to them: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> who <b>said</b> that with regard to <b>a widow,</b> the court <b>appraises</b> the clothes <b>that are upon her.</b> Therefore, the court takes everything she is wearing into account in the calculation of her marriage contract payment.

### Part 22
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>A certain</b> person <b>said to</b> his heirs, in his will: Give <b>a dowry to</b> my <b>daughter.</b> There was an established custom for the amount of money spent on a dowry, including clothing and jewelry. In the meantime, the cost of <b>a dowry depreciated,</b> i.e., all these items could be acquired with less money. The question arose concerning the difference between the amount the father wished to give her when he wrote the will and the sum they paid in practice. <b>Rav Idi bar Avin said:</b> The <b>profit [<i>purna</i>],</b> i.e., this difference in price, goes <b>to the</b> male <b>orphans,</b> not to the daughter.

### Part 23
The Gemara cites a related incident: <b>A certain</b> person <b>said to</b> his heirs, in his will:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC