
### Part 1
it does <b>appear to be Shabbat wages.</b> Consequently, the Sages decreed that he should not give her money for Shabbat.

### Part 2
On the same issue, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosef said to Shmuel: What is</b> the reason for the difference in <i>halakha</i> <b>between a rebellious</b> man <b>and a rebellious</b> woman? According to all opinions, a rebellious wife’s fine is greater than that of a rebellious husband. <b>He said to him: Go and learn from the market of prostitutes. Who hires whose</b> services? Clearly, a man suffers more from lack of sexual intercourse, and therefore the penalty for a rebellious wife is greater. <b>Alternatively,</b> when <b>he</b> desires sexual relations, <b>his inclination</b> is noticeable <b>on the outside,</b> and therefore he feels shame as well as pain. <b>But</b> for <b>her, her inclination is on the inside,</b> and is not obvious.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If someone <b>feeds his wife by means of a third party</b> serving as a trustee, while the husband himself is not living with her for some reason, he may <b>not</b> give <b>her less than two <i>kav</i></b> of <b>wheat or four <i>kav</i></b> of <b>barley</b> a week for her sustenance. <b>Rabbi Yosei said: Only Rabbi Yishmael, who was near Edom, allotted her barley. And he</b> must <b>give her half a <i>kav</i></b> of <b>legumes, and half a <i>log</i></b> of <b>oil, and a <i>kav</i></b> of <b>dried figs or</b> the weight of <b>a <i>maneh</i></b> of <b>fig cakes. And if he does not have</b> these fruits, <b>he</b> must <b>apportion</b> for her <b>a corresponding</b> amount of <b>fruit from elsewhere.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And he</b> must <b>give her a bed, a soft mat, and</b> a hard <b>mat. And he</b> must <b>give her a cap for her head, and a belt for her waist, and</b> new <b>shoes from Festival to Festival,</b> i.e., he must buy her new shoes each Festival. <b>And</b> he must purchase <b>garments</b> for her with a value <b>of fifty dinars from year to year.</b> The mishna comments: <b>And he may not give her new</b> clothes, which tend to be thick and warm, <b>in the summer, nor worn</b> garments <b>in the rainy season,</b> as these are too thin and she will be cold. <b>Rather, he should give her clothes</b> at a value <b>of fifty dinars in the rainy season, and she covers herself with</b> these same <b>worn</b> garments <b>in the summer</b> as well. <b>And</b> the leftover, <b>worn</b> clothes belong <b>to her.</b>

### Part 5
In addition to the above, <b>he</b> must <b>give her</b> another <b>silver <i>ma’a</i></b> coin <b>for</b> the rest of <b>her needs. And she eats with him from Shabbat evening to Shabbat evening.</b> Although he may provide for her sustenance via a third party throughout the week, on Shabbat evening she has the right to eat together with him. <b>And if he does not give her a silver <i>ma’a</i></b> coin <b>for her needs, her earnings</b> belong <b>to her.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And what</b> is the fixed amount <b>that she</b> must <b>earn for him?</b> She must spin wool in the <b>weight</b> of <b>five <i>sela</i></b> of threads of the <b>warp in Judea, which are</b> equivalent to <b>ten <i>sela</i></b> according <b>to</b> the measurements of the <b>Galilee, or the weight</b> of <b>ten <i>sela</i></b> of the threads of the <b>woof,</b> which are easier to prepare, <b>in Judea, which are</b> equivalent to <b>twenty <i>sela</i></b> according <b>to</b> the measurements used in the <b>Galilee. And if she is nursing</b> at the time, the required amount <b>is reduced from her earnings and is added</b> to the sum she receives <b>for her sustenance. In what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> i.e., all these amounts and measurements, <b>said? With</b> regard to <b>the poorest of Jews,</b> i.e., these are the minimum requirements. <b>However, in the case of</b> a financially <b>prominent man, all</b> the amounts are increased <b>according to his prominence.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>not Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka and</b> it is <b>not Rabbi Shimon, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Eiruvin</i> 82b): <b>What is the measure</b> for a joining of Shabbat boundaries [<i>eiruv</i>]? It consists of a quantity of <b>food</b> sufficient for <b>two meals for each and every one</b> of those included in the <i>eiruv</i>. The <i>tanna’im</i> disagree with regard to the definition of these two meals: It is referring to <b>one’s food</b> that he eats <b>on a weekday and not on Shabbat;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is referring to the amount he eats <b>on Shabbat and not on a weekday. And</b> both <b>this</b> Sage, Rabbi Meir, <b>and that</b> Sage, Rabbi Yehuda, <b>intend to be lenient,</b> as Rabbi Meir maintains that people eat more food on Shabbat, whereas Rabbi Yehuda believes that they consume more on a weekday.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says:</b> Food for two meals is the size of <b>a loaf bought with a <i>pundeyon</i>,</b> which is one forty-eighth of a <i>sela</i>, <b>when four <i>se’a</i></b> of wheat are sold <b>for a <i>sela</i>.</b> According to this calculation, a <i>pundeyon</i> can purchase one-twelfth of a <i>se’a</i> of wheat, which is equivalent to half of a <i>kav</i>, as there are six <i>kav</i> in a <i>se’a</i>. Therefore, according to Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, one quarter of a <i>kav</i> is sufficient for a single meal. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> Food for two meals is <b>two</b> of three <b>parts of a loaf, when three loaves</b> are prepared <b>from a <i>kav</i></b> of wheat. According to Rabbi Shimon, therefore, one-ninth of a <i>kav</i> of wheat is sufficient for a meal.

### Part 9
Having discussed the various opinions with regard to the size of a loaf of bread sufficient for a meal, the mishna states that <b>half</b> of this loaf is the amount called a half [<i>peras</i>], a measure relevant <b>for</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>a leprous house.</b> If one enters a house afflicted with leprosy and remains there long enough to eat this amount of food, the clothes he is wearing become ritually impure. <b>And half of its half,</b> one quarter of a loaf this size, is the amount of ritually impure food that <b>renders the body unfit.</b> In other words, impure food of this amount imparts ritual impurity to the body of the eater and disqualifies him by rabbinic law from eating <i>teruma</i>. <b>And half of one half of its half,</b> one-eighth of this loaf, is the minimum measure of food that is <b>susceptible to ritual impurity as food.</b>

### Part 10
After the citing the mishna, the Gemara returns to its question: <b>Who is</b> the author of <b>the mishna</b> here, which says a husband must provide two <i>kav</i> of wheat per week for his wife’s sustenance? <b>If</b> it is <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka,</b> who maintains that one quarter of a <i>kav</i> is sufficient for a single meal, there <b>are</b> only <b>eight</b> meals in two <i>kav</i>, and the wife requires at least fourteen meals for a week, as it was customary to eat two meals each day. <b>And if</b> it is <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that one-ninth of a <i>kav</i> is sufficient for a meal, two <i>kav</i> <b>are</b> enough for <b>eighteen</b> meals, and therefore the mishna requires more than she actually needs.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, and</b> this is <b>as Rav Ḥisda said</b> in explanation of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka’s opinion: <b>Deduct one-third for the grocer’s</b> markup, as he takes one-third as profit. This adds one half to the total cost. <b>Here, too, bring one-third</b> and <b>add</b> it <b>to</b> the total amount of meals that can be provided by two <i>kav</i> of wheat. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Still,</b> after adjusting the calculation by adding an additional half, a measurement known by the term: Outside third, to the amount of meals that can be eaten from two <i>kav</i> of wheat, <b>they are</b> equal to <b>twelve meals.</b> This is still not sufficient, as the wife requires fourteen. The Gemara answers: <b>She eats with him on Shabbat evening.</b> Consequently, this meal is not included in the amount that must be provided through the third party.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that when the mishna is referring to eating, it means <b>literal eating. However, according to the one who says</b> that this <b>eating</b> on Shabbat evening is a euphemism, and it is actually referring to <b>conjugal relations, what can be said? And furthermore,</b> even if the meal on Shabbat evening is omitted, <b>they are</b> still <b>thirteen</b> meals that she requires but she has enough for only twelve. <b>Rather,</b> this is <b>as Rav Ḥisda said,</b> with regard to Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka’s opinion: <b>Deduct one-half for the grocer’s</b> markup. <b>So too</b> here, <b>bring a half and add</b> it <b>to</b> the total amount, which means she has enough for sixteen meals, not eight.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: This is <b>difficult</b> with regard to one statement <b>of Rav Ḥisda,</b> which seemingly contradicts the other statement <b>of Rav Ḥisda.</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement, that the grocer’s markup adds one-third to the price, is referring <b>to a place where they</b> also <b>give</b> money as a separate payment for the <b>wood</b> required to bake bread. <b>That</b> statement, that the grocer’s markup adds half, is referring <b>to a place where they do not give</b> money for <b>wood,</b> and therefore the markup must be higher to cover those costs.

### Part 14
After reconciling the apparent contradiction between the two statements of Rav Ḥisda, the Gemara returns to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka. <b>If so,</b> according to the above calculation, there <b>are sixteen</b> meals, which is more than a woman requires in a week. The Gemara suggests: In that case, <b>who is</b> the author of <b>the mishna?</b> Is it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥidka, who said</b> that <b>a person is obligated to eat four meals on Shabbat?</b> Since two meals are eaten on an ordinary weekday, this results in a total of sixteen meals a week.

### Part 15
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>You</b> can <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who maintain that one is obligated to eat only three meals on Shabbat, as you should <b>remove one meal for guests and wayfarers.</b> In other words, the husband cannot give his wife the absolute minimum amount she requires for herself and no more. He must give her enough to provide for the occasional visitor. Consequently, the total sum is somewhat more than was originally assumed.

### Part 16
The Gemara adds: <b>Now that you have arrived at this</b> answer, <b>you</b> can <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who maintains that two <i>kav</i> is sufficient for eighteen meals. This can be explained either by saying that Rabbi Shimon agrees with the opinion <b>of the Rabbis,</b> that one eats three meals on Shabbat, if you <b>remove three</b> meals <b>for guests and wayfarers,</b> or that Rabbi Shimon agrees with the opinion <b>of Rabbi Ḥidka,</b> that four meals are eaten on Shabbat, in which case you must <b>remove two</b> meals <b>for guests and wayfarers.</b> In this manner, the mishna can be reconciled with all opinions.

### Part 17
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yosei said: Only</b> Rabbi Yishmael, who was near Edom, <b>allotted her barley.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> does this indicate that <b>it is</b> only <b>in Edom that they eat barley,</b> whereas <b>in the rest of the world they do not eat</b> barley? This cannot be the case, as barley was eaten by the poor everywhere. The Gemara explains: <b>This is what</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>is saying: Only Rabbi Yishmael, who was near Edom, allotted her a double</b> amount <b>of barley</b> to that <b>of wheat, since Edomite barley is bad,</b> whereas elsewhere the barley is of a higher quality, and therefore the difference between barley and wheat is less marked.

### Part 18
§ The mishna further taught: <b>And he</b> must <b>give her half a <i>kav</i></b> of <b>legumes</b> as well as oil and fruit. The Gemara comments: <b>And yet wine is not taught</b> in the mishna. <b>This supports</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC