
### Part 1
<b>which is</b> categorized as part of <b>her earnings</b> and to which the husband has rights, <b>Rabbi Akiva says</b> the surplus belongs <b>to her,</b> then with regard to lost <b>objects</b> that <b>she found,</b> which are unrelated to her handiwork, do they <b>not all the more so</b> belong to her?

### Part 2
That is Rabbi Akiva’s opinion with regard to surplus, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 85a): With regard to a woman who said to her husband: Anything <b>that I produce</b> will be <b><i>konam</i>,</b> i.e., forbidden like an offering, <b>to your mouth, he need not nullify</b> the vow. The vow never took effect at all because a woman cannot prohibit her husband from items produced by actions that she is obligated to perform for him. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: He should nullify</b> the vow, <b>lest she produce surplus</b> that is <b>more than</b> the amount that <b>is fitting for him,</b> and the vow will take effect on the surplus, which she is not obligated to provide him. According to Rabbi Akiva, any surplus belongs to her. The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, reverse</b> the opinions: Lost <b>objects found by a wife</b> belong <b>to her husband; Rabbi Akiva says:</b> They belong <b>to her.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael, <b>didn’t</b> he say that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: With regard to surplus that is not</b> produced <b>through</b> extraordinary <b>effort, everyone agrees that it is</b> the <b>husband’s. Where they disagree</b> is in a case <b>of surplus that is</b> produced <b>through</b> extraordinary <b>effort. The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that the surplus belongs <b>to her husband, and Rabbi Akiva holds</b> that the surplus belongs <b>to her.</b> Apparently, there is no need to reverse the opinions, as Rabbi Akiva acknowledges that there are instances in which surplus belongs to the husband (Rid). The Gemara responds: <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> A lost <b>object found by</b> a wife is <b>comparable to surplus that is</b> produced <b>through</b> extraordinary <b>effort,</b> as this is not a regular occurrence. Therefore, lost objects are subject to the <b>dispute between Rabbi Akiva and the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Pappa raises a dilemma:</b> In a case where <b>she performed two</b> tasks <b>for him simultaneously, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>; is the status of the earnings the same as surplus produced through exertion? Similarly, <b>Ravina raises a dilemma:</b> In a case where she performed <b>three or four</b> tasks <b>simultaneously, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
§ The mishna states that payments for <b>her humiliation and</b> for <b>her degradation</b> belong to her, but that Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira holds that the husband receives a portion of the compensation. <b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan strongly objects to this: If that is so</b> according to Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, then if one <b>humiliated another’s horse,</b> is it then the <i>halakha</i> <b>that also</b> such an offender <b>is required to give him</b> payment for <b>humiliation?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> is <b>a horse subject to humiliation?</b> How is a horse, who suffers no humiliation, comparable to a person, who does suffer from humiliation? <b>Rather,</b> the question is: According to Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, <b>if one spat on another’s clothing,</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>that also</b> such an offender <b>be required to give him</b> payment for <b>humiliation?</b>

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>indeed</b> he would be required to pay, <b>but didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Kamma</i> 90a): If <b>he spat</b> at another person <b>and the saliva reached him, or</b> if <b>he uncovered a woman’s head, or</b> if <b>he removed his garment from</b> another, <b>he is obligated to give him</b> a payment of <b>four hundred dinars,</b> because of the extreme humiliation that he caused. <b>And Rav Pappa said: They taught</b> that he must pay four hundred dinars <b>only</b> when the spit reached <b>his</b> person. <b>However,</b> if the saliva reached <b>his garment,</b> the one who spat is <b>exempt.</b> Why, then, is one who humiliates a woman required to pay compensation to her husband? The Gemara rejects the comparison: When a person spits <b>on one’s garment, he does not</b> suffer <b>dishonor,</b> but if <b>one’s wife</b> is humiliated, <b>she</b> suffers <b>dishonor,</b> which causes him humiliation.

### Part 7
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi: However, if that is so,</b> if <b>one humiliated a poor person of noble descent, where there is dishonor for all members of the family,</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>also that he is required to give</b> payment for <b>humiliation to all members of the family?</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to him</b> that there is a distinction between one’s wife and one’s relatives. <b>There,</b> where a relative was humiliated, it is <b>not</b> as if <b>they themselves</b> had suffered the humiliation. <b>Here,</b> since <b>one’s wife is</b> considered <b>his own self,</b> it is as if he himself were humiliated.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who pledges</b> to set aside a sum of <b>money for his son-in-law</b> as part of a dowry, <b>and his son-in-law dies</b> before receiving the money, the terms of the dowry do not transfer to the brother, who is now the <i>yavam</i> of the widow. <b>The Sages said:</b> The father-in-law <b>can say</b> to the <i>yavam</i>: <b>To your brother, I wanted to give</b> this money, <b>but to you I do not want to give</b> it.

### Part 9
The mishna addresses another matter. If the woman had <b>pledged to bring in for him one thousand dinars</b> in cash as a dowry, <b>he</b> then <b>pledges,</b> in the marriage contract, that he will give her <b>fifteen hundred dinars against them.</b> That is, he writes in the marriage document that in the event of divorce or his death, he will pay her that greater amount. <b>And against</b> the <b>appraisal</b> of goods such as utensils and other movable items that are included in the dowry, <b>he pledges one-fifth less</b> than the amount of the evaluation. This is because movable property is generally assessed at a value one-fifth higher than the actual value, and he cannot earn any money from these items.

### Part 10
If the <b>appraisal</b> is set <b>at one hundred dinars and</b> the property <b>is</b> actually <b>worth one hundred dinars,</b> then since the appraisal is conducted at market value <b>he has</b> a claim to property worth <b>only one hundred dinars.</b> Likewise, he may not record a decreased sum of property. His recorded <b>appraisal</b> of the movable property that she brings into the marriage is <b>one hundred dinars</b> only when <b>she is giving thirty-one <i>sela</i> and</b> one <b>dinar,</b> equal to 125 dinars. This is because the actual value is one-fifth less than the inflated evaluation, as explained. <b>And</b> similarly, he pledges <b>four hundred</b> dinars against her assets only when <b>she is giving five hundred,</b> based on the inflated assessment of their worth, such that the real value is four hundred dinars. In contrast, <b>what</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC