
### Part 1
§ <b>Rav attached</b> the following question <b>for Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>between</b> the <b>lines</b> of a letter he sent him: With respect to <b>brothers who mortgaged</b> a certain property, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is this property subject to seizure, if need be, for the benefit of the daughters’ dowries? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya was sitting before</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi when the letter arrived. <b>He said to him:</b> What is meant in the question? Did <b>they sell</b> the property <b>or</b> did <b>they pledge</b> it as a guarantee, so that it has not yet been transferred? Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>said to him: What difference does it make? Whether they sold</b> it <b>or pledged</b> it, the court <b>may appropriate</b> the property <b>for support</b> for the daughters’ dowries, <b>but</b> the court <b>may not appropriate</b> it for their <b>sustenance.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rav</b> himself, <b>if he is raising a dilemma</b> about a case in which <b>they sold</b> the property, <b>let him write</b> explicitly that he is asking about an instance in which <b>they sold</b> the property. And <b>if he is raising a dilemma</b> about a case in which <b>they pledged</b> the property, <b>let him write</b> explicitly that he is asking about an instance in which <b>they pledged</b> the property. Why does Rav instead employ an ambiguous term?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav was raising a dilemma about both</b> cases <b>and thought: If I write to him</b> that <b>they sold</b> the property, then <b>it</b> works <b>out well if</b> he <b>sends</b> back <b>to me</b> the ruling <b>that</b> the court may <b>appropriate</b> the sold property for the daughters’ dowries. In that case, I would also understand that <b>all the more so,</b> if the brothers merely <b>pledged</b> the property, the court would appropriate it for the dowry. But <b>if he sends to me</b> the reply that the court <b>does not appropriate</b> sold property, <b>still</b> the case in which they <b>pledged</b> the property will <b>be a dilemma for me.</b>

### Part 4
Alternatively, <b>if I write to him</b> that the brothers <b>pledged</b> it, then <b>if he sends to me</b> the response <b>that</b> the court <b>does not appropriate</b> it, I can infer that <b>all the more so</b> if the brothers <b>sold</b> it we do not collect from the buyer. And <b>if he sends me</b> the response that the court <b>does appropriate</b> the land for the daughters’ dowries, <b>still</b> the case in which they <b>sold</b> the property will <b>be a dilemma for me.</b> Therefore, <b>I will write to him</b> that they <b>mortgaged</b> it, <b>which implies this</b> meaning <b>and</b> it <b>implies that</b> one, and in this way I will receive a complete answer to my question.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Whether</b> it is <b>this or whether</b> it is <b>that,</b> the court <b>does not appropriate</b> assigned or sold properties for either the support or sustenance of the daughters. <b>A dilemma was raised before them:</b> Is it <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan did not hear this</b> ruling <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>but had he heard it, he would have accepted it? Or, perhaps,</b> is it that even if <b>he had heard it, he would not have accepted it?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara proposes an answer, indicated by a dispute of <i>amora’im</i>: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as it was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> disputed a certain case. The Sages debated the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>one who died and left</b> behind <b>two daughters and a son, and the first</b> daughter <b>advanced and took one-tenth of</b> the <b>estate</b> for her dowry, <b>but the second</b> daughter <b>did not have enough time to collect</b> her one-tenth <b>before the son died.</b> When the daughters divide the remaining assets, are they divided equally, or does the second daughter receive a slightly larger sum, commensurate with an additional portion earmarked for the dowry that she has not yet collected?

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The second</b> daughter <b>forfeited</b> her right to an equal one-tenth of the estate for a dowry. No specific funds are separated from the estate as a dowry before the inheritance is divided equally among the daughters. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> The Sages <b>said</b> something even <b>greater than this</b> with respect to her support: The court <b>appropriates</b> liened property <b>for support, but</b> it <b>does not appropriate</b> it <b>for sustenance. And</b> yet would you, Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>say</b> that <b>the second</b> daughter <b>forfeited</b> her right to collect even when the property is not liened? It cannot be that her support is diminished merely because of her brother’s death.

### Part 8
The Gemara understands that there is evidence within the exchange that Rabbi Yoḥanan knew Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s opinion and nevertheless ruled against it. <b>And if it is so,</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan never heard the ruling of Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, then <b>let</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>say to</b> Rabbi Ḥanina: <b>Who stated that,</b> that property is appropriated for the dowry? Rather, Rabbi Yoḥanan must have known and rejected Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi’s ruling. The Gemara rejects the proof: <b>And perhaps he actually did not hear it; but</b> had <b>he heard it, he</b> would have <b>accepted it. And</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan ruled as he did because <b>it is different there,</b> in the case in which the son died, <b>since there is abundance</b> in <b>the house.</b> Since the second daughter receives half of all the inheritance, she is not concerned about the one-tenth of the estate.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yeimar said to Rav Ashi: If</b> that is <b>so,</b> according to that logic, then if <b>she</b> had <b>found a generic lost object, as there is abundance</b> in <b>the house</b> due to the value of the newly found article, <b>so too would we not give her one-tenth of the estate?</b> Since finding a lost object, or similarly, being independently wealthy, does not actually change her right to collect her full dowry, it stands to reason that she should collect the full dowry even when she inherits half of the remaining estate. <b>He said to him: I would say</b> this is true of <b>abundance</b> in <b>the house</b> that comes <b>from these properties</b> of the estate. Because the matter depends upon her share of the inheritance, when she commands a sizeable portion of the inheritance, she does not quibble over the one-tenth of the inheritance earmarked for her dowry. However, if she has other resources unrelated to the inheritance, her independent wealth cannot diminish her share of the inheritance with respect to the dowry.

### Part 10
§ With regard to the fundamental right of daughters to receive the support of the dowry from the estate, <b>Ameimar said: A daughter is</b> considered <b>an inheritor. Rav Ashi said to Ameimar:</b> According to your opinion, <b>if</b> another inheritor <b>wants to remove her</b> from among the inheritors <b>by</b> giving her <b>money</b> instead of inherited property, is he <b>indeed unable to remove her?</b> May she insist on receiving actual property from the estate for the purpose of her dowry? <b>He said to him: Yes,</b> she may insist on inherited property. Rav Ashi continued to ask Ameimar: <b>If</b> he <b>wants to remove her by</b> giving her <b>one</b> specific piece of <b>land,</b> is he <b>also unable to remove her,</b> since, as an inheritor, she has the right to collect portions of all the property? <b>He said to him: Yes,</b> he is limited in this way. She may insist on her right to inherit from the entire property.

### Part 11
In contrast to Ameimar, <b>Rav Ashi said: A daughter is</b> legally considered <b>a creditor</b> with regard to the inheritance, and the inheritors may insist that they will provide her support by any means, without giving her a share of the actual inheritance. The Gemara notes: <b>And even Ameimar retracted</b> his opinion that she is an inheritor, <b>as Rav Minyumi, son of Rav Niḥumi, said: I was standing in front of Ameimar, and this woman came before him, as she was asking</b> for <b>one-tenth</b> of her father’s <b>estate. And I saw that his opinion</b> was <b>that if</b> the inheritor <b>wants to remove her by</b> giving her <b>money,</b> he <b>may remove her, as I heard from</b> the woman’s <b>brothers that they were saying to her: If we had</b> sufficient <b>money, we would</b> pay your claims and <b>remove you with</b> our own <b>money. And Ameimar was silent and did not say anything to them.</b> Since Ameimar did not object to their suggestion in principle, evidently he agreed that her status was that of a creditor, who may be repaid in cash.

### Part 12
The Gemara comments: <b>And now that you</b> have reached a conclusion and <b>said</b> that the daughter <b>is</b> functionally <b>a creditor,</b> is she a creditor <b>of</b> the <b>father or of</b> the <b>brothers?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> <i>halakha</i> is there <b>a practical difference?</b> Either way, as the father has died, she receives her support from the estate. The Gemara answers: There is a difference with respect <b>to collecting intermediate-quality land without an oath and inferior-quality land with an oath.</b> If she is the father’s creditor, she may collect from the estate only the inferior-quality land with an oath. If, however, she is the brothers’ direct creditor, she may collect her claim in the same manner as standard creditors, collecting intermediate-quality land without an oath.

### Part 13
<b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Whose creditor is she? The Gemara responds: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as Ravina provided</b> one-tenth of the estate <b>for the daughter of Rav Ashi</b> from two sources. <b>From Mar, son of Rav Ashi,</b> Ravina gave her <b>intermediate-quality land without an oath.</b> He collected another portion of the property <b>from the</b> orphan <b>son of Rav Sama, son of Rav Ashi,</b> who was an inheritor of the same estate from his grandfather. This portion was provided of <b>inferior-quality land, with an oath.</b> Since, with regard to the property that Rav Ashi’s daughter was collecting from an orphan, Ravina required an oath and allowed her to collect only low-grade land, it appears that Ravina treated the daughter as the creditor of the sons and not of the father.

### Part 14
The Gemara records a number of related incidents. <b>Rav Neḥemya, son of Rav Yosef, sent</b> a message <b>to Rabba bar Rav Huna the Small, of Neharde’a: When this woman</b> bearing this letter <b>comes before you, provide her one-tenth of</b> her father’s <b>estate,</b> providing a percentage <b>even of</b> the land upon which sits <b>the millstone</b> [<b><i>itzterubela</i></b>], as this is also real estate. <b>Rav Ashi said: When we were</b> students <b>in Rav Kahana’s house, we would collect</b> the one-tenth of the estate for the dowry <b>even from the</b> income from <b>the rental fees</b> for <b>houses</b> in the estate. Since this money is earned from the real estate itself, it too is considered in calculating the appropriate dowry.

### Part 15
The Gemara recounts an interaction between Rav Anan and Rav Huna. <b>Rav Anan sent</b> the following letter to <b>Rav Huna: Huna, our friend,</b> we wish you <b>peace. When this woman</b> bearing this <b>letter comes before you, provide her one-tenth of</b> her father’s <b>estate. Rav Sheshet was sitting before him,</b> and Rav Huna <b>said to him: Go</b> and <b>say to</b> Rav Anan my reply. Knowing that Rav Sheshet may be hesitant to relay the sharp language of the reply, Rav Huna cautioned him: <b>And whoever does not say to him</b> my exact words <b>is</b> in a state of <b>excommunication: Anan, Anan,</b> should the one-tenth be provided <b>from real estate or from movable property? And,</b> incidentally, tell me <b>who sits at the head</b> in <b>the house of a <i>marzeiḥa</i>?</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rav Sheshet went before Rav Anan</b> and reverentially <b>said to him,</b> addressing him in the third person: My <b>Master</b> is <b>a teacher, but Rav Huna</b> is the <b>teacher of</b> the <b>teacher. Moreover, he</b> readily <b>excommunicates whoever does not say to him,</b> i.e., to you, my teacher, his precise message, <b>and if</b> it <b>were not that</b> he would <b>excommunicate</b> me, <b>I would not say</b> his words: <b>Anan, Anan,</b> should the one-tenth be provided <b>from real estate or from movable property? And,</b> incidentally, tell me <b>who sits at the head</b> in <b>the house of a <i>marzeiḥa</i>?</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rav Anan went before Mar Ukva</b> to consult with him about Rav Huna’s reply. He <b>said to him:</b> Let the <b>Master see how Rav Huna sent me</b> an offensive message, addressing me as <b>Anan, Anan. Moreover,</b> with regard to this word <b><i>marzeiḥa</i></b> in the letter <b>that he sent me, I do not know what it is.</b> Mar Ukva <b>said to him: Say</b> to <b>me, my friend [<i>izi</i>],</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC