
### Part 1
Rava’s dilemma is based on the assumption that a rape victim is able to conceive before she is a grown woman. The Gemara asks: <b>And can</b> a minor <b>conceive? But didn’t Rav Beivai teach</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Naḥman:</b> It is permitted for <b>three women</b> to <b>engage in relations with a</b> contraceptive <b>resorbent. These are they: A minor, and a pregnant woman, and a nursing woman.</b> The <i>baraita</i> elaborates: <b>A minor</b> may do so <b>lest she conceive and die; a pregnant</b> woman, <b>lest her</b> existing <b>fetus</b> be crushed by another fetus and <b>assume</b> the shape of <b>a sandal</b> fish if she conceives a second time; and <b>a nursing</b> woman, <b>lest</b> she conceive, causing her milk to spoil, which will lead <b>her</b> to <b>wean her son</b> prematurely, endangering his health.

### Part 2
<b>And</b> the <i>baraita</i> further states: <b>What is a minor girl?</b> A minor girl is a girl <b>from eleven years and one day old until twelve years and one day old.</b> If she was <b>less than that</b> age or <b>more than that</b> age, <b>she proceeds and engages in relations in her usual manner;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Both this</b> woman <b>and that</b> woman, i.e., in the cases of all these women, <b>she proceeds and engages in relations in her usual manner, and from Heaven they will have mercy</b> and prevent any mishap, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that it is stated: “The Lord preserves the simple”</b> (Psalms 116:6). Apparently, a minor is unable to conceive.

### Part 3
<b>And if you say that she conceived when she was a young woman,</b> twelve years old, <b>and gave birth when she was a young woman,</b> and died before she reached the status of a grown woman, can a woman <b>give birth in six months</b> after conception? <b>But didn’t Shmuel say: There are only six months between</b> becoming <b>a young woman and</b> becoming <b>a grown woman? And if you say</b> that Shmuel is saying that it is <b>less</b> than six months <b>that there is not</b> transition from young woman to grown woman status; however, <b>more</b> than six months <b>there is</b> transition, as different women develop differently, and therefore she could conceive and give birth while she is a young woman, that is not so, <b>as</b> Shmuel <b>said: Only,</b> indicating that the period is neither less nor more than six months.

### Part 4
<b>Rather,</b> Rava’s dilemma is unrelated to whether or not her son inherits the fine payment. <b>This is his dilemma: Is there</b> achievement of <b>grown-woman status in the grave and</b> therefore the right of the <b>father</b> to receive payment of the fine <b>lapsed;</b> and since there is no one claiming the payment, the rapist need not pay? <b>Or perhaps there is no</b> achievement of <b>grown-woman</b> status <b>in the grave, and</b> the right of the <b>father did not lapse. Mar bar Rav Ashi raised the dilemma</b> in <b>this</b> manner: Does <b>death effect grown-woman status or does it not effect grown-woman status?</b> No resolution was found for this dilemma, and the Gemara concludes that the dilemma <b>stands</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
On a similar note, <b>Rava inquired of Abaye:</b> If he forcibly <b>had intercourse with</b> a young woman <b>and she was</b> later <b>betrothed, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Abaye <b>said to him: Is it written: And he shall give to the father of the young woman who is not betrothed?</b> Actually it is written: “If a man finds a young woman…who was not betrothed” (Deuteronomy 22:28), which indicates that the determining factor is whether she was betrothed before the rape and not whether she is engaged at the moment of payment. Rava asked him: <b>And according to your reasoning, that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If he forcibly <b>had intercourse</b> with a young woman <b>and she</b> later <b>married,</b> the fine is paid <b>to her,</b> not to her father. There too, ask: <b>Is it written: And he shall give to the father of the young woman who is not married?</b> Even though the verse does not address the moment of payment, if she married the fine is paid to her.

### Part 6
Abaye retorted: <b>How can</b> these cases be <b>compared? There,</b> in the case of marriage, there is reason to diverge from the plain meaning of the verse, <b>as grown-woman status removes her from</b> the <b>authority of the father and marriage removes her from</b> the <b>authority of the father. Just as</b> with regard to <b>grown-woman status,</b> if he forcibly <b>had intercourse with her and she became a grown woman,</b> the fine is paid <b>to her,</b> as it is written: “And he shall give to the father of the young woman” (Deuteronomy 22:29); <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>marriage,</b> if he forcibly <b>had intercourse with her and she</b> later <b>married,</b> the fine is paid <b>to her. However,</b> with regard to <b>betrothal, does</b> it <b>remove</b> her <b>from</b> the <b>authority of the father entirely? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 66b): With regard to <b>a betrothed young woman, her father and her husband</b> together <b>nullify her vows?</b> Apparently, betrothal does not remove her entirely from her father’s authority, and therefore, the <i>halakha</i> with regard to betrothal cannot be derived from the <i>halakha</i> with regard to grown-woman status. Therefore, Rava’s question is not difficult.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The seducer gives</b> the father of his victim <b>three things, and the rapist</b> gives the father <b>four.</b> The mishna specifies: <b>The seducer gives</b> the father payments for <b>humiliation, degradation, and</b> the <b>fine. A rapist adds</b> an addition to <b>his</b> payments, <b>as he</b> also <b>gives</b> payment for the <b>pain. What</b> are the differences <b>between</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a rapist and</b> that of <b>a seducer? The rapist gives</b> payment for <b>the pain, and the seducer does not give</b> payment for <b>the pain. The rapist gives</b> payment <b>immediately, and the seducer</b> does not pay those payments immediately but only <b>when he releases</b> her. <b>The rapist drinks from his vessel [<i>atzitzo</i>],</b> i.e., marries the woman he raped, perforce, <b>and the seducer, if he wishes to release</b> her, <b>he releases</b> her.

### Part 8
The mishna clarifies: <b>How does</b> the rapist <b>drink from his vessel? Even if</b> the woman he raped <b>is lame, even if she is blind, and even if she is afflicted with boils,</b> he is obligated to marry her and may not divorce her. However, if <b>a matter of licentiousness is found in her,</b> e.g., if she committed adultery, <b>or if she is unfit to enter the Jewish people,</b> e.g., if she is a <i>mamzeret</i>, <b>he is not permitted to sustain her</b> as his wife, <b>as it is stated: “And to him she shall be as a wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:29), from which it is inferred that she must be <b>a woman who is</b> legally <b>suitable for him.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna taught that a rapist pays for the pain that he caused. The Gemara asks: <b>For what pain</b> is he obligated to pay? <b>Shmuel’s father said:</b> It is for the <b>pain that</b> he caused when <b>he slammed her onto the ground</b> while raping her. <b>Rabbi Zeira</b> strongly <b>objects to this: But if</b> what you say is <b>so,</b> if <b>he slammed her onto silk, so too</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from payment for pain? <b>And if you say indeed</b> that it is <b>so, but isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon: A rapist does not pay</b> for <b>the pain due to</b> the fact

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC