
### Part 1
In the case of <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> married <b>to an Israelite,</b> who are entitled to a marriage contract despite the fact that the relationship is forbidden and they must get divorced, <b>he is not obligated to redeem her, as I do not apply to her</b> the clause: <b>And I will restore you to me as a wife,</b> as she is forbidden to him. <b>Rava said:</b> In <b>any</b> case <b>where the prohibition of her captivity,</b> i.e., the fact that she was taken captive, <b>causes her</b> to be forbidden to her husband, as in the case of a priest’s wife who was taken captive, <b>he is obligated to redeem her.</b> However, if <b>another prohibition causes her</b> to be forbidden to her husband, e.g., the case of a widow who is married to a High Priest, <b>he is not obligated to redeem her.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> As it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who vows</b> that <b>his wife</b> may not derive benefit from him, in which case he must divorce her, <b>and she</b> is then <b>taken captive, Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> He <b>redeems</b> her <b>and gives her</b> the payment for <b>her marriage contract. Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> He <b>gives her</b> the payment for <b>her marriage contract but he does not</b> have to <b>redeem</b> her, as he may not take her back as his wife, due to his vow.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Natan said: I asked Sumakhos: When Rabbi Yehoshua said</b> that he <b>gives her</b> the payment for <b>her marriage contract but he does not</b> have to <b>redeem</b> her, was he referring to a case <b>where he vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him <b>and she was subsequently taken captive, or</b> was he speaking <b>of one who was taken captive and he subsequently vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him?

### Part 4
<b>And he said to me: I have not heard</b> a tradition on this matter, <b>but it would appear that</b> Rabbi Yehoshua does not obligate the husband to redeem her in a situation where <b>he vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him <b>and she was subsequently taken captive. As, if you say</b> that the same <i>halakha</i> applies in a case where <b>she was taken captive and he subsequently vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him, the husband might <b>come to engage in trickery.</b> If he wants to release himself from the duty to ransom his wife after she is captured, he can simply vow that she may not derive benefit from him, in which case he would be obligated to pay her only the marriage contract.

### Part 5
The Gemara now analyzes the suggested comparison between the opinions cited in this <i>baraita</i> and the dispute between Abaye and Rava. <b>What, is it not</b> the case that the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree about</b> a priest <b>who vows</b> that his wife, i.e., <b>the wife of a priest,</b> may not derive benefit from him? <b>And Abaye spoke in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> when he said that the husband must redeem his wife even if she is forbidden to him due to something other than the fact that she was taken captive, <b>and Rava spoke in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara refutes this suggestion: <b>No; with what are we dealing here?</b> With a case <b>where she vowed</b> not to derive benefit from him, <b>and</b> her husband <b>upheld it for her</b> by neglecting to nullify her vow when he heard it. The Gemara explains: <b>Rabbi Eliezer maintains</b> that <b>he is putting his finger between her teeth,</b> i.e., he causes the vow to be in effect, and therefore he must redeem her and return her to her native province. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua maintains</b> that <b>she put her finger between her</b> own <b>teeth,</b> i.e., she is responsible for the vow, because she is the one who initially pronounced it.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> Rabbi Yehoshua maintains that <b>she put her finger between her</b> own <b>teeth, what is</b> the payment of <b>the marriage contract doing</b> here? Why must he pay her marriage contract if it is her fault that they cannot remain married?

### Part 8
<b>And furthermore,</b> it was stated above that <b>Rabbi Natan said: I asked Sumakhos: When Rabbi Yehoshua said</b> that he <b>gives her</b> the payment for <b>her marriage contract but he does not</b> have to <b>redeem</b> her, was he referring to a case <b>where he vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him <b>and she was subsequently taken captive, or</b> was he speaking <b>of one who was taken captive and he subsequently vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him? <b>And he said</b> to me: <b>I have not heard</b> a tradition on this matter, but it is reasonable to assume that the case is where he took the vow and she was subsequently taken captive, as otherwise there is a concern that the husband will engage in trickery.

### Part 9
<b>But if</b> this is referring to a case <b>where she</b> was the one who <b>vowed</b> not to derive benefit from him, <b>what is</b> the difference to <b>me</b> whether <b>he</b> upheld <b>her vow and she was subsequently taken captive,</b> and <b>what is</b> the difference to <b>me</b> whether <b>she was taken captive and he subsequently</b> upheld <b>her vow?</b> Either way there is no reason to be concerned that he might engage in trickery, since she was the one who took the vow.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> this is <b>actually</b> referring to a case <b>where he</b> was the one who initially <b>vowed</b> that <b>she</b> may not derive benefit from him. <b>And Abaye explains</b> the <i>baraita</i> according <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning, and Rava explains</b> the <i>baraita</i> according <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning. Abaye explains</b> the <i>baraita</i> according <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> as follows: With regard to <b>a widow</b> who is married <b>to a High Priest, everyone agrees</b> that he is <b>obligated to redeem her.</b> If she was <b>a <i>mamzeret</i></b> or <b>a Gibeonite woman</b> married <b>to an Israelite, everyone agrees</b> that he is <b>not obligated to redeem her.</b> In the case of a priest <b>who takes a vow</b> prohibiting his wife, i.e., <b>the wife of a priest,</b> from deriving benefit from him, <b>likewise everyone agrees</b> that he is <b>obligated to redeem her, as this is</b> the same as the case of <b>a widow</b> who is married <b>to a High Priest,</b> as he can fulfill the requirement to restore her to her native province.

### Part 11
<b>When they disagree</b> it is in the case <b>of</b> an Israelite <b>who vows</b> that his wife, i.e., <b>the wife of an Israelite,</b> may not derive benefit from him. <b>Rabbi Eliezer follows</b> the status of the woman <b>at the outset,</b> i.e., when the marriage contract was written. Since at that time he could restore her to be his wife, the obligation he took upon himself to redeem her from captivity remains in effect, despite the fact that he can no longer do so due to the vow. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua follows</b> the status of the woman <b>at the end,</b> and holds that since, in practice, the husband cannot take her back as a wife because of the vow, he is no longer obligated to ransom her.

### Part 12
Similarly, <b>Rava explains</b> the <i>baraita</i> according <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning:</b> In the case of <b>a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest,</b> and <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> married <b>to an Israelite, everyone agrees</b> that he is <b>not obligated to redeem her,</b> as the prohibition against her remaining married to him results from a cause other than her captivity. <b>When they disagree</b> it is with regard to <b>one who vows</b> that his wife may not derive benefit from him, <b>whether</b> she is <b>the wife of a priest or the wife of an Israelite.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Eliezer follows</b> her status <b>at the outset</b> and holds that since he obligated himself to ransom her when he wrote the marriage contract he must act accordingly. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua follows</b> her status <b>at the end,</b> and holds that since he cannot fulfill his obligation to restore her as his wife due to a factor other than her captivity, he is entirely exempt from redeeming her.

### Part 14
§ The mishna taught that if <b>she was taken captive,</b> her husband <b>is obligated to redeem her. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of a wife who was <b>taken captive in her husband’s lifetime and afterward her husband died</b> before he could redeem her, if <b>her husband was aware of her</b> captivity, the <b>heirs are obligated to redeem her,</b> but <b>if her husband was not aware of her</b> captivity, his <b>heirs are not obligated to redeem her.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara relates: <b>Levi thought to act in accordance with this <i>baraita</i>. Rav said to him: My uncle</b> [<b><i>ḥavivi</i></b>], Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>said as follows: The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with this <i>baraita</i>. Rather,</b> it is <b>in accordance with that which is taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: If she was <b>taken captive after the death of her husband, the orphans are not obligated to redeem her. And moreover, even</b> if she <b>was taken captive in her husband’s lifetime</b> and he heard about it, <b>and afterward her husband died, the orphans are not obligated to redeem her, as I cannot apply to her</b> the clause in the marriage contract: <b>And I will restore you to me as a wife.</b> Since this stipulation cannot be fulfilled, the obligation to redeem her does not apply.

### Part 16
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If she was <b>taken captive and they were seeking</b> ransom <b>from</b> her husband of <b>up to ten times her value,</b> i.e., far more than the usual ransom for a captive of this kind, on the <b>first occasion</b> she is taken captive he must <b>redeem</b> her. <b>From this</b> point <b>forward,</b> i.e., if she was taken captive a second time, if he <b>wants</b> to, <b>he redeems</b> her, but if he does not <b>want</b> to redeem her, <b>he does not</b> have to <b>redeem</b> her, as the Sages obligated him to redeem her only once. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC