
### Part 1
<b>who have come</b> to appeal to the charity fund <b>to be married</b> off, the administrators <b>marry</b> off <b>the orphan girl</b> first <b>and afterward</b> they <b>marry</b> off <b>the orphan boy, because the humiliation of a woman</b> who is not married <b>is greater than that of</b> an unmarried <b>man.</b>

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught:</b> Concerning <b>an orphan</b> boy <b>who has come to marry,</b> the community tries its utmost to provide for all of his needs. The charities <b>rent a house for him, arrange for him a bed and all his utensils, and thereafter</b> they <b>marry him a wife, as it is stated:</b> “But you shall surely open your hand to him, and shall surely lend him <b>sufficient for his deficiency in that which is deficient for him”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:8). With regard to the phrase <b>“sufficient for his deficiency,” this</b> is referring to <b>the house. “Which is deficient”; this</b> is referring to a <b>bed and table. “For him [<i>lo</i>]”; this</b> is referring to <b>a wife. And similarly</b> the verse <b>states: “I will make him [<i>lo</i>] a helpmate for him”</b> (Genesis 2:18), when God created a wife for Adam.

### Part 3
Concerning this issue, <b>the Sages taught: “Sufficient for his deficiency”;</b> this teaches that <b>you are commanded with respect to</b> the pauper <b>to support him, but you are not commanded with respect to him to make him wealthy,</b> as the obligation encompasses only that which he lacks, as indicated by the word deficient. However, the verse also states: <b>“Which is deficient for him”;</b> this includes <b>even a horse upon which to ride and a servant to run in front of him</b> for the sake of his stature, if necessary. For someone accustomed to these advantages, their absences constitute a true deficiency, not an extravagant indulgence. The Gemara relates: <b>They said about Hillel the Elder that he obtained for a poor person of noble descent a horse upon which to ride and a servant to run in front of him. One time he did not find a servant to run in front of him, and</b> Hillel himself <b>ran in front of him</b> for <b>three <i>mil</i>,</b> to fulfill the dictate “which is deficient for him.”

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving the people of the Upper Galilee, who bought for a poor person of noble descent from</b> the city of <b>Tzippori a <i>litra</i> of meat every day.</b> The Gemara asks: If they provided him with the reasonable ration of <b>a <i>litra</i> of meat, what is the novelty</b> in this incident? Why does it bear repeating? <b>Rav Huna said:</b> It was <b>a <i>litra</i> of meat of poultry,</b> which is very expensive. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that <b>for</b> the weight of <b>a <i>litra</i></b> of coins, they bought him <b>actual</b> red <b>meat.</b> The price of ordinary meat was so expensive that they had to pay the exorbitant price of a <i>litra</i> of coins. <b>Rav Ashi said</b> they did not spend a <i>litra</i> of coins for him. Rather, <b>there,</b> in the Galilee, <b>it was a small village,</b> and <b>every day they would lose</b> an entire <b>animal</b> just <b>for him.</b> They would slaughter an animal daily, simply to provide him with fresh meat, although there was otherwise no market for such a plentiful supply of meat in the village.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates another incident concerning charity. <b>A certain</b> person <b>came before Rabbi Neḥemya</b> to request charity. <b>He said to him: On what do you</b> normally <b>dine? He said to him:</b> I usually dine <b>on fatty meat and aged wine.</b> Rabbi Neḥemya asked him: <b>Is it your wish to belittle yourself</b> and partake together <b>with me in</b> a meal of <b>lentils,</b> which is my regular food? <b>He partook with him of lentils, and he died,</b> since he was not accustomed to this food. Rabbi Neḥemya <b>said: Woe to this one who was killed</b> by <b>Neḥemya.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>On the contrary,</b> Rabbi Neḥemya <b>should have said: Woe to Neḥemya who killed this one.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Neḥemya meant that it was <b>he,</b> the pauper, <b>who should not have pampered himself so</b> much. The poor man was to blame for his own death. His excessive indulgence rendered him incapable of digesting simple foods such as lentils.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates another story. <b>A certain person came before Rava</b> to request charity. <b>He said to him: On what do you</b> normally <b>dine? He said to him: On a fattened hen and aged wine. He said to him: And were you not concerned for</b> causing <b>a burden to the community</b> by expecting such opulent foods? <b>He said to him: Is that to say</b> that it is <b>from their</b> funds that <b>I eat? I eat from</b> the support of <b>the Merciful One.</b> This would seem to be a reasonable argument, <b>as we</b> already <b>learned</b> that in the verse <b>“the eyes of all wait for You, and You give them their food in its time”</b> (Psalms 145:15), the phrase: <b>At their time, is</b> not <b>stated, rather “in its time.”</b> This <b>teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, gives each and every one his</b> personally appropriate <b>sustenance at its proper time,</b> and the community is merely His agent in discharging His will. Therefore, the man is justified in maintaining his standard.

### Part 7
<b>In the meantime,</b> while they were talking, <b>Rava’s sister, who had not seen him for thirteen years, came. And</b> as a gift, <b>she brought him a fattened hen and aged wine. Rava said</b> to himself: <b>What is this that</b> happened <b>in front of me</b> that suddenly I am brought food that I do not usually eat? He then understood that this was a providential response to what he had earlier said to the man. Rava <b>said to him: I have responded [<i>na’aneti</i>] to your</b> contention. <b>Arise</b> and <b>eat.</b>

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If an individual <b>does not have</b> sufficient means of support <b>and does not want to be supported</b> from charity funds, the charities <b>provide him</b> funds <b>as a loan</b> in a dignified manner, <b>and</b> then they <b>go back and give</b> the funds <b>to him as a gift;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> They <b>give him</b> funds <b>as a gift, and</b> then they <b>go back and give</b> the funds <b>to him as a loan.</b> The Gemara wonders about the Rabbis’ ruling: How can we give it <b>as a gift?</b> After all, <b>he does not</b> want to <b>take it</b> as a gift. The Gemara answers that <b>Rava said:</b> The Rabbis’ instruction is <b>to begin</b> discussions <b>with him</b> by offering the assistance <b>as a gift.</b> If he refuses, the charities give it to him as a loan, but they treat it as a gift and refrain from attempting to collect a debt.

### Part 9
If <b>he has</b> sufficient funds of his own <b>but does not want to support himself</b> by his own funds without the assistance of charity, the charities <b>give him</b> aid <b>as a gift, and then</b> they <b>go back and collect</b> the debt <b>from him.</b> The Gemara asks: How can the administrators of the fund <b>go back and collect from him?</b> Would their efforts not be in vain, as <b>subsequently he would not take</b> their support, knowing that he would still have to pay for it? <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> The charities collect the accrued debt from his estate only <b>after</b> his <b>death.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Shimon says,</b> disputing the opinion of the Rabbis: If <b>he has</b> sufficient funds <b>and does not want to be supported</b> by his own means, they <b>do not get involved with him,</b> as the community is not obligated to support him. If <b>he does not have and does not want to be supported</b> from charity, the charities <b>say to him: Bring collateral and take</b> a loan, <b>so that his mindset should be raised for him,</b> with the false impression that he is not receiving a handout.

### Part 10
The Gemara cites a dispute related to the previous discussions. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the double expression in the Torah: “You shall open your hand to him [<i>ha’avet ta’avitenu</i>]” (Deuteronomy 15:8). <b>“<i>Ha’avet</i>”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who does not have</b> funds <b>and does not want to be supported</b> by charity. The policy is <b>that</b> the charities <b>provide him</b> funds <b>as a loan and go back and give</b> the funds <b>to him as a gift. “<i>Ta’avitenu</i>”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who has</b> means <b>and does not want to support</b> himself. The policy is <b>that</b> the charities <b>provide</b> money <b>as a gift, and then</b> they <b>go back and collect from</b> his estate <b>after</b> his <b>death.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> If <b>he has</b> money <b>and does not want to support</b> himself, they <b>do not get involved with him.</b> The <i>baraita</i> asks: <b>How then do I uphold</b> the double expression <b>“<i>ha’avet ta’avitenu</i>”?</b> The <i>baraita</i> answers: <b>The Torah spoke in the language of men,</b> and the double form does not have halakhic significance.

### Part 12
The Gemara recounts another incident related to charity. <b>Mar Ukva</b> had <b>a pauper in his neighborhood,</b> and Mar Ukva <b>was accustomed every day to toss four dinars for him into the</b> slot adjacent to the <b>hinge of the door. One day</b> the poor person <b>said: I will go</b> and <b>see who is doing this service for me. That day Mar Ukva was delayed in the study hall,</b> and <b>his wife came with him</b> to distribute the charity.

### Part 13
<b>When</b> the people in the poor man’s house <b>saw that</b> someone <b>was turning the door,</b> the pauper <b>went out after them</b> to see who it was. Mar Ukva and his wife <b>ran</b> away <b>from before him</b> so that he would not determine their identity, and <b>they entered a certain furnace whose fire was</b> already <b>raked</b> over and tempered but was still burning. <b>Mar Ukva’s legs were being singed,</b> and <b>his wife said to him: Raise your legs and set them on my legs,</b> which are not burned. Understanding that only his wife was spared from burns, because she was more worthy, Mar Ukva <b>became distraught.</b> By way of explanation, <b>she said to him: I am</b> normally <b>found inside the house, and</b> when I give charity, <b>my assistance is ready</b> and immediate, insofar as I distribute actual food items. Since you distribute money, which is not as readily helpful, my aid is greater than yours.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> is <b>all this?</b> Why did they go to such extreme lengths to avoid being discovered? The Gemara answers: It is <b>as Mar Zutra bar Toviya said</b> that <b>Rav said, and some say</b> that <b>Rav Huna bar Bizna said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon Ḥasida said, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: It is preferable for a person to deliver himself into a fiery furnace so that</b> he <b>not whiten</b> the <b>face</b> of, i.e., embarrass, <b>his friend in public. From where do we</b> derive this? <b>From the</b> conduct of <b>Tamar, as it is written:</b> “And Judah said: Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. When <b>she was brought forth,</b> she sent to her father-in-law, saying: By the man, whose these are, am I with child” (Genesis 38:24–25). Although Tamar was taken to be executed by burning, she privately and directly appealed to Judah, rather than publicly identifying him as the father of her unborn children and causing him embarrassment.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates another incident involving Mar Ukva. <b>Mar Ukva</b> had another <b>pauper in his neighborhood,</b> and Mar Ukva <b>was accustomed to send to him four hundred dinars every</b> year on the <b>eve of Yom Kippur. One day he sent</b> the money <b>to him by the hand of his son.</b> The son <b>returned</b> and <b>said to him:</b> The poor individual <b>does not need</b> the charity. Mar Ukva <b>said: What did you see</b> that prompted you to say this? He said to him: <b>I saw them spilling old wine</b> on the ground <b>for him,</b> to give the room a pleasant smell. Mar Ukva <b>said:</b> If he is <b>pampered this much</b> and requires even this luxury, then he needs even more money. <b>He doubled</b> the funds <b>and sent them to him.</b>

### Part 16
<b>When</b> Mar Ukva <b>was dying, he said: Bring me my charity records. He found that it was written there</b> that he had given <b>seven thousand</b> fine, <b><i>siankei</i>,</b> i.e., gold, <b>dinars,</b> to charity. <b>He said: My provisions are light, and the way is far.</b> This meager sum is insufficient for me to merit the World-to-Come. <b>He got up</b> and <b>spent half</b> of <b>his</b> remaining <b>money</b> on charity. The Gemara asks: <b>How did he do this? But didn’t Rabbi Ilai say: In Usha they instituted: One who spends</b> money on charity, <b>he should not spend more than one-fifth</b> of his money for this purpose. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> restriction on giving too much charity <b>applies</b> only <b>while he is alive,</b> because <b>perhaps he will descend from his holdings</b> and become destitute. Therefore, for his own financial security, he should never distribute more than one-fifth. <b>But after death, we have no</b> problem <b>with it.</b> One need not save money in his estate anymore.

### Part 17
The Gemara recounts more stories related to charity. <b>Rabbi Abba would wrap coins in his scarf and toss</b> the money <b>behind him</b> over his shoulder. <b>And</b> he <b>would place himself at the homes of the poor</b> without being seen, so the poor could receive the aid without being embarrassed. <b>And he would incline his eyes</b> just enough so he could safeguard the handouts <b>from swindlers</b> who might take the money dishonestly.

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina</b> knew <b>a certain pauper</b> and <b>was accustomed to send to him four dinars</b> on <b>every Shabbat eve. One day he sent it in the hand of his wife. She came</b> back home and <b>said to him:</b> The man <b>does not need</b> charity. Rabbi Ḥanina asked her: <b>What did you see</b> that prompted you to say this? She said to him: <b>I heard them saying to him</b> inside the house: <b>With what do you</b> normally <b>dine:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC