
### Part 1
<b>until twenty-four months</b> from the day the child was born. The reason for this decree is to protect the child. If she remarries she may become pregnant and may not be able to continue nursing, but her second husband will not be obligated to support the child who is not his son. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> getting married <b>after eighteen months. Rabbi Natan bar Yosef said: These</b> words <b>are the same</b> as <b>the statement of Beit Shammai, and those</b> words <b>are the same</b> as <b>the statement of Beit Hillel,</b> i.e., this is an ancient dispute, <b>as Beit Shammai say: Twenty-four months, and Beit Hillel say: Eighteen months.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: I will decide. According to the one who says twenty-four months, she may marry after twenty-one months,</b> since even if she gets pregnant, for the first three months of pregnancy she can still continue to nurse. <b>According to the one who says eighteen months, she may marry after fifteen months, since the milk becomes spoiled</b> due to pregnancy <b>only after three months.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Ulla said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. And Mar Ukva said: Rabbi Ḥanina allowed me to marry</b> a nursing woman <b>after fifteen months.</b> It is related that <b>Abaye’s tenant farmer came before Abaye</b> to ask a question. <b>He said to him: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>betrothing</b> a nursing woman <b>after fifteen months?</b> Abaye <b>said to him: One</b> reason it is permitted is that in disputes between <b>Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda,</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Rabbi Yehuda. And furthermore,</b> this is actually a dispute between earlier <i>tanna’im</i>, and when <b>Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel</b> dispute, <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Beit Hillel. And</b> in addition, <b>Ulla said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with Rabbi Yehuda. And Mar Ukva said: Rabbi Ḥanina allowed me to marry after fifteen months, and</b> therefore <b>all the more so you</b> are permitted to betroth her, as you are only <b>betrothing</b> and not marrying her.

### Part 4
<b>When</b> Abaye <b>came before Rav Yosef</b> and told him of the incident, Rav Yosef <b>said to him</b> in response: <b>Rav and Shmuel both say: She must wait twenty-four months</b> before even becoming betrothed, <b>excluding the day that</b> the child <b>was born and excluding the day she became betrothed.</b> When Abaye heard this, <b>he ran three parasangs</b> after his tenant farmer, <b>and some say</b> that he ran <b>one parasang [<i>parsa</i>] through sand.</b> He wanted to inform him that he should not rely on the leniency, but rather he should act in accordance with Rav and Shmuel, who prohibited the betrothal, <b>but he did not</b> succeed in <b>catching up to him.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said</b> that he learned from this situation <b>that which the Sages said: A person should not permit even</b> eating <b>an egg in <i>kutaḥ</i>,</b> a dish made with milk, <b>in his teacher’s vicinity.</b> This is a very simple ruling, as an egg is not meat and may unquestionably be eaten with milk. There are no stringencies that apply to this case, but nevertheless one should not rule even on such a <i>halakha</i> in his teacher’s vicinity. Abaye explained that this is <b>not because it appears disrespectful</b> to teach <i>halakha</i> in one’s teacher’s vicinity, as this is a simple matter that does not require great knowledge of <i>halakha</i>, <b>rather because he will not be successful in saying the matter</b> correctly. An illustration of this principle is what just happened, <b>since I had learned this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rav and Shmuel,</b> and <b>even so I was unsuccessful in saying it</b> correctly, as I ruled in the vicinity of my teacher, Rav Yosef.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught: If</b> a woman <b>gave her child to a wet nurse</b> during the waiting period, <b>or weaned him, or</b> the child <b>died, she is permitted to marry immediately.</b> It is related that <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, thought to act in accordance with this <i>baraita</i>.</b> However, <b>a certain old woman said to them: There was an incident in which I</b> was involved with regard to this issue <b>and Rav Naḥman prohibited it for me.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rav Naḥman permit this for</b> the members of <b>the Exilarch’s household?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The Exilarch’s household is different,</b> since people employed by them <b>do not renege</b> out of fear of the consequences. Consequently, if a woman from that household arranges a wet nurse for her child, it is certain that the wet nurse will keep her commitment, whereas with other people there is a danger that if the mother remarries the child might be left without anyone to feed him.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Pappi said to</b> Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua: <b>And do you not maintain</b> that such a marriage is prohibited <b>from that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> a woman <b>frequently went to her father’s house</b> and had been there for a long time; <b>or she had been angry with her husband</b> and separated from him while still <b>in</b> his <b>house; or her husband had been incarcerated in prison; or</b> her husband <b>had gone overseas; or her husband had been old or ill; or if she was a barren woman, or elderly,</b> or <b>a sexually underdeveloped woman, or a minor girl; or if she had miscarried after the death of her husband; or if she was unfit to give birth</b> for any other reason, although in any of these cases there is no concern that she might be pregnant, <b>they must all wait</b> at least <b>three months.</b> The Sages said that a woman must wait for three months between marriages, so there would be no doubt as to who is the father of any child she may give birth to, and they did not distinguish between different women with regard to this decree. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 9
However, <b>Rabbi Yosei permits</b> all the aforementioned women <b>to be betrothed and to marry immediately,</b> since there is no concern that they may be pregnant. <b>And Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> with regard to all of <b>his decrees.</b> In every place where Rabbi Meir was stringent so as to avoid possibility of error, the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with his opinion. Consequently, this ruling should apply also to a nursing mother who wishes to remarry; the restriction should apply equally to a woman who had given her child to a wet nurse, or who had weaned him, or whose child had died.

### Part 10
<b>They answered him:</b> The matter <b>was not in our mind,</b> meaning that we had forgotten this principle. Nevertheless, the Gemara concludes: <b>The <i>halakha</i></b> is that if a nursing mother’s child <b>died,</b> the mother <b>is permitted</b> to marry immediately, but if <b>she had weaned him,</b> she <b>is prohibited</b> from marrying, lest she forcibly wean him prematurely. <b>Mar bar Rav Ashi said: Even if</b> the child <b>died, she is also prohibited</b> from marrying, because if it were permitted when the child dies, there would be concern that <b>she might kill him and</b> then <b>go and get married.</b> It is related that <b>there was an incident</b> where <b>a woman strangled</b> her child for this reason. The Gemara concludes that <b>that is not so,</b> i.e., this incident does not affect the <i>halakha</i>. <b>That woman was insane,</b> and since <b>women do not</b> ordinarily <b>strangle their children,</b> one need not be concerned about this happening.

### Part 11
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>someone gave a child</b> to a wet nurse, and she agreed <b>to nurse</b> him for payment, <b>she may not nurse her</b> own <b>child or another</b> woman’s <b>child</b> together <b>with him,</b> in order that she not take away milk from the child she is being paid to nurse. Even <b>if she fixed a small</b> allowance for food with the payment for nursing, <b>she must</b> nevertheless <b>eat large</b> quantities so that she will have enough milk. And <b>she may not eat</b> together <b>with him,</b> i.e., while she is nursing the child, <b>things</b> that are <b>bad for</b> her <b>milk.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks about this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Now</b> that <b>you said</b> that she may <b>not</b> nurse <b>her own child</b> together with her client’s child, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to say that she cannot nurse <b>another woman’s child?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that the prohibition is limited to <b>her child, as</b> there is a concern that since <b>she favors him, she will feed him more</b> milk than the other child, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>another</b> woman’s <b>child, if she did not have surplus</b> milk <b>she would not feed him,</b> and therefore it should be permitted, the <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> not to distinguish between the cases.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> said that even <b>if she fixed a small</b> allowance for food, <b>she must eat large</b> quantities. The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> should she get this food if the allowance cannot cover it? <b>Rav Sheshet said: From her own</b> funds. Because she accepted an obligation to nurse the child, she must take the necessary steps to fulfill her obligation.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> said: <b>She may not eat</b> together <b>with him things</b> that are <b>bad for</b> her milk. The Gemara asks: <b>What are these</b> foods that are detrimental for milk? <b>Rav Kahana said: For example, hops; and young, green grain</b> sprouts; <b>small fish; and soil. Abaye said: Even pumpkin and quince. Rav Pappa said: Even pumpkin and palm branches</b> with small, unripe dates. <b>Rav Ashi said: Even <i>kutaḥ</i> [<i>kamka</i>] and small</b> fried <b>fish.</b> All these items are bad, as <b>some cause milk to dry up</b> and <b>some cause milk to spoil.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara cites other possible consequences of a mother’s behavior that could affect her children: <b>A woman who engages in intercourse in a mill will have epileptic children;</b> one who <b>engages in intercourse on the ground will have long-necked children;</b> one who <b>steps on a donkey’s dung</b> when pregnant <b>will have bald children;</b> one who <b>eats mustard</b> during pregnancy <b>will have gluttonous children;</b> one who <b>eats garden cress [<i>taḥlei</i>] will have tearful children;</b> one who <b>eats</b> fish <b>brine [<i>moninei</i>] will have children with blinking eyes;</b> one who <b>eats soil will have ugly children;</b> one who <b>drinks intoxicating liquor will have black children;</b> one who <b>eats meat and drinks wine</b> during pregnancy <b>will have children</b> who are

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC