
### Part 1
<b>spread underneath him</b> to walk on, <b>and</b> with his blessing, <b>the poor</b> would <b>come and fold them up from behind him</b> for themselves? Clearly he gave abundant charity. The Gemara offers two possible explanations: <b>If you wish, say that he acted</b> that way <b>for his own honor,</b> to demonstrate that he considered the exorbitant expense trivial. <b>And if you wish, say that as he should have done, he did not do. As people say, according to the camel</b> is <b>the burden.</b> The stronger the camel, the heavier the load it must bear. Even if he gave altruistically, Nakdimon ben Guryon did not give as much as he was expected to give.

### Part 2
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 5:8) with regard to the daughter of Nakdimon ben Guryon: <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, said</b> in the form of an oath: I pray that <b>I will</b> not <b>see the consolation</b> of the Jewish people <b>if I did not see her gathering barley</b> kernels <b>from between the hooves of horses in Akko. I recited this verse about her: “If you know not, O you fairest among women, go your way forth by the footsteps of the flock and feed your kids,</b> beside the shepherds’ tents” (Song of Songs 1:8). <b>Do not read</b> it as <b>“your kids [<i>gediyotayikh</i>]” but rather</b> read it as <b>your bodies [<i>geviyotayikh</i>].</b> This woman is compelled to follow the sheep to the pastures in order to sustain her own body from the leftovers of their food.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara returns to the topic of how the groom records the bride’s dowry in the marriage contract: <b>Rav Shemen bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If <b>she brings him gold</b> in her dowry, the court <b>appraises it, and it is</b> recorded in the marriage contract <b>according to its value,</b> without additions or subtractions. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The <i>halakha</i> is that <b>the gold is like utensils</b> and not like cash for purposes of the dowry. The Gemara qualifies its objection: <b>What, is it not</b> that gold is <b>like</b> silver vessels, <b>which diminish,</b> so that they resemble all other goods in the dowry whose values are reduced in the marriage contract? The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the intent is that gold is <b>like utensils of gold, which do not diminish.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>should have</b> stated that gold is <b>like its</b> own <b>utensils,</b> which would demonstrate that gold is appraised according to its true value. Evidently, then, this is not true of gold.

### Part 4
<b>And moreover,</b> one can ask: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 6:2) that the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>gold is like utensils</b> and that <b>gold</b> dinars <b>are like silver</b> coins. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: In a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to exchange them,</b> the court <b>appraises them, and they are</b> recorded <b>at their appraised worth,</b> no more or less. The Gemara clarifies: <b>To which</b> clause is <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> referring, when he comments that they are not exchanged? <b>If we say</b> he is commenting <b>on the latter clause</b> concerning the gold dinars, <b>by inference</b> it may be understood <b>that the first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that gold dinars have the same status as cash, <b>even in a place where</b> people <b>were accustomed not to exchange them. But they are not used</b> and do not function as liquid money in a place where they are not exchanged. Why, then, does the husband need to raise the value as though they were functional cash?

### Part 5
<b>Rather, is it not</b> that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel commented <b>on the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that <b>gold is like utensils. What</b> is meant by the ambiguous term <b>utensils? Utensils of silver. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> qualifies this ruling and <b>says:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that <b>it is like gold</b> dinars, whose value remains constant, <b>in a place where they are accustomed not to exchange it</b> or use it for business. In any event, the opinion of the first <i>tanna</i> in this <i>baraita</i>, that gold is treated like silver utensils, contradicts the previous assertion that gold must have the status of gold utensils, not silver utensils.

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: <b>No, actually</b> it must be that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel commented <b>on the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, which deals with gold dinars, <b>and</b> they are not exchanged <b>because they are used</b> as cash only <b>with difficulty.</b> They are not typically used for business, but they could be used when necessary. <b>And</b> consequently, <b>they disagree about this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds since they are used</b> when necessary, <b>we increase</b> the value of gold dinars <b>for</b> the wife in the dowry, and the husband writes an increased sum in the marriage contract. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, <b>holds since they are used</b> for commerce <b>only with difficulty, we do not increase</b> the value of gold dinars <b>for her.</b> According to this interpretation, the first opinion can still subscribe to the notion that gold pieces, like gold utensils, are appraised at their actual value.

### Part 7
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead that the <b>entire</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, and</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> The <i>halakha</i> is that a piece of <b>gold is like utensils</b> and <b>gold dinars are like money. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said? In a place where</b> the people were <b>accustomed to exchange the</b> dinars. <b>However, in a place where the</b> people were <b>accustomed not to exchange the</b> dinars, the court <b>appraises their</b> worth, <b>and they are</b> recorded <b>at their appraised worth.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: In a place where the</b> people were <b>accustomed not to exchange them,</b> the court <b>appraises their</b> worth, <b>and they are</b> recorded <b>at their appraised worth.</b>

### Part 8
The contradiction from this <i>baraita</i> has been resolved, but <b>in any case,</b> a difficulty remains: If the status of gold is similar to that of gold utensils and it is appraised at its actual value, the <i>baraita</i> <b>should have</b> stated that gold is <b>like its</b> own <b>utensils</b> and not simply like any utensils. The Gemara answers: The language is <b>difficult. If you wish, say</b> the following answer instead: <b>With what are we dealing here? With smashed gold</b> fragments. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> We are dealing <b>with granules</b> of gold. Certainly, then, they are not treated as gold utensils, but the novel element of the <i>baraita</i> is that they have the status of regular utensils and not of gold dinars.

### Part 9
§ Apropos the preceding discussion concerning the appraisal of objects used for commerce, the Gemara cites a series of related comments. <b>Rabbi Yannai said:</b> With regard to <b>spices in Antioch,</b> they <b>are like money.</b> Since in Antioch they would conduct business with spices, they should be treated like cash when a woman brings them in her dowry. Similarly, <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Concerning <b>camels in Arabia, a woman may collect</b> the amount of her <b>marriage settlement from them.</b> Since they conduct business using camels in Arabia, the camels are consequently given the status that money has in other places.

### Part 10
Similarly, <b>Rav Pappi said:</b> With regard to <b>those robes in Bei Mikhsei, a woman may collect</b> her <b>marriage settlement from them</b> because they use dresses for commerce. <b>And Rav Pappi said:</b> With regard to <b>these sacks in Rodya and ropes in Kimḥonya, a woman may collect</b> her <b>marriage settlement from them. Rava said: Initially, I would have said</b> that concerning <b>those money pouches [<i>arnakei</i>] in Meḥoza, a woman may collect</b> her marriage settlement <b>from them. What is the reason? They rely on them,</b> and they serve the commercial function served by real estate in other places. <b>Once I saw that they take them and</b> the pouches <b>are used, and when they find land they buy</b> it <b>with them</b> and do not retain them, <b>I said</b> that they too <b>rely on land.</b> The money pouches are used in a fluid manner, but these pouches do not serve the same role served by real estate.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who marries</b> off <b>his daughter</b> with the terms of the dowry <b>unspecified, he must not give her less than fifty dinars.</b> If the bride’s father <b>pledged to bring her</b> into the marriage <b>bare,</b> by saying that he refuses to give her anything, <b>the husband should not say: When I bring her into my house, I will clothe her with my clothing,</b> but not beforehand. <b>Rather, he must clothe her while she is yet in her father’s house,</b> and she enters the marriage with the clothing in hand. <b>And similarly,</b> with regard to a charity administrator <b>who marries</b> off <b>an orphan girl,</b> he <b>must not give her less than fifty dinars. If there are</b> sufficient resources <b>in the</b> charity <b>fund,</b> the charities <b>provide</b> even more <b>for her,</b> furnishing a dowry and her other needs <b>according to her dignity.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Abaye said:</b> The <b>fifty dinars</b> mentioned in the mishna is referring to fifty <b>provincial</b> dinars, each of which is worth one-eighth the amount of a standard dinar. <b>From where</b> do I know that this is so? <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches: If there are</b> sufficient resources <b>in the</b> charity <b>fund,</b> the charities <b>provide</b> more <b>for her,</b> furnishing a dowry and her other needs <b>according to her dignity. And we say: What is</b> this <b>fund? Raḥava said:</b> The <b>charity fund. And if it enters our minds</b> to say that the mishna is referring to <b>fifty actual,</b> i.e., standard, <b>dinars, if there are</b> sufficient resources <b>in the fund, how many</b> standard dinars <b>do we give him?</b> Fifty standard dinars is already a sizable sum to distribute as charity. <b>Rather, conclude from this</b> comment that the mishna is referring to <b>fifty provincial dinars.</b>

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught:</b> Concerning <b>an orphan boy and an orphan girl who have come</b> and appealed <b>to be supported</b> by the charity fund, the distributors <b>provide for the orphan girl</b> first <b>and afterward</b> they <b>provide for the orphan boy.</b> This is <b>because it is the way of a man to circulate about the entryways</b> to ask for charity, <b>and it is not a woman’s way to circulate</b> for charity. Therefore, her need is greater. Concerning <b>an orphan boy and orphan girl</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC