
### Part 1
<b>there is</b> effectively an act of <b>locking</b> a door <b>in front of her</b> by withholding from her any possibility of rejoicing, <b>but</b> when he forbids her from going <b>to a house of mourning, what locking</b> of a door <b>in front of her is there? He taught: In the future she</b> too <b>will die, and no person will eulogize her</b> or take care of her, just as she did not do so for others. <b>And some say: No person will value her</b> or pay attention to her, since a person who does not visit the sick or console mourners cuts himself off from others.

### Part 2
Similarly, <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Meir used to say: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “It is better to go to a house of mourning than to go to a house of feasting, since that is the end of all men, and the living will take it to heart”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:2)? <b>What</b> does <b>“and the living will take it to heart”</b> mean? It means that they will take <b>matters</b> relating <b>to death</b> to heart, realizing that they too will eventually die. He <b>who eulogizes</b> others, people <b>will eulogize him;</b> he <b>who buries</b> someone, people <b>will bury him;</b> he <b>who lifts</b> others to bring them to burial, people <b>will</b> similarly <b>lift</b> him to bring him to burial; he <b>who escorts</b> others out for burial, people <b>will</b> similarly <b>escort him;</b> he <b>who carries</b> others, others <b>will carry him.</b> Therefore, one who does not come to a house of mourning to comfort the bereaved will himself not be treated with proper dignity when he dies.

### Part 3
§ The mishna stated: <b>And if he claimed</b> he forbade her <b>due to something else, he is permitted</b> to do so. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> meant by <b>something else? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> He claims he did so <b>due to promiscuous individuals that are</b> commonly <b>found there,</b> and he does not want his wife to be among them. <b>Rav Ashi said: We said</b> that he may forbid her <b>only</b> with regard to a case <b>where a presumption has been</b> established that promiscuous people frequent this location, <b>but</b> if <b>no</b> such <b>presumption has been</b> established, <b>it is not in his power</b> to say he is concerned about it.

### Part 4
§ The mishna stated: <b>And if he said to her:</b> The vow will be void <b>on condition that you tell</b> so-and-so what you told me, or what I told you, he must divorce her and give her the payment of her marriage contract. The Gemara asks: <b>And let her say it.</b> Why shouldn’t she simply comply with his wishes? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> It is referring to <b>degrading matters,</b> meaning intimate conversations between husband and wife, which she is ashamed to relate in the presence of others.

### Part 5
The mishna stated: <b>Or</b> he said the vow will be void on condition <b>that she fill</b> something up <b>and pour</b> it <b>into the refuse.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And let her do it. Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The mishna’s intention is <b>that</b> he demanded that <b>she fill</b> herself up <b>and</b> then <b>shake</b> herself out. This is a euphemistic way of saying that the husband wants her to take measures to prevent herself from becoming pregnant, and she is permitted to protest this. <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> The case is <b>that</b> he told her <b>to fill</b> up <b>ten jugs of water and pour</b> them <b>into the refuse,</b> a task that involves pointless effort and appears foolish.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted</b> that <b>according to Shmuel,</b> who explains that the mishna is referring to a case where the husband insists that she not become pregnant, <b>due to that</b> reason <b>he must divorce</b> her <b>and give</b> her the payment of her <b>marriage contract. But according to the <i>baraita</i>,</b> which explains that he simply wants her to engage in pointless work, <b>what difference does it make to her? Let her do it. Rabba bar bar Ḥanna said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Because she</b> would <b>appear insane</b> if she were to perform pointless actions, she may therefore demand a divorce.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Kahana said: One who vows</b> and obligates <b>his wife not to borrow or not to lend</b> utensils that people generally lend, such as <b>a sifter, or a sieve, or a mill, or an oven, must divorce</b> her <b>and give</b> her the payment of her <b>marriage contract, since</b> by making such rules <b>he causes her to develop a bad reputation among her neighbors,</b> who will suspect her of stinginess or haughtiness.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: <b>That</b> opinion <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who vows</b> and obligates <b>his wife not to borrow or not to lend a sifter, or a sieve, or a mill, or an oven, must divorce</b> her <b>and give</b> her the payment of her <b>marriage contract, since he causes her to develop a bad reputation among her neighbors. And similarly,</b> if it is <b>she who vowed not to borrow or not to lend a sifter, or a sieve, or a mill, or an oven, or that she will not weave nice garments for his children, she</b> may be <b>divorced without</b> payment of her <b>marriage contract.</b> This too is <b>because she causes him to develop a bad reputation among his neighbors,</b> as they will link her behavior to him and think that he instructed her to act this way.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these</b> are examples of women who may be <b>divorced without</b> payment of their <b>marriage contract:</b> A woman <b>who violates</b> the <b>precepts of Moses,</b> i.e., <i>halakha</i>, <b>or</b> the precepts of <b>Jewish</b> women, i.e., custom. The Mishna explains: <b>And who is</b> categorized as a woman who violates the <b>precepts of Moses?</b> This includes cases such as when <b>she feeds him</b> food <b>that has not been tithed, or she engages in sexual intercourse with him</b> while she has the legal status of <b>a menstruating woman, or she does not separate a portion of dough to be given to a priest [<i>ḥalla</i>], or she vows and does not fulfill</b> her vows.

### Part 10
<b>And who is</b> considered a woman who violates the <b>precepts of Jewish</b> women? One who, for example, <b>goes out</b> of her house, <b>and her head,</b> i.e., her hair, is <b>uncovered; or</b> she <b>spins</b> wool <b>in the</b> public <b>marketplace; or</b> she <b>speaks with every man</b> she encounters. <b>Abba Shaul says: Also one who curses his,</b> i.e., her husband’s, <b>parents in his presence. Rabbi Tarfon says: Also a loud woman. And who is</b> defined as <b>a loud woman? When she speaks inside her house and her neighbors hear her voice.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna stated: <b>She feeds him</b> food <b>that has not been tithed.</b> The Gemara attempts to clarify: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the case under discussion? <b>If he knows</b> that the food is untithed, <b>he should abstain</b> and not eat it. And <b>if he does not know</b> that the food is untithed, then <b>how does he know</b> that she in fact fed him such food, so that he can divorce her? The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary when she tells him: So-and-so</b> the <b>priest rectified the pile</b> of grain <b>for me</b> by tithing it, <b>and he</b> then <b>went and asked</b> the priest whether he did so, <b>and it was found</b> to be <b>a lie.</b> It is therefore clear that she did not tithe the food before she served it to him.

### Part 12
§ The mishna stated: <b>Or she engages in sexual intercourse with him</b> while she has the status of <b>a menstruating woman.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If he knows about her</b> that she is a menstruating woman, <b>he should abstain.</b> And <b>if he does not know,</b> then <b>he should rely on her. Because Rav Ḥinnana bar Kahana said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a menstruating woman can count</b> the days <b>for herself,</b> and that she is trusted to testify that she did so? <b>As it is stated: “Then she shall count to herself seven days”</b> (Leviticus 15:28). <b>“To herself”</b> means <b>by herself,</b> and she may be trusted that she did so. If so, why can’t the husband trust his wife that she is not a menstruating woman?

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary when she tells him: So-and-so</b> the <b>Sage purified the blood for me</b> by ruling that it did not qualify as menstrual blood, <b>and he went and asked him, and it was found</b> that her claim was <b>a lie. And if you wish, say</b> instead that this is <b>similar to that which Rav Yehuda</b> said, <b>as Rav Yehuda stated:</b> If <b>she is known by her neighbors to be a menstruating woman, her husband is flogged if</b> he has relations with <b>her, due to</b> the prohibition against cohabiting with <b>a menstruating woman.</b> In this case, she was known by her neighbors to be a menstruating woman, but she had not told her husband. She then engaged in sexual intercourse with him, and he subsequently discovered her status from her neighbors.

### Part 14
§ The mishna stated: <b>Or she does not separate <i>ḥalla</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If he knows</b> that she did not separate <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>he should abstain. If he does not know,</b> then <b>how does he know</b> about it afterward in order to divorce her? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary when she tells him: So-and-so</b> the <b>kneader rectified the dough for me</b> by separating <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>and he went and asked him, and it was found</b> that her claim was <b>a lie.</b>

### Part 15
§ The mishna also stated: <b>Or she vows and does not fulfill</b> her vows. The Gemara clarifies the reason for this, as it is different from the other cases in the mishna, where she causes her husband to violate a prohibition. In this case it is only she who violates a prohibition. <b>As the Master said: Due to</b> the sin of unfulfilled <b>vows, children die, as it is stated:</b> “It is better not to vow than to vow and not pay. <b>Do not allow your mouth to bring your flesh to sin…</b>why should the Lord become angry at your voice and destroy the work of your hands?” (Ecclesiastes 5:4–5). <b>And what is the work of a person’s hands? You must say</b> it is referring to <b>his sons and his daughters. Rav Naḥman said:</b> A proof to the above idea may be brought <b>from here: “In vain I smote your children”</b> (Jeremiah 2:30). The phrase <b>“in vain”</b> means: <b>For matters</b> caused by <b>vain</b> words, meaning that you took a vow and did not fulfill it.

### Part 16
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir used to say: Anyone who knows concerning his wife that she vows and does not fulfill</b> her vows <b>should return and vow</b> to obligate <b>her.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>He should vow</b> and obligate <b>her? How will he rectify</b> it <b>for her</b> by doing this? <b>Rather,</b> the intention is <b>he should return and provoke her, so that she will vow in his presence and he can</b> then <b>nullify</b> it <b>for her. They said to him:</b> This solution is not effective, because <b>a person does not reside in a basket [<i>kefifa</i>],</b> i.e., in close quarters, <b>with a snake,</b> since this is extremely dangerous. Similarly, he cannot constantly prevent her from taking vows, so it would be preferable that he divorce her.

### Part 17
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> similar to the previous one that <b>Rabbi Yehuda used to say: Anyone who knows concerning his wife that she does not separate <i>ḥalla</i> for him should go back and separate</b> it <b>after she</b> is finished. <b>They said to him:</b> This solution is not effective, since <b>a person does not reside in a basket with a snake.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara discusses the two applications of the idea that a husband should try to correct his wife’s misdeeds: <b>He who teaches it with regard to this,</b> the case of <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>all the more so</b> would teach it <b>for that,</b> the case of vows, which are not a daily occurrence. <b>But he who teaches it with regard to that,</b> i.e., the case of vows, teaches it only in that case, <b>but</b> in <b>this</b> case of <i>ḥalla</i>, <b>sometimes he</b> will <b>happen to eat</b> untithed produce; and Rabbi Meir holds that he cannot always be careful enough to ensure that <i>ḥalla</i> was taken.

### Part 19
§ The mishna stated: <b>And who is</b> considered a woman who violates the <b>precepts of Jewish</b> women? One who <b>goes out and her head is uncovered.</b> The Gemara asks: The prohibition against a woman going out with <b>her head uncovered</b> is not merely a custom of Jewish women. Rather, <b>it is by Torah</b> law, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to a woman suspected by her husband of having been unfaithful: <b>“And he shall uncover the head of the woman”</b> (Numbers 5:18). And <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> From here there is a <b>warning to Jewish women not to go out with an uncovered head,</b> since if the Torah states that a woman suspected of adultery must have her head uncovered, this indicates that a married woman must generally cover her head. The Gemara explains: <b>By Torah</b> law,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC