
### Part 1
<b>that she will ultimately suffer</b> the same pain during intercourse when <b>under</b> the authority of <b>her husband? They said to him: One who has intercourse against</b> her <b>will is not comparable to one who has intercourse willingly.</b> Apparently, the pain associated with rape is a direct result of the forced intercourse and not of some associated cause. <b>Rather, Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said:</b> It refers to the <b>pain of spreading</b> her <b>legs</b> during intercourse. <b>And likewise,</b> the verse <b>says: “And you opened your legs to every passerby”</b> (Ezekiel 16:25).

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, a seduced woman</b> should <b>also</b> be obligated to make that payment as well. <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh stated a parable: To what can</b> this <b>matter</b> of a seducer <b>be compared?</b> It can be compared <b>to a person who said to another: Tear my silk and be exempt</b> from payment. Since she engaged in relations of her own volition, she certainly absolved him of payment for the pain. The Gemara asks: Tear <b>my</b> silk? It is not her silk, and therefore she may not waive payment for damage to it; <b>it is</b> the silk <b>of her father,</b> as the fine and the other payments are paid to him. <b>Rather, Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said</b> that <b>the clever</b> women <b>among them say</b> that <b>a seduced woman has no pain</b> during intercourse, as she is a willing participant.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But don’t we see that</b> even a married woman <b>has</b> pain when she engages in sexual relations for the first time? <b>Abaye said: My</b> foster <b>mother told me</b> that the pain is <b>like hot water on the head of a bald</b> man. <b>Rava said:</b> My wife, <b>Rav Ḥisda’s daughter, told me</b> that it is <b>like the stab of a bloodletting knife. Rav Pappa said:</b> My wife, <b>Abba Sura’s daughter, told me</b> that it is <b>like</b> the feeling of <b>hard bread on the gums.</b> When a woman engages in intercourse willingly, the pain is negligible. Therefore, the seducer is not obligated to pay for pain.

### Part 4
§ The mishna continues: <b>The rapist gives</b> payment <b>immediately, and the seducer when he releases her, etc.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>When he releases</b> her? Is <b>she his wife?</b> He did not yet marry her, so how can the mishna use the language of divorce? <b>Abaye said: Say</b> that he gives payment <b>when</b> he opts <b>not</b> to <b>marry</b> her. If he marries her he need not pay. <b>That</b> opinion <b>was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Although they said</b> that <b>the seducer gives</b> the fine <b>when</b> he opts <b>not</b> to <b>marry</b> her, the compensation for her <b>humiliation and degradation he gives immediately.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: Although <b>both the rapist and the seducer</b> are obligated to marry their victim, <b>both she and her father are able to prevent</b> the marriage.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to <b>a woman who was seduced, it is written: “If her father refuses [<i>maen yemaen</i>]</b> to give her to him” (Exodus 22:16), and the Sages interpreted: <b>I have only</b> derived that <b>her father</b> can prevent the marriage; <b>from where do we</b> derive that <b>she herself</b> can do so? <b>The verse states:</b> <i>Maen <b>yemaen</b></i><b>,</b> a double verb indicating that the marriage can be prevented <b>in any case,</b> i.e., she too may do so.

### Part 6
<b>However,</b> from where is it derived that they can prevent the marriage in the case of <b>a rapist? Granted, she</b> herself can prevent the marriage, as <b>it is written: “And to him she shall be</b> as a wife” (Deuteronomy 22:29), and the term “shall be” indicates <b>with her consent. However, from where do we</b> derive that <b>her father</b> can prevent the marriage?

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said:</b> No verse is necessary as it stands to reason that the father too can prevent the marriage <b>so that a sinner will not profit.</b> If her father could not prevent the marriage, the rapist would acquire the right to marry the young woman despite the father’s refusal, a right not accorded to one who seeks to betroth a young woman in a conventional manner. <b>Rava said</b> it is derived through <b>an <i>a fortiori</i> inference: Just as</b> in the case of <b>a seducer, who contravened only her father’s will,</b> as she acquiesced to his proposition, nevertheless <b>both she and her father can prevent</b> the marriage; in the case of <b>a rapist, who contravened</b> both <b>her father’s will and her own will, all the more so</b> is it <b>not</b> so that both she and her father can prevent the marriage?

### Part 8
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Rava did not say in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Abaye,</b> as <b>since</b> the rapist <b>pays the fine he is not a sinner</b> who <b>profits,</b> as he too must pay the dowry of a virgin even if he marries her. Likewise, <b>Abaye did not say in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Rava</b> because in the case of <b>a seducer, where</b> the seducer himself <b>can prevent</b> the marriage, <b>her father can also prevent</b> the marriage. In the case of <b>a rapist, where</b> the rapist himself <b>cannot prevent</b> the marriage, <b>her father also cannot prevent</b> the marriage.

### Part 9
<b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Although</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>the rapist gives</b> payment <b>immediately, when he releases</b> her <b>she has no</b> claim <b>upon him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>When he releases</b> her? <b>Can he release her?</b> It is prohibited by Torah law for him to do so. Rather, emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say: When she leaves,</b> if she seeks to divorce him and demands a bill of divorce, <b>she has no</b> monetary claim <b>upon him.</b> Similarly, if <b>he died,</b> the <b>money of her fine offsets her marriage contract.</b> The fine, which was the equivalent of the dowry of virgins, replaces her marriage contract. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> Even a rape victim <b>has a marriage contract</b> of <b>one hundred dinars,</b> like the marriage contract of all non-virgin wives.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do they disagree?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>The Rabbis maintain: What is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages instituted a marriage contract</b> for the woman? They instituted it <b>so that she will not be inconsequential in his eyes,</b> enabling him <b>to</b> easily <b>divorce her.</b> Because divorcing her will cost money, he will not do so rashly. <b>And this</b> woman whom he raped, <b>he cannot release her</b> by Torah law, obviating the need for a marriage contract. <b>And Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, maintains:</b> With regard to <b>this</b> woman <b>too,</b> although he cannot divorce her, he can <b>torment her until she says: I do not want you.</b> When she initiates the divorce, he can divorce her. Therefore, the Sages instituted that she receives the marriage contract of a non-virgin to prevent him from doing so.

### Part 11
The mishna continues: <b>A rapist drinks from his vessel,</b> and the seducer is not obligated to marry the woman he seduced. <b>Rava from Parzakya said to Rav Ashi: Since</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of a rapist and a seducer <b>are derived from each other</b> with regard to the sum of the fine,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC