
### Part 1
<b>And just as</b> witnesses <b>render</b> other <b>witnesses false, conspiring</b> witnesses <b>only in their presence,</b> because with their testimony they render them liable to be punished, <b>so too,</b> witnesses <b>contradict</b> the testimony of other witnesses <b>only in their presence.</b> Since the signatories to the document are dead, their testimony cannot be contradicted.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Naḥman said to</b> Rav Sheshet: <b>If</b> the first pair of witnesses <b>was before us and</b> the second pair would <b>contradict</b> their testimony, <b>that is contradiction, and we would not consider their</b> testimony and would not collect money with the document, <b>as it is contradicted testimony. Now that they are not</b> before us, and in a case <b>where if they were before us perhaps they would have admitted to</b> the second witnesses that the testimony of the second witnesses is correct, <b>are they deemed credible,</b> and the document that they signed valid?

### Part 3
<b>Rather, Rav Naḥman said</b> in the case where the testimony of the first witnesses is contradicted not in their presence, the ruling is: <b>Establish two</b> witnesses <b>against</b> the <b>two</b> witnesses who contradict their testimony, thereby neutralizing both testimonies, <b>and establish the money in the possession of its owner, just as it was</b> in the case <b>of the property of bar Shatya. As</b> when <b>bar Shatya,</b> a man who suffered from periodic bouts of insanity, <b>sold</b> his <b>property, two</b> witnesses <b>came</b> and <b>said: He sold</b> it <b>when he was insane; and two</b> other witnesses <b>came</b> and <b>said: He sold</b> it <b>when he was sane.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> in that case: <b>Establish two</b> witnesses <b>against</b> the <b>two</b> witnesses who contradict the testimony of the first pair, <b>and establish the money in the possession of bar Shatya.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>We say</b> that the property remains in the possession of bar Shatya <b>only when he has</b> possession of the property based on <b>the possession of his fathers. However, if he does not have</b> possession of the property based on <b>the possession of his fathers,</b> but he acquired the property himself, <b>we say: He purchased</b> his properties <b>when he was insane, and he sold them when he was insane.</b> He does not have presumptive ownership of them. Therefore, the property remains in the possession of the person to whom bar Shatya sold it.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Abbahu</b> disagrees with the opinion of Rav Sheshet and <b>says:</b> Witnesses <b>render</b> other <b>witnesses false, conspiring</b> witnesses <b>only in their presence, but</b> witnesses <b>contradict</b> the testimony of other witnesses <b>not in their presence. And</b> with regard to <b>rendering</b> other <b>witnesses false, conspiring</b> witnesses <b>not in their presence, although it is not</b> effective in <b>rendering them false, conspiring</b> witnesses in the sense that they are punished for their false testimony, <b>in any case, it is contradiction</b> of their testimony.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i> cited previously: <b>If there are</b> other <b>witnesses</b> who testify <b>that it is their handwriting, or if their handwriting emerges from another place, from a document that one challenged and</b> that <b>was deemed valid in court,</b> these witnesses are <b>not deemed credible.</b> The Gemara infers: From a document <b>that one challenged, yes,</b> the signatures are authenticated and the testimony of the other witnesses is not accepted; however, <b>if one did not challenge</b> the document, <b>no,</b> the document cannot be used to authenticate their signatures. This <b>supports</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Asi, as Rabbi Asi said: One ratifies a document</b> by authenticating the witnesses’ signatures <b>only from a document that</b> someone <b>challenged and</b> that <b>was deemed valid in court.</b>

### Part 7
The Sages <b>of Neharde’a say: One ratifies a document</b> by authenticating the witnesses’ signatures <b>only from two marriage contracts or from</b> the bills of sale for <b>two fields</b> that those witnesses signed. <b>And</b> those bills of sale are effective <b>only</b> in a case <b>where their owner ate their</b> produce for <b>three years,</b> the requisite period to establish presumptive ownership of the field, <b>and in peace,</b> undisturbed by protest. In that case we can rely on the signatures, and the documents are considered valid.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi said:</b> Authentication of signatures by comparison to other documents can be accomplished specifically <b>when</b> the documents <b>emerge from the possession of another. However,</b> when the documents emerge <b>from the possession of</b> the litigant <b>himself, no,</b> they may not be used to authenticate the signatures. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> in a case where the documents emerge <b>from the possession of</b> the litigant <b>himself that</b> they may <b>not</b> be used to authenticate the signatures? It is that <b>perhaps</b> while the documents were in his possession he learned how to copy the signatures and <b>forged</b> them. If so, <b>also</b> in a case where the documents emerge <b>from the possession of another, perhaps he went and saw</b> the signatures, and <b>came</b> back <b>and forged</b> them. The Gemara answers: In that case, <b>he would not be able</b> to <b>accurately</b> reproduce the signatures <b>to that extent</b> based on memory alone.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught: A person may write his testimony in a document and testify on its</b> basis <b>even after several years</b> have passed. <b>Rav Huna said: And</b> that <b>is</b> the <i>halakha</i> only <b>if he remembers</b> the testimony <b>on his own</b> and he uses the document merely to refresh his memory with regard to certain details. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> One may rely on that written testimony <b>even if he does not remember</b> the testimony <b>by himself</b> at all. <b>Rabba said: Conclude from</b> this statement of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> With regard to <b>these two witnesses who know testimony</b> in a certain case, <b>and one of them forgot</b> the testimony, <b>one</b> witness <b>may remind his fellow</b> witness of the testimony, as according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, even if the witness remembers the testimony only by means of an external stimulus, the testimony is valid.

### Part 10
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If the litigant <b>himself</b> reminds the witness of the testimony, <b>what is</b> the ruling? <b>Rav Ḥaviva said: Even</b> if the litigant <b>himself</b> reminds the witness, he may testify. <b>Mar, son of Rav Ashi, said:</b> If the litigant <b>himself</b> reminds the witness, he <b>may not</b> testify. <b>And</b> the Gemara concludes that <b>the <i>halakha</i> is</b> that if the litigant <b>himself</b> reminds the witness of the testimony, the witness <b>may not</b> testify, due to the concern that the litigant influenced the nature of his testimony.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC