
### Part 1
<b>she may refuse</b> her husband <b>and go</b> on <b>her</b> way. According to this opinion, the marriage did not take effect at all, despite the fact that they engaged in sexual intercourse, because the betrothal involved an error.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> If a man betroths a woman on condition that there are no vows incumbent upon her to fulfill, but there are vows incumbent upon her, and <b>she goes to a halakhic authority and he dissolves her</b> vows, <b>she is betrothed.</b> However, if he betroths her on condition that she has no blemishes, but she does have blemishes, and she goes <b>to a doctor and he heals her</b> blemishes, <b>she is not betrothed.</b> The Gemara inquires: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between a halakhic authority and a doctor?</b> The Gemara explains: When <b>a halakhic authority</b> dissolves a vow, he <b>uproots the vow retroactively.</b> It is as if she had never vowed at all, and therefore she was in fact not bound by vows at the time of their betrothal. <b>But a doctor only heals from here onward.</b> Since she had blemishes at the time of betrothal, she is in breach of his condition.

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i> that if she goes <b>to a halakhic authority and he dissolves her</b> vows, or <b>to a doctor and he heals her</b> blemishes, <b>she is not betrothed? Rava said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> for <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> and <b>that</b> one follows <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that if her vows were dissolved by a halakhic authority she is betrothed, is in accordance with <b>Rabbi Meir, who said</b> that <b>a man is willing for his wife to be degraded</b> by going <b>to court</b> to have her vow dissolved. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i> follows the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, who said</b> that <b>a man is not willing for his wife to be degraded in court.</b> Consequently, even if she went to a halakhic authority and he dissolved her vows, such a solution is unacceptable to her husband, as he did not want her to go to court. Therefore, the betrothal is invalid even after the dissolution of the vow.

### Part 4
The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is</b> this fundamental dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Elazar? The Gemara answers: <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Gittin</i> 45b): If a man <b>who divorces his wife due to a vow</b> that she took subsequently regrets his decision and wants to take her back, <b>he may not remarry</b> her. Similarly, if he divorces her <b>due to a bad reputation</b> she has acquired, <b>he may not remarry</b> her. This is because if he were allowed to take her back if the vow is dissolved by a halakhic authority or after discovering that the rumors about her were false, he might say that had he known this he never would have divorced her. Such a statement would retroactively cast doubt on the validity of the bill of divorce and could potentially cause her children from a second marriage to have the status of <i>mamzerim</i>. He is therefore informed that if he divorces her due to a vow or a bad reputation he can never remarry her.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>any vow that is known by many</b> people and therefore cannot be nullified, <b>he may not remarry</b> her. If <b>it is not known by many</b> people, but rather is a private matter between them, <b>he may remarry</b> her. <b>Rabbi Meir says: Any vow that requires investigation by a halakhic authority,</b> that is, the husband cannot nullify it himself and she needs a halakhic authority to analyze the vow carefully to find an opening that will permit its dissolution, <b>he may not remarry</b> her, for he can claim that had he known the vow could be dissolved he would never have divorced her, thereby undermining the bill of divorce. <b>And</b> with regard to a vow <b>that does not require the investigation by a halakhic authority,</b> which he knows he can nullify himself, <b>he may remarry</b> her. There is no concern that he might impair the bill of divorce, as he knew he could dissolve the vow and yet he chose to divorce her regardless.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Elazar says: Both</b> in the case of a vow that <b>requires</b> investigation by a halakhic authority <b>and one that does not require</b> it, <b>he may not remarry</b> her. <b>Rabbi Elazar said</b> in explanation of his view: <b>They prohibited</b> remarrying a woman who was bound by a vow that <b>requires</b> investigation by a halakhic authority <b>only due to</b> a vow <b>that does not require</b> such investigation. The Gemara explains the respective opinions: <b>What is the reason for Rabbi Yehuda’s</b> statement? <b>As it is written:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC