
### Part 1
<b>However, according to the one who says</b> the rebellion is <b>against</b> performing <b>tasks,</b> is <b>an ill woman fit to perform tasks?</b> Since she is ill, she has no obligation to perform tasks and this is not deemed rebellious behavior. <b>Rather,</b> one must explain this as follows: If she rebelled <b>against</b> engaging in <b>marital relations, everyone agrees that she is</b> defined as <b>a rebellious</b> woman. <b>They disagree</b> with regard to one who rebels <b>against</b> performing <b>tasks.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rav Huna, <b>holds</b> that one who rebels <b>against performing tasks is not a rebellious woman, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, <b>holds</b> that one who rebels <b>against performing tasks is also</b> considered <b>a rebellious</b> woman.

### Part 2
§ With regard to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself:</b> A woman who <b>rebels against her husband</b> is fined; <b>we reduce her marriage contract</b> by <b>seven dinars</b> each <b>week,</b> and <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Seven <i>terapa’ikin</i>. Our Sages went back and were counted again,</b> meaning they voted and decided that instead of deducting a small amount from her marriage contract each week, <b>they would make</b> public <b>announcements about her for four consecutive <i>Shabbatot</i>. And</b> they decided <b>that the court would send</b> messengers <b>to her</b> to inform her: <b>Be aware that even if your marriage contract is worth ten thousand dinars, you will lose</b> it all if you continue your rebellion. If she does not retract her rebellion, she forfeits her entire marriage contract. With regard to this enactment, <b>it is the same to me,</b> meaning the <i>halakha</i> does not change, if she is <b>a betrothed woman or a married woman,</b> and <b>even</b> if she is <b>a menstruating woman, and even</b> if she is <b>ill, and even</b> if she is <b>a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i></b> to perform levirate marriage.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Yosef said to Shmuel: Is a menstruating woman fit</b> to engage in <b>conjugal relations? He said to him: One who has bread in his basket,</b> i.e., one who knows that he will be able to engage in relations with his wife after her period of menstrual impurity ends, <b>is not comparable to one who does not have bread in his basket.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rami bar Ḥama said: We make announcements about her only in synagogues and study halls,</b> but not in the street. <b>Rava said: The</b> language of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise, as it teaches:</b> They would make announcements on <b>four consecutive <i>Shabbatot</i>,</b> which are days when no labor is performed and people are not to be found in the streets, but rather in synagogues and study halls. The Gemara summarizes: <b>Conclude from</b> this that this is the case. <b>Rami bar Ḥama said: The court sends</b> people to talk <b>with her twice, once before the announcement and once after the announcement.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Rav Ḥisda taught</b> with regard to this: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the decision of <b>our Sages. Rava said: This is an absurdity [<i>burkha</i>]. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said to him: What is absurd about this? I said this to him, and I said it to him in the name of a great man. And who is</b> the great man who ruled this way? <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And in accordance with whose</b> opinion does Rava <b>hold?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>In accordance with that which was stated: Rava</b> said that <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is</b> that <b>she is consulted</b> in an attempt to convince her to retract her decision, and while doing so deductions are made from her marriage contract. But <b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda</b> said that <b>Rav Sheshet said: The <i>halakha</i> is</b> that <b>we do not consult with her.</b> According to both versions of Rav Sheshet’s ruling, she does not lose her marriage contract immediately but rather it is reduced every week. This is the source for Rava’s opinion.

### Part 7
§ With regard to this <i>halakha</i>, the Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> in which the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a rebellious</b> woman applies? <b>Ameimar said:</b> The case is where <b>she says: I want</b> to be married to <b>him, but</b> I am currently refusing him because <b>I want to cause him anguish</b> due to a dispute between us. <b>However,</b> if <b>she said: I am disgusted with him, we do not compel her</b> to remain with him, as one should not be compelled to live with someone who disgusts her. <b>Mar Zutra said: We</b> do <b>compel her</b> to stay with him.

### Part 8
It is related: <b>There was an incident</b> in which a woman rebelled, claiming that she was disgusted with her husband, <b>and Mar Zutra compelled her</b> to stay with him. <b>And from this</b> couple <b>issued Rabbi Ḥanina of Sura.</b> This demonstrates that even such coercion can cause a blessing. However, the Gemara concludes: <b>That is not so.</b> That case should not serve as a precedent, as <b>there</b> the positive outcome <b>was</b> due to <b>heavenly assistance.</b> Ordinarily, nothing good results from conjugal relations that the wife does not desire.

### Part 9
It is related that <b>the daughter-in-law of Rav Zevid rebelled</b> against her husband. <b>She was holding a certain garment</b> in her hands. <b>Ameimar, Mar Zutra, and Rav Ashi were sitting, and Rav Gamda was sitting with them. They sat and said:</b> If a woman <b>rebelled, she lost</b> her right to <b>her worn clothes,</b> meaning she has forfeited the clothes she brought with her for her dowry even if they are still in existence. <b>Rav Gamda said to them: Because Rav Zevid is a great man,</b> are <b>you</b> willing to <b>flatter him</b> with regard to this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Didn’t Rav Kahana say: Rava raises a dilemma</b> about this issue with regard to worn clothes, <b>and he did not resolve it?</b> Yet you reached a decision out of respect for Rav Zevid. This is inappropriate. <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that this incident happened differently, as these three Sages <b>sat and said:</b> If she <b>rebelled, she did not lose</b> her right to <b>her worn clothes. Rav Gamda said to them:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC