
### Part 1
One recites praise of <b>the bride as she is,</b> emphasizing her good qualities. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> One recites: <b>A fair and attractive bride. Beit Shammai said to Beit Hillel:</b> In a case <b>where</b> the bride <b>was lame or blind,</b> does <b>one say</b> with regard <b>to her: A fair and attractive bride? But the Torah states: “Keep you from a false matter”</b> (Exodus 23:7). <b>Beit Hillel said to Beit Shammai:</b> According <b>to your statement,</b> with regard to <b>one who acquired an inferior acquisition from the market,</b> should another <b>praise it</b> and enhance its value <b>in his eyes or condemn it</b> and diminish its value <b>in his eyes? You must say</b> that <b>he should praise it</b> and enhance its value <b>in his eyes</b> and refrain from causing him anguish. <b>From here the Sages said: A person’s disposition should always be empathetic with mankind,</b> and treat everyone courteously. In this case too, once the groom has married his bride, one praises her as being fair and attractive.

### Part 2
<b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said: This is what they sing before brides in the West,</b> in Eretz Yisrael: <b>No eye shadow, and no rouge, and no braiding</b> of the hair, <b>and</b> yet she is comparable to <b>a graceful ibex.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>When the Sages ordained Rabbi Zeira, this</b> is what <b>they</b> metaphorically <b>sang</b> with regard <b>to him</b> in his praise: <b>No eye shadow, and no rouge, and no braiding</b> of the hair, <b>and</b> yet she is comparable to <b>a graceful ibex.</b>

### Part 3
On a related note, the Gemara relates: <b>When the Sages ordained Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi, this</b> is what <b>they sang to them: Anyone from</b> people of <b>this</b> kind <b>and anyone from</b> people of <b>that</b> kind, <b>ordain</b> them <b>for us. Do not ordain for us</b> others, <b>neither from</b> those who <b>corrupt [<i>sarmisin</i>]</b> <i>halakhot</i>, <b>nor from</b> those who are <b>worthless [<i>sarmitin</i>]. And some say: Not from</b> those who provide only <b>one-fifth [<i>ḥamisin</i>]</b> of the reason for a <i>halakha</i>, <b>and not from</b> those whose knowledge is <b>incomplete [<i>turmisin</i>].</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates another instance of singing the praise of the Sages: <b>When Rabbi Abbahu would come from the academy to the house of the emperor, the maidservants of the emperor’s house would go out to greet him, and this</b> is what <b>they sang to him: Master of his people and leader of his nation, candle of illumination, blessed is your arrival in peace.</b>

### Part 5
With regard to the mitzva of bringing joy to the bride and groom, the Gemara relates: The Sages <b>said about Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai that he would take a myrtle branch and dance before the bride, and say: A fair and attractive bride. Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak would</b> base his <b>dance on three</b> myrtle branches that he would juggle. <b>Rabbi Zeira said: The old man is humiliating us,</b> as through his conduct he is demeaning the Torah and the Torah scholars. It is further related: <b>When</b> Rav Shmuel bar Rav Yitzḥak <b>died, a pillar of fire demarcated between him</b> and <b>everyone</b> else, <b>and we learn</b> through tradition <b>that a pillar of fire demarcates only for either one</b> person <b>in a generation or for two</b> people <b>in a generation.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: His branch [<i>shotitei</i>] was effective for the old man,</b> as it is due to this mitzva that he fulfilled so enthusiastically that he was privileged to receive this great reward. <b>And some say</b> that Rabbi Zeira said: <b>His nonsense [<i>shetutei</i>]</b> was effective <b>for the old man. And some say</b> that he said: <b>His method [<i>shittatei</i>]</b> was effective <b>for the old man.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Aḥa would place</b> the bride <b>on his shoulders</b> and dance. <b>The Sages said to him: What</b> is the ruling? Is it permitted for <b>us to do so as well? He said to them: If</b> brides are <b>comparable for you to a beam, fine, but if not, no,</b> you may not.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said:</b> It <b>is permitted to look at the face of a bride</b> throughout <b>all seven</b> days of the wedding celebration, <b>in order to endear her to her husband,</b> whose appreciation of her beauty will be thereby enhanced. The Gemara notes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with his</b> opinion, as it is prohibited to look at any married woman, even a bride.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught: One reroutes</b> the funeral procession for burial of <b>a corpse</b> to yield <b>before</b> the wedding procession of <b>a bride. And both this,</b> the funeral procession, <b>and that,</b> the wedding procession, yield <b>before a king of Israel. They said about King Agrippa [<i>Agrippas</i>] that</b> although he was not required to do so, <b>he rerouted</b> his entourage <b>before</b> the wedding procession of <b>a bride, and the Sages praised him</b> for doing so.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: The Sages <b>praised him;</b> is that to say <b>by inference that he did well</b> in yielding? <b>But didn’t Rav Ashi say: Even</b> according <b>to the one who said</b> with regard to <b>a <i>Nasi</i> who relinquishes</b> the <b>honor</b> due <b>him</b> that <b>his honor is relinquished,</b> i.e., he may do so, with regard to <b>a king who relinquishes</b> the <b>honor</b> due <b>him, his honor is not relinquished. As the Master said</b> that the meaning of the verse <b>“You shall place a king over you”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:15) is <b>that his awe shall be upon you.</b> The Torah established that the subjects’ awe is an essential component of kingship and it is not the prerogative of the king to waive it. The Gemara answers: <b>It was</b> at <b>a crossroads</b> that he encountered the wedding procession, and the fact that he yielded to the bride was not obvious to onlookers. Therefore, the honor due the king was not compromised.

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught: One suspends the study of Torah to</b> attend <b>the removal of a corpse</b> for burial <b>and to</b> attend <b>the entry of a bride into</b> the wedding canopy. The Sages <b>said about Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Elai, that he would suspend the study of Torah to</b> attend <b>the removal of a corpse</b> for burial <b>and to</b> attend <b>the entry of a bride into</b> the wedding canopy. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> In a case <b>where</b> there are <b>not</b> enough people <b>with him,</b> i.e., accompanying the corpse, to satisfy <b>all his needs,</b> i.e., to appropriately honor him. <b>However, if</b> there are enough people <b>with him</b> to satisfy <b>all his needs, one does not suspend</b> Torah study.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And how many</b> people constitute <b>all his needs? Rav Shmuel bar Eini said in the name of Rav: Twelve thousand men and six thousand</b> additional men each sounding <b>a shofar</b> to herald the approaching funeral procession. <b>And some say: Thirteen thousand men and, among them, six thousand</b> men sounding <b>a shofar. Ulla said:</b> All his needs means a crowd large enough <b>so that the men</b> in the funeral possession <b>form a partition</b> stretching <b>from the gate of the city [<i>abbula</i>] until the cemetery. Rav Sheshet, and some say Rabbi Yoḥanan, said: The</b> number of people required for <b>taking</b> of the Torah from the Jewish people with the death of a Torah scholar <b>is equivalent to</b> the number present at <b>its giving</b> to the Jewish people. <b>Just as its giving</b> took place <b>with six hundred thousand</b> men present at Sinai, <b>so too,</b> the <b>taking</b> of the Torah at the funeral of a Torah scholar <b>is with six hundred thousand</b> men. The Gemara notes: <b>This applies only to one who read</b> the Bible <b>and studied</b> mishna, i.e., one who is a student of Torah, and consequently worthy of that honor.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC