
### Part 1
There is a <b>fine even in a place</b> where there is <b>sale.</b> That is, not only can a minor girl from the age of three be sold until she matures, but she also receives payment of the fine.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara questions the basic <i>halakha</i> that one who rapes young women of flawed lineage is liable to pay the fine: <b>And are these</b> young women <b>entitled</b> to the <b>fine? But why? I read here</b> with regard to a rapist: <b>“And to him she shall be as a wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:29), from which the Sages derived that only <b>a wife who is suitable for him</b> is eligible to receive payment of a fine from a rapist. <b>Reish Lakish said</b> that one verse states: “If a man finds a young woman” (Deuteronomy 22:28), and another states: “And he shall give to the father of the young woman” (Deuteronomy 22:29). This is tantamount to three mentions: <b>Young woman, young woman, the young woman,</b> as the superfluous definite article is interpreted as a third mention of the term. <b>One</b> mention is required <b>to</b> teach the matter <b>itself,</b> that one who rapes a young woman is liable to pay a fine; <b>and one</b> is <b>to include</b> payment of a fine to those young women for whose rape one is <b>liable for</b> violating <b>prohibitions; and one</b> is <b>to include</b> payment of a fine to those young women for whose rape one is <b>liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b> This is derived from the <i>halakha</i> of the seducer, as the verses state: “And if a man seduce a virgin…he shall weigh money like the dowry of the virgins” (Exodus 22:15–16). This is tantamount to three mentions: <b>Virgin, virgins, the virgins. One</b> mention is required <b>to</b> teach the matter <b>itself; and one</b> is <b>to include</b> those young women for whose rape one is <b>liable for</b> violating <b>prohibitions; and one</b> is <b>to include</b> those young women for whom one who rapes them is <b>liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rav Pappa, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not cite</b> the source <b>as Reish Lakish</b> did? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> derivation from the three instances of the term young woman is <b>required by him to</b> teach <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Abaye</b> said, <b>as Abaye said:</b> If one <b>engaged in</b> forced <b>intercourse with</b> a young woman <b>and she died</b> before he stood trial, he is <b>exempt</b> from paying the fine, <b>as it is stated: “And he shall give to the father of the young woman”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:29). From the fact that the verse does not simply say: To her father, it is inferred: <b>To the father of the young woman and not to the father of a dead</b> woman. He is liable only if the young woman is still alive.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And Reish Lakish, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not cite</b> the source <b>as Rav Pappa</b> did? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> derivation from the three instances of the term virgin is <b>required by him to</b> derive <b>a verbal analogy, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written with regard to a seducer: <b>“He shall weigh [<i>yishkol</i>] money like the dowry of the virgins”</b> (Exodus 22:16), from which it is derived <b>that this</b> fine of a seducer <b>should be</b> a sum of fifty <i>sela</i> <b>like the dowry of the virgins</b> specified in the case of a rapist; <b>and the dowry of the virgins must be</b> paid in <i>sela</i> <b>like this</b> fine of the seducer. Therefore, Reish Lakish holds that no additional matters may be derived from the term virgins. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> for <b>Reish Lakish too,</b> isn’t it <b>required by him to</b> teach <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Abaye</b> said? <b>And</b> similarly, for <b>Rav Pappa,</b> isn’t it <b>required by him to</b> derive <b>a verbal analogy?</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> there are <b>six verses written,</b> and both Reish Lakish and Rav Pappa derive matters from all of them. In the two passages discussing the rapist and the seducer, it is written: <b>Young woman, young woman, the young woman; virgin, virgins, the virgins. Two</b> mentions are required <b>to</b> teach the matters <b>themselves,</b> the basic <i>halakhot</i> of a rapist and a seducer; <b>one</b> mention is needed <b>to</b> teach <b>in accordance with that</b> which <b>Abaye</b> said; <b>and one</b> mention is necessary <b>to</b> derive <b>a verbal analogy</b> with regard to the dowry of virgins. <b>Two</b> mentions of the term <b>remain for him; one</b> is <b>to include</b> those young women for whose rape one is <b>liable for</b> violating <b>prohibitions, and one</b> is <b>to include</b> those young women for whom one who rapes them is <b>liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>.</b> Reish Lakish and Rav Pappa do not disagree; the derivation of each complements that of the other.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> the mishna comes <b>to exclude</b> the opinion <b>of this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“And to him she shall be [<i>tihye</i>] as a wife”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:29). <b>Shimon HaTimni says:</b> This is referring to <b>a woman for whom there is betrothal [<i>havaya</i>].</b> If one betroths a woman with whom relations are punishable by <i>karet</i>, the betrothal does not take effect. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya says:</b> This is referring to <b>a woman who is suitable for</b> him to <b>sustain,</b> whom he need not divorce due to her flawed lineage.

### Part 8
The Gemara begins its analysis of the <i>baraita</i> with the question: <b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> the statements of Shimon HaTimni and Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya? The Gemara explains that <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> The difference <b>between their</b> opinions is with regard to <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman,</b> or any other woman who is forbidden but for whom betrothal takes effect. <b>According to the one who said</b> that the criterion is whether <b>there is betrothal,</b> for <b>this</b> woman <b>there is also betrothal.</b> If a Jewish man betroths a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman, although it is prohibited to do so, the betrothal takes effect. However, <b>according to the one who said</b> that the criterion is whether the woman is <b>suitable for</b> him to <b>sustain, this</b> woman <b>is not suitable for</b> him to <b>sustain,</b> since due to the prohibition he is obligated to divorce her.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Akiva, who said: Betrothal does not take effect for</b> women for whose rape one is <b>liable for</b> violating <b>prohibitions, what is</b> the difference <b>between them?</b> According to his opinion, betrothal of a <i>mamzeret</i> does not take effect either. The Gemara answers: The difference <b>between their</b> statements is the case of <b>a widow</b> raped <b>by a High Priest, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Simai, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Simai says: Rabbi Akiva deems</b> children <b>from all</b> illicit relations <b><i>mamzerim</i>, except for a</b> child born <b>from a widow to a High Priest, as the Torah said:</b> “A widow and a divorcée <b>he shall not take…and he shall not profane [<i>yeḥallel</i>]</b> his seed among his people” (Leviticus 21:14–15), from which it is derived: If he has a child with a widow <b>he creates <i>ḥillulin</i>,</b> i.e., the male offspring of those relations is a <i>ḥalal</i>, disqualified from the priesthood, and the female offspring is a <i>ḥalala</i>, unfit to marry a priest, <b>but he does not create <i>mamzerim</i>.</b> Apparently, in that case, the betrothal does take effect.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Yeshevav, who said: Come, let us scream at Akiva ben Yosef,</b> who is proliferating <i>mamzerim</i>, <b>as he would say:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who does not have</b> the possibility of permitted <b>relations in the Jewish people,</b> including a widow with a High Priest, <b>the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>, what is</b> the difference <b>between their</b> opinions, between the one who said that a fine is paid to women with whom the betrothal takes effect and the one who said that a fine is paid to women suitable for one to sustain? Rabbi Yeshevav maintains that betrothal does not take effect even in the case of a widow to a High Priest. The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC