
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> he <b>proffers a claim</b> that there was no <b>blood</b> after consummating the marriage, <b>indeed</b> he can cause her to lose her marriage contract with that claim. However, <b>with what are we dealing here</b> in the <i>baraita</i>? We are dealing <b>with</b> one <b>who proffers a claim</b> that he encountered an <b>open entrance,</b> i.e., there was no hymen. As the hymen of an adult woman is no longer completely intact, the claim is of no consequence.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Sumakhos says in the name of Rabbi Meir: A blind</b> woman <b>does not have a claim concerning virginity.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the statement <b>of Sumakhos? Rabbi Zeira said: Due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> a blind woman <b>is struck</b> by falling <b>onto the ground,</b> causing her hymen to break. The Gemara asks: <b>All</b> girls tend <b>to be struck</b> by falling onto the ground <b>as well;</b> what is unique about blind girls? The Gemara answers: When <b>all of</b> the other girls fall, they <b>see</b> the blood flow <b>and show</b> it to <b>their mother.</b> The mother would then examine them and discover that her hymen was broken. <b>This</b> blind girl <b>does not see</b> the flow of blood <b>and</b> therefore <b>does not show</b> it too <b>her mother.</b> Due to that possibility, the man who married the blind woman must have considered the likelihood that her hymen is not intact, and therefore he cannot make a claim concerning virginity.

### Part 3
§ The previous <i>baraita</i> concluded: <b>And one who leaves</b> her husband <b>due to a bad reputation has neither a fine</b> for rape <b>nor</b> a fine for <b>seduction.</b> The initial understanding is that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a young betrothed woman who leaves her husband because she committed adultery. The Gemara asks: <b>One who leaves</b> her husband <b>due to a bad reputation is subject to stoning</b> as an adulteress; clearly she is not entitled to the fine. <b>Rav Sheshet said: This is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: One about whom a bad reputation emerged in her youth</b> that she engaged in sexual relations <b>has neither a fine</b> for rape <b>nor</b> a fine for <b>seduction,</b> as the assumption is that she is no longer a virgin.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Pappa said: Conclude from it</b> with regard to <b>this tainted document</b> whose authenticity was compromised that <b>we do not collect</b> a debt <b>with it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If you say that a rumor emerged about it that it is a forged document,</b> and in <b>the corresponding</b> case <b>here,</b> the case of a bad reputation, <b>that a rumor emerged about her that she engaged in</b> promiscuous <b>sexual relations; but didn’t Rava say:</b> If <b>a rumor emerged about</b> a woman <b>in a town</b> as <b>one who engaged in</b> promiscuous <b>sexual relations, one</b> need <b>not be concerned about it?</b> The assumption is that it is insubstantial, as a reputation based on rumor is disregarded.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> it is <b>that two</b> witnesses <b>came and said: She propositioned us</b> to engage <b>in forbidden</b> relations, and in <b>the corresponding</b> case <b>here</b> with regard to a document, it is a case <b>where two</b> people <b>came and said</b> that <b>he said to us: Forge</b> a document <b>for me.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, there,</b> in the case of the rumor of promiscuity, <b>immoral men are common,</b> and even if they refused her, presumably she found someone willing to engage in relations with her. <b>However, here,</b> with regard to forgery, even <b>if he assumed presumptive status</b> as one seeking a forgery, <b>do all the Jewish people assume presumptive status</b> as forgers? Why is the assumption that the document was forged? The Gemara answers: <b>Here too, since he is</b> actively <b>seeking a forgery, say that</b> he <b>forged</b> the document <b>and wrote</b> it. Even if others are not suspected of cooperating with him, there is suspicion with regard to the document. Therefore, the case of the tainted document and the woman with a bad reputation are comparable.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these</b> are the cases of young women <b>who do not</b> have <b>a fine</b> paid to their fathers when they are raped or seduced: <b>One who has intercourse with a convert or with a captive</b> woman <b>or with a</b> gentile <b>maidservant, who were redeemed, converted, or emancipated</b> when they were <b>more than three years and one day</b> old, as presumably they are no longer virgins. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: A captive</b> woman <b>who was redeemed</b> remains <b>in her</b> state of <b>sanctity even though</b> she is <b>an adult,</b> as it cannot be stated that she certainly engaged in intercourse.

### Part 7
The mishna resumes its list of the cases of young women who are not entitled to a fine when raped or seduced by the following men: In the case of <b>one who engages in intercourse with his daughter, with his daughter’s daughter, with his son’s daughter, with his wife’s daughter, with her son’s daughter,</b> or <b>with her daughter’s daughter; they do not</b> receive payment of <b>a fine.</b> That is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he is liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty, and <b>that their death</b> penalty is administered by <b>the court, and anyone who is liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty <b>does not pay money, as it is stated: “And yet no harm follow, he shall be punished”</b> (Exodus 21:22). This verse indicates that if a woman dies and the one who struck her is liable to receive the death penalty, he is exempt from payment.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Dosa said one</b> and the same <b>thing</b> with regard to a captive woman. The statement of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> is <b>that</b> which <b>we said</b> in the mishna. The statement of <b>Rabbi Dosa</b> is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A captive</b> daughter or wife of a priest, who was redeemed, <b>partakes of <i>teruma</i>;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Dosa.</b> In explanation, <b>Rabbi Dosa said: And what did this Arab</b> who took her captive <b>do to her? And due to</b> the fact <b>that he</b> lasciviously <b>squeezed between her breasts,</b> did he <b>render her unfit</b> to marry into <b>the priesthood?</b> Although he may have taken liberties with her, there is no concern that he had relations with her.

### Part 9
<b>Rabba said: Perhaps that is not so,</b> and their opinions differ. Perhaps <b>Rabbi Yehuda states</b> his opinion <b>only here</b> with regard to payment of a fine, <b>so that</b> the <b>sinner will not profit</b> through exemption from the fine because this girl was taken captive in her youth. <b>However, there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, <b>he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and she is unfit to marry a priest. <b>Alternatively,</b> there is another distinction between their opinions. Perhaps <b>Rabbi Dosa stated</b> his opinion <b>only there, with regard to <i>teruma</i></b> whose legal status today is <b>by rabbinic</b> law, and therefore he rules leniently. <b>However,</b> with regard to payment of a <b>fine,</b> which is mandated <b>by Torah</b> law, <b>he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and the rapist is exempt from payment based on the principle: The burden of proof is incumbent upon the claimant, and she cannot prove that her captors did not engage in intercourse with her and that she is a virgin.

### Part 10
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rabba: <b>And is the rationale</b> for the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda here,</b> in the case of a fine, to ensure <b>that</b> the <b>sinner will not profit? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: A captive</b> woman <b>who was taken captive</b> remains <b>in her</b> state of <b>sanctity</b> with the presumptive status of a virgin? <b>Even</b> if she was in captivity when she was <b>ten years old, her marriage contract is two hundred</b> dinars. <b>And there,</b> in that case, <b>what</b> relevance <b>is there</b> for the rationale: To ensure <b>that</b> the <b>sinner will not profit?</b> That <i>baraita</i> refers to a marriage contract and no transgression is involved. The Gemara answers: <b>There too,</b> Rabbi Yehuda issues the same ruling for a different reason. She receives the marriage contract of a virgin because if she didn’t, <b>perhaps men would refrain and not marry her,</b> due to their suspicion that her captors violated her.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehuda maintain</b> that a captive woman remains <b>in her</b> state of <b>sanctity? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who redeems a captive may marry her,</b> even if he is a priest, but if he <b>testifies</b> that <b>she</b> did not engage in sexual relations while in captivity, <b>he may not marry her? Rabbi Yehuda says: Both</b> in <b>this</b> case, where he redeemed her, <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case, where he testified, <b>he may not marry her,</b> lest she was violated and rendered unfit to marry a priest. The Gemara comments: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>itself is difficult.</b> On the one hand <b>you said: One who redeems a captive may marry her, and then it was taught:</b> If he <b>testifies</b> that <b>she</b> did not engage in sexual relations while in captivity, <b>he may not marry her.</b> Is that to say that <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he</b> also <b>testifies</b> that <b>she</b> was not violated <b>he may not marry her?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: One who redeems a captive</b> woman <b>and testifies</b> that <b>she</b> was not violated <b>may marry her.</b> However, if he <b>only testifies</b> that <b>she</b> was not violated <b>he may not marry her.</b>

### Part 13
With regard to the apparent contradiction between the two statements of Rabbi Yehuda, the Gemara says: <b>In any case,</b> this <i>baraita</i> is <b>difficult</b> according <b>to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as contrary to his earlier statement, he states that a captive woman does not retain the presumptive status of a virgin. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> Emend the text and <b>say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Both</b> in <b>this</b> case and in <b>that</b> case <b>he may marry her. Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, says: Actually,</b> do not emend the <i>baraita</i> and learn it <b>as it was taught.</b> In the <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Yehuda spoke to them</b> according <b>to the statement of the Rabbis.</b> According <b>to my</b> opinion, that the presumptive status of a redeemed captive woman is that of a virgin, <b>both</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>he may marry her. However,</b> according <b>to your</b> opinion that there is concern lest she was violated, the <i>halakha</i> <b>should be</b> that <b>both</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>he may not marry her.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis</b> explain their ruling? They explain: <b>One who redeems a captive</b> woman and <b>testifies</b> that <b>she</b> was not violated <b>may marry her,</b> as <b>a person does not throw</b> away <b>money for nothing.</b> If he paid the ransom to redeem her, he must be certain that she is a virgin. One who <b>only testifies</b> that <b>she</b> was not violated <b>may not marry her, lest he had his eye on her</b> to marry her and is prepared to lie to facilitate that marriage.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Pappa bar Shmuel raised a contradiction before Rav Yosef:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC