
### Part 1
<b>And until when</b> is it considered too premature for a scholar to issue halakhic rulings? It is <b>until forty years.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rabba issue rulings,</b> even though he lived for only forty years? The Gemara answers: It is permitted for a scholar who has not studied for so long to issue rulings <b>when</b> his knowledge reaches the level of the foremost scholar in his city and <b>they are equals.</b>

### Part 2
§ It states in the mishna: <b>And those who injure</b> themselves out of false <b>abstinence [<i>perushin</i>]</b> are people who erode the world. <b>The Sages taught: There are seven</b> pseudo-<b>righteous</b> people who erode the world: The <b>righteous of Shechem,</b> the self-<b>flagellating righteous,</b> the <b>bloodletting righteous,</b> the <b>pestle</b>-like <b>righteous,</b> the <b>righteous</b> who say: Tell me <b>what my obligation</b> is <b>and I will perform it,</b> those who are <b>righteous due to love,</b> and those who are <b>righteous due to fear.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: The <b>righteous of Shechem [<i>shikhmi</i>]; this is</b> one <b>who performs</b> actions comparable to the <b>action</b> of the people of <b>Shechem,</b> who agreed to circumcise themselves for personal gain (see Genesis, chapter 34); so too, he behaves righteously only in order to be honored. The self-<b>flagellating righteous; this is</b> one <b>who injures his feet,</b> as he walks slowly, dragging his feet on the ground in an attempt to appear humble, and injures his feet in the process. The <b>bloodletting righteous; Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says</b> that <b>this is</b> one <b>who lets blood</b> by banging his head <b>against the walls</b> because he walks with his eyes shut, ostensibly out of modesty. The <b>pestle</b>-like <b>righteous; Rabba bar Sheila says</b> that this is one <b>who</b> walks <b>bent over like</b> the <b>pestle</b> of a mortar.

### Part 4
With regard to the <b>righteous</b> one who says: Tell me <b>what my obligation</b> is <b>and I will perform it,</b> the Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t this virtuous</b> behavior, as he desires to be aware of his obligations? <b>Rather,</b> this is referring to one <b>who says:</b> Tell me <b>what further obligations</b> are incumbent <b>upon me and I will perform them,</b> indicating that he fulfills all of his mitzvot perfectly and therefore seeks additional obligations.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> also includes in the list of pseudo-righteous people those who are <b>righteous due to love</b> and those who are <b>righteous due to fear,</b> i.e., one who performs mitzvot due to love of their reward or due to fear of punishment. <b>Abaye and Rava said to the <i>tanna</i></b> who transmitted this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Do not teach</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: Those who are <b>righteous due to love</b> and those who are <b>righteous due to fear, as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: A person should always engage in Torah</b> study <b>and in</b> performance of <b>the mitzvot even if</b> he does <b>not</b> do so <b>for their own sake, as through</b> performing them <b>not for their own sake,</b> one <b>comes</b> to perform them <b>for their own sake.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> That <b>which is hidden is hidden, and</b> that <b>which is revealed is revealed,</b> but in Heaven everything is known, and <b>the great court</b> in Heaven <b>will exact payment from those who wear the cloak</b> of the righteous but are in fact unworthy. The Gemara relates: <b>King Yannai said to his wife</b> before he died: <b>Do not be afraid of the Pharisees [<i>perushin</i>], and neither</b> should you fear <b>from those who are not Pharisees,</b> i.e., the Sadducees; <b>rather,</b> beware <b>of the hypocrites who appear like Pharisees, as their actions are like the act of</b> the wicked <b>Zimri and they request</b> a <b>reward like</b> that of the righteous <b>Pinehas</b> (see Numbers, chapter 25).

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Merit does not delay</b> the punishment <b>of the bitter water</b> of a <i>sota</i>, <b>and if you say</b> that <b>merit does delay</b> the punishment <b>of the water that causes the curse,</b> as stated earlier by the Rabbis (20a), <b>you weaken [<i>madhe</i>]</b> the power of <b>the</b> bitter <b>water before all the women who drink</b> the water, who will no longer be afraid of it, as they will rely on their merit to save them. <b>And you defame the untainted women who drank</b> the water and survived, <b>as</b> people <b>say: They are defiled but</b> it is their <b>merit that delayed</b> the punishment <b>for them. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Merit delays</b> the punishment <b>of the water that causes the curse, but</b> a woman whose punishment is delayed <b>does not give birth and does not flourish; rather, she progressively deteriorates. Ultimately she dies by the same death</b> as a <i>sota</i> who dies immediately.

### Part 8
§ If <b>the meal-offering</b> of the <i>sota</i> <b>is rendered impure before it has been sanctified in the</b> service <b>vessel, its</b> status <b>is like</b> that of <b>all the</b> other <b>meal-offerings</b> that are rendered impure before being sanctified in a service vessel, <b>and it is redeemed. But if</b> it is rendered impure <b>after it has been sanctified in the</b> service <b>vessel, its</b> status <b>is like</b> that of <b>all the</b> other <b>meal-offerings</b> that are rendered impure after being sanctified in a service vessel, <b>and it is burned. And these are</b> the <i>sota</i> women <b>whose meal-offerings are burned</b> if they have already been sanctified in a service vessel:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC