
### Part 1
were <b>resting in the Ark. And similarly, it says</b> in the verse with regard to the war against Midian: <b>“And Moses sent them, a thousand of every tribe, to the war, them and Pinehas</b> the son of Elazar the priest, to the war, with the holy vessels and the trumpets for the alarm in his hand” (Numbers 31:6). The verse is interpreted as follows: <b>“Them”; these</b> are <b>the Sanhedrin. “Pinehas”; he</b> was the priest <b>anointed for war. “And the holy vessels”; this</b> is <b>the Ark and the tablets that</b> were <b>within it. “And the trumpets for the alarm”; these</b> are <b>the <i>shofarot</i>.</b>

### Part 2
A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught:</b> It was <b>not for nothing</b> that specifically <b>Pinehas went to war</b> with Midian; <b>rather,</b> it was <b>to exact</b> the rightful <b>judgment of his mother’s father,</b> Joseph, <b>as it is stated: “And the Midianites sold him into Egypt</b> to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh’s” (Genesis 37:36). The Gemara asks: <b>Is this to say that Pinehas came,</b> on his mother’s side, <b>from</b> the family of <b>Joseph? But it is written: “And Elazar, Aaron’s son, took himself a wife from the daughters of Putiel;</b> and she bore him Pinehas” (Exodus 6:25). <b>What, is it not that</b> Pinehas <b>came from</b> the family of <b>Yitro, who</b> was also called Putiel because he <b>fattened [<i>pittem</i>] calves for idol worship?</b> They answer: <b>No;</b> he was descended <b>from Joseph, who mocked [<i>pitpet</i>] his desire</b> by resisting the advances of Potiphar’s wife.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But is it not</b> the case that, according to an oral tradition, <b>the tribes</b> were <b>denigrating</b> Pinehas after he killed Zimri, saying: Did <b>you see this son of Puti, the son whose mother’s father fattened cows for idol worship?</b> Should this man <b>kill a prince of Israel?</b> Evidently, his grandfather Puti was Yitro, not Joseph. The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> Pinehas was descended from both Joseph and Yitro. <b>If his mother’s father</b> descended <b>from Joseph, his mother’s mother</b> descended <b>from Yitro. And if his mother’s mother</b> descended <b>from Joseph, his mother’s father</b> descended <b>from Yitro.</b> The Gemara confirms this resolution: The language <b>is also precise, as it is written:</b> Elazar took a wife <b>“from the daughters of Putiel,”</b> which <b>implies</b> that she came from <b>two</b> daughters of men named Putiel. The Gemara concludes: You may <b>learn from</b> the verse that this is so.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna continues its discussion of the speech given before battle. <b>“And the officers shall speak to the people, saying: What man is there that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house,</b> lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it” (Deuteronomy 20:5). He is sent home if he is <b>one who builds a storehouse for straw, a barn for cattle, a shed for wood,</b> or <b>a warehouse.</b> Similarly, it applies if he is <b>one who builds, or</b> if he is <b>one who purchases, or</b> if he is <b>one who inherits, or</b> if he is <b>one to whom</b> it <b>is given</b> as <b>a gift.</b> In all these instances, the man returns from the war encampment.

### Part 5
The next verse states: <b>“And what man is there that has planted a vineyard, and has not used the fruit</b> thereof? Let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle and another man use the fruit thereof” (Deuteronomy 20:6). He is sent home if he is <b>one who plants</b> a whole <b>vineyard</b> of many vines, <b>or</b> if he is <b>one who plants</b> as few as <b>five fruit trees</b> of another variety, <b>and even</b> if these five are <b>from the five species.</b> The produce need not be all of one species. The same applies if he is <b>one who plants, or</b> if he is <b>one who layers</b> the vine, bending a branch into the ground so that it may take root and grow as a new vine, <b>or</b> if he is <b>one who grafts</b> different trees onto one another. <b>And</b> it applies if he is <b>one who purchases</b> a vineyard, <b>or</b> if he is <b>one who inherits</b> a vineyard, <b>or</b> if he is <b>one to whom</b> the vineyard <b>is given</b> as <b>a gift.</b>

### Part 6
The next verse states: <b>“And what man is there that has betrothed a wife,</b> and has not taken her? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her” (Deuteronomy 20:7). He is sent home if he is <b>one who betroths a virgin, or</b> if he is <b>one who betroths a widow.</b> This applies <b>even</b> if his <i>yevama</i>, his late brother’s wife, is a <b>widow waiting for</b> him as <b>her <i>yavam</i></b> to perform levirate marriage; <b>and even</b> if <b>he heard that his brother died in the war</b> and the widow begins to wait for him only then, <b>he returns and goes</b> home. <b>Each of these</b> men, although they are exempt, still <b>hear the address of the priest</b> and <b>the regulations of war</b> at the local camp, <b>and</b> thereafter <b>they return</b> to their respective homes. However, they still support the war effort, <b>and</b> they <b>provide water and food</b> for the soldiers <b>and repair the roads.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And these</b> are the men <b>who do not return</b> to their homes: <b>One who builds a gateway,</b> or <b>an enclosed veranda [<i>akhsadra</i>], or a balcony;</b> or <b>one who plants</b> no more than <b>four fruit trees or</b> even <b>five</b> or more <b>non-fruit bearing trees;</b> or <b>one who remarries his divorced</b> wife. Nor is there an exemption for one who has betrothed a woman whom he is not permitted to marry: With regard to <b>a widow</b> betrothed <b>to a High Priest</b> (see Leviticus 21:7); <b>a divorcée or a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>],</b> in lieu of entering into a levirate marriage, betrothed <b>to a common priest</b> (see Leviticus 21:13–15); <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> betrothed <b>to an Israelite;</b> or <b>an Israelite woman</b> betrothed <b>to a <i>mamzer</i> or a Gibeonite</b> (see Deuteronomy 23:3); such a man <b>does not return</b> to his home. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even one who rebuilds a house</b> as it stood originally <b>would not return. Rabbi Eliezer says: Even one who builds a</b> new <b>brick house in the Sharon would not return</b> because these houses are not stable and are expected to collapse periodically.

### Part 8
<b>These</b> are the men <b>who do not</b> even <b>move from their places</b> because they do not even report to the camp: One who <b>built a house and dedicated it</b> within the year; one who <b>planted a vineyard and used its fruit</b> for less than a year; one <b>who marries his betrothed</b> and <b>one who marries his <i>yevama</i>,</b> his brother’s widow who must enter into a levirate marriage or perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>as it is stated:</b> “When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go out with the army…<b>he shall be free for his house one year,</b> and shall cheer his wife whom he has taken” (Deuteronomy 24:5). The mishna interprets the verse as follows: <b>“For his house”; this</b> means <b>his house</b> that he built. <b>“He shall be”; this</b> term includes <b>his vineyard. “And shall cheer his wife”; this is his wife. “Whom he has taken”;</b> this phrase comes <b>to include his <i>yevama</i>,</b> who is considered his wife with respect to this <i>halakha</i> although he has not yet married her. Those who are exempt for these reasons <b>do not</b> even <b>provide water and food</b> to the soldiers, <b>and</b> they <b>do not repair the roads.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: “And the officers shall speak…</b>What man is there that has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it” (Deuteronomy 20:5). One <b>might</b> have thought that they say <b>their own words</b> and that the priest does not issue these proclamations. However, <b>when it says: “And the officers shall</b> speak <b>further”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:8), <b>their own words are mentioned</b> only in this latter verse. Evidently, then, the priest is the speaker in the earlier verse. <b>How</b> then <b>do I realize</b> the meaning of: <b>“And the officers shall speak”</b> in the first verse? <b>The verse is speaking of the words of the</b> priest <b>anointed for war. How so? The priest speaks</b> in an undertone, <b>and an officer calls out</b> the priest’s words so that they are audible to the assembled.

### Part 10
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>A priest speaks, and an officer calls out</b> his words; <b>and it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>A priest speaks and a priest calls out. And it is taught</b> in yet <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>An officer speaks and an officer calls out. Abaye said: How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? <b>From</b> the words: <b>“That</b> the priest <b>shall approach”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:2), <b>until</b> the words: <b>“And</b> the officers <b>shall speak”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:5), which consist of words of encouragement and inspiration, <b>a priest speaks and</b> another <b>priest calls out. From</b> the words <b>“and</b> the officers <b>shall speak” until</b> the words: <b>“And</b> the officers <b>shall</b> speak <b>further”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:8), which list various people who are to return home from the battle front because of happy occasions, <b>a priest speaks and an officer calls out. From</b> the words <b>“and</b> the officers <b>shall</b> speak <b>further” and on,</b> which address those who are fearful and fainthearted, <b>an officer speaks and</b> another <b>officer calls out.</b>

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that the officers announce: <b>“What man is there that has built a new house,</b> and has not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it” (Deuteronomy 20:5). <b>The Sages taught:</b> From the phrase <b>“That has built,” I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that this applies to one <b>who has</b> literally <b>built</b> a house. <b>From where</b> do I derive that it includes one who <b>purchased, or inherited, or has been given</b> a house <b>as a gift? The verse states</b> broadly: <b>“What man is there that has built.”</b> By not merely stating: One that has built, but using the expanded “what man is there that has built,” the verse includes any of these circumstances.

### Part 12
From the term <b>“a house” I have</b> derived <b>only a house</b> in which people live. <b>From where</b> is it derived that the exemption is understood <b>to</b> also <b>include</b> one who builds <b>a storehouse for straw, a barn for cattle, a shed for wood, or a warehouse? The verse states: “That has built,”</b> which includes whatever one built, <b>in any case.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>I</b> should <b>include even one who builds a gateway,</b> or <b>an enclosed veranda, or a balcony;</b> however, <b>the verse states: “A house,”</b> which teaches that <b>just as a house</b> is, by definition, a structure that is <b>fit for living, so too,</b> this <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>every</b> structure that is potentially <b>fit for living,</b> although in practice it may be used for another purpose.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> The word <b>“house”</b> is to be understood to mean, <b>as it indicates,</b> a building meant for human residence. With regard to the house for which a man may be sent back from the camp, since the verse does not state merely: <b>“And has not dedicated,”</b> but rather: <b>“And has not dedicated it,”</b> specifying the particular house to which the man is connected, the verse therefore <b>excludes a robber</b> who does not own his house. The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that this opinion is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili? As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, didn’t he say:</b> When the verse singles out the “fearful <b>and fainthearted”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:8), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>one who is afraid</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC