
### Part 1
<b>Hear my words, the regulations of war,</b> and consider who is fit to participate in the battle. <b>And return</b> home, all of you who are exempt from combat. <b>What does he say on the battlefield? “Let not your heart faint; fear not, nor be alarmed, and do not be terrified of them”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:3). These four cautions <b>correspond</b> to <b>four actions done by the nations of the world:</b> They <b>clash</b> their weapons, <b>and</b> they <b>blast</b> horns, they <b>shout, and</b> they <b>trample</b> heavily with their horses to frighten their adversaries.

### Part 2
The mishna recorded the particulars of the priest’s address: <b>The Philistines came championed by Goliath.</b> The Gemara describes the battle between David and Goliath. What is implied by the name <b>Goliath? Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The verse indicates <b>that he stood before the Holy One, Blessed be He, with brazenness [<i>gilui panim</i>], as it is stated: “Choose yourselves a man [<i>ish</i>], and let him come down to me”</b> (I Samuel 17:8), and <b>man [<i>ish</i>]</b> is referring to <b>none other</b> than <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it is stated: “The Lord is a man [<i>ish</i>] of war”</b> (Exodus 15:3). <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: I will hereby fell him by the son of a man [<i>ben ish</i>], as it is stated: “Now David was the son of that man [<i>ben ish</i>] of Ephrath”</b> (I Samuel 17:12).

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Meir: In three instances, his</b> own <b>mouth ensnared that wicked one</b> and unwittingly foretold his own downfall. <b>One</b> time he said: <b>“Choose yourselves a man, and let him come down to me,”</b> describing himself at the bottom. <b>And another</b> time, he said: <b>“If he is able to fight with me and kill me</b> then will we be your servants; but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall you be our servants, and serve us” (I Samuel 17:9). There, he supposed that his opponent would defeat him, before supposing that he, Goliath, would be victorious. Finally, <b>the other</b> time was <b>when he said to David</b> (I Samuel 17:43): <b>“Am I a dog, that you come to me with staves?”</b> The Gemara asks: But didn’t David also speak in this manner? <b>David also said to him: “You come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a javelin”</b> (I Samuel 17:45). The Gemara answers: David <b>then said to him,</b> immediately afterward: <b>“But I come to you in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have taunted”</b> (I Samuel 17:45).

### Part 4
The verse says: <b>“And the Philistine drew near morning and evening”</b> (I Samuel 17:16). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> He did this specifically <b>in order to prevent them from</b> completing <b>the recitation of <i>Shema</i></b> in the required times of <b>morning and evening. “And</b> Goliath <b>presented himself forty days”</b> (I Samuel 17:16). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> These days <b>correspond</b> to <b>the forty days over which the Torah was given,</b> as he wanted to do away with it.

### Part 5
The verse introduces Goliath: <b>“And a champion [<i>ish habeinayim</i>] went out from the camp of the Philistines,</b> named Goliath” (I Samuel 17:4). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is indicated by the term <b><i>beinayim</i>? Rav said:</b> The word is related to the root <i>beit</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, meaning build, and means <b>that he is built [<i>muvneh</i>]</b> perfectly and free <b>of any blemish. And Shmuel said:</b> The word is related to the word <i>bein</i>, meaning between, and means that he was <b>the middle [<i>beinoni</i>] among his brothers.</b> A Sage <b>from the school of Rabbi Sheila said:</b> The word is related to the root <i>beit</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>heh</i>, meaning build, and means <b>that he</b> was <b>made</b> strong <b>as a building [<i>binyan</i>]. Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The word is related to the word <i>bein</i>, meaning between, and means that he was born from among many, as follows: He was <b>the son of one hundred fathers [<i>pappi</i>] and one dog [<i>nanai</i>],</b> as his mother engaged in sexual intercourse with one hundred men and a dog, and he was fathered from among them.

### Part 6
The verse recounts that he was <b>“named Goliath, of Gath”</b> (I Samuel 17:4). <b>Rav Yosef taught:</b> This is <b>because everyone</b> would <b>thresh his mother</b> by cohabiting with her <b>like</b> people do in <b>a winepress [<i>gat</i>],</b> where everyone tramples. <b>It is written</b> that Goliath came from <b>“the caves [<i>me’arot</i>]</b> of the Philistines” (I Samuel 17:23), <b>but we read,</b> according to the Masoretic text: He came from among “the <b>ranks [<i>ma’arkhot</i>]</b> of the Philistines.” What is meant by the written term <i>me’arot</i>? <b>Rav Yosef taught:</b> The word is related to the word <i>he’era</i>, meaning penetrated, and implies <b>that everyone penetrated [<i>he’eru</i>],</b> i.e., engaged in sexual intercourse <b>with, his mother.</b>

### Part 7
<b>It is written</b> that Goliath’s mother was: <b>“Harafa”</b> (II Samuel 21:16), <b>and</b> in another place <b>it is written: “Orpah”</b> (Ruth 1:4), and the Gemara will soon explain that this was the same woman. <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> engaged in a dispute concerning this matter. <b>One</b> of them <b>said: Her name was Harafa, and why is she called</b> by the <b>name Orpah?</b> It is <b>because everyone came at her from behind [<i>orfin</i>] her,</b> i.e., sodomized her. <b>And one</b> of them <b>said: Her name was Orpah, and why is she called</b> by the <b>name Harafa?</b> It is <b>because everyone threshed her like groats [<i>harifot</i>],</b> i.e., engaged in sexual intercourse with her, <b>and so it says</b> that this word means groats: <b>“And the woman took and spread the covering over the well’s mouth, and strewed groats [<i>harifot</i>] thereon”</b> (II Samuel 17:19). <b>And if you wish,</b> you can <b>say from here: “Though you should crush a fool in a mortar with a pestle among groats [<i>harifot</i>],</b> yet will not his foolishness depart from him” (Proverbs 27:22).

### Part 8
The Gemara continues its discussion of the battle of David and Goliath. <b>“These four were born to Harafa in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants”</b> (II Samuel 21:22). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are the names of the four siblings mentioned here? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> They are <b>Saph, and Madon, Goliath, and Ishbi in Nob</b> (see II Samuel 21:16–20).

### Part 9
It says: <b>“And they fell into the hands of David and his servants.”</b> Why? It is because of the acts of their forebears, <b>as it is written: “And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, and Ruth cleaved to her”</b> (Ruth 1:14). <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: The children of the one who kissed,</b> referring to the four giants descended from Orpah, <b>will come and fall into the hand of the children of the one who cleaved,</b> referring to David, who was descended from Ruth. <b>Rava taught: As a reward for the four tears that Orpah shed</b> in sadness <b>over her mother-in-law, she merited four mighty warriors descended from her, as it is stated: “And they lifted up their voice and wept again”</b> (Ruth 1:14).

### Part 10
<b>It is written</b> about Goliath: “And <b>the half [<i>ḥetz</i>] of his spear</b> was like a weaver’s beam” (I Samuel 17:7), <b>and we read,</b> according to the Masoretic tradition: “And <b>the shaft [<i>etz</i>] of his spear.” Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The written version of the text demonstrates that <b>we have not yet reached half [<i>ḥetzi</i>] of the praise of that wicked</b> man. Only half of his spear was as long as a weaver’s beam, but the Masoretic reading offers a less impressive description. It is learned <b>from here that it is prohibited to relate the praise of wicked people.</b> The Gemara asks: If so, <b>then</b> the verse <b>should not begin</b> by praising <b>him at all.</b> The Gemara answers: It was necessary in this case in order <b>to relate the praise of David,</b> who defeated Goliath.

### Part 11
§ According to the mishna, the priest would say: <b>The Ammonites came championed by Shobach</b> (see II Samuel, chapter 10). In one account, his name <b>is written: “Shobach”</b> (II Samuel 10:18), <b>and</b> in another place <b>it is written: “Shophach”</b> (I Chronicles 19:18). <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> engaged in a dispute concerning this matter. <b>One</b> of them <b>said: His name was Shophach, and why is he called</b> by the <b>name Shobach?</b> It is <b>because he was built like a dovecote [<i>shovakh</i>],</b> as he was exceptionally tall. <b>And one</b> of them <b>said: His name was Shobach, and why is he called</b> by the <b>name Shophach?</b> It is <b>because anyone who would see him</b> would become terrified and his courage would be <b>spilled [<i>nishpakh</i>] before him like</b> water from <b>a jug.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara records a dispute concerning the enemy forces of Nebuchadnezzar. The prophet states: <b>“Their quiver [<i>ashpato</i>] is an open sepulcher, they are all mighty men”</b> (Jeremiah 5:16). <b>Rav and Shmuel, and some say Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi,</b> engaged in a dispute concerning the implication of the verse. <b>One</b> of them <b>said: When they shoot an arrow, they produce heaps</b> and <b>heaps [<i>ashpatot ashpatot</i>] of corpses. And lest you say that</b> they are <b>skilled in</b> the arts of <b>battle</b> but they are not particularly strong, <b>the verse states: “They are all mighty men.” And one</b> of them <b>said: When they perform their needs,</b> i.e., relieve themselves, <b>they produce heaps</b> and <b>heaps [<i>ashpatot ashpatot</i>] of excrement,</b> which indicates they eat heartily, like mighty men. <b>And lest you say it is because they are ill</b> in their <b>intestines, the verse states: “They are all mighty men”</b> and are not ill.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Mari said: Learn from</b> this exchange that if there is <b>one whose excrement is abundant, he is ill</b> in his <b>intestines.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What difference is there</b> whether or not he is ill in his intestines? The Gemara answers: It is <b>so that</b> one who suffers these symptoms <b>will tend to himself</b> medically.

### Part 14
In a similar vein, one is urged to relieve his distress. The verse states: <b>“If there is a care in the heart of a man, let him bend it [<i>yashḥena</i>]”</b> (Proverbs 12:25). <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> dispute the verse’s meaning. <b>One said: He should force it [<i>yasḥena</i>] out of his mind.</b> He should remove his worries from his thoughts. <b>And one said:</b> It means <b>he should tell [<i>yesiḥena</i>]</b> his troubles <b>to others,</b> which will relieve his anxiety.

### Part 15
The mishna recounts the priest’s address: <b>But you are not like them,</b> because, as the verse states: “For the Lord your God is He that goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you” (Deuteronomy 20:4). <b>And why</b> does the verse elaborate <b>so much</b> in spelling out the nature of God’s attendance in battle? It is <b>because the</b> ineffable <b>name</b> of God <b>and all of His appellations</b> that are written on the tablets

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC