
### Part 1
<b>A corpse occupies four cubits with</b> regard to <b>impurity,</b> as the Sages decreed that one becomes impure when he stands within four cubits of a corpse. This measure protects priests and others who are forbidden to contract ritual impurity imparted by a corpse, so that they do not inadvertently become impure. <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> of the mishna <b>taught</b> in another mishna as well (<i>Oholot</i> 15:8): With regard to <b>a courtyard</b> adjacent to <b>a grave, one who stands within it is ritually pure, provided that there are four cubits</b> by four cubits <b>within it.</b> A courtyard this size constitutes its own space, according to <b>the statement of Beit Shammai. Beit Hillel say:</b> A space of <b>four handbreadths</b> by four handbreadths is enough. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> Four handbreadths suffice <b>when the entrance</b> to the courtyard is <b>from above.</b> In such a case there is no concern that one will cover the grave with his body, and thereby become ritually impure, when entering the courtyard. <b>However,</b> if <b>its entrance</b> is <b>from the side, everyone agrees</b> the courtyard must be at least <b>four cubits</b> by four cubits in size.

### Part 2
The Gemara challenges the preceding resolution: <b>In which direction [<i>kelapei layya</i>]</b> is there a distinction between the positions of the entrance? <b>On the contrary,</b> if one enters <b>from the side,</b> he can <b>slip away</b> and <b>exit</b> without becoming impure. However, if one enters <b>from above it is impossible that</b> he will <b>not overlie the grave</b> over the course of climbing in and out of the courtyard. <b>Rather,</b> it should say: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement</b> of Beit Hillel, according to which four handbreadths by four handbreadths are enough, <b>said?</b> It is <b>when the entrance is from the side. However,</b> if <b>the entrance is from above,</b> then the courtyard must be at least <b>four cubits</b> by four cubits according to all opinions. The Gemara further qualifies: <b>And this statement</b> applies in <b>a courtyard</b> adjacent to <b>a grave whose partitions</b> are <b>delineated, but</b> if there is <b>only a corpse</b> lying about without any enclosures, it certainly <b>occupies</b> and affects a surrounding area of four cubits.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches among the statements that were said before battle: <b>“What man is there that has betrothed a wife</b> and has not taken her? Let him go and return to his house” (Deuteronomy 20:7). <b>The Sages taught: “That has betrothed”</b> is referring to <b>one who betroths a virgin, and</b> to <b>one who betroths a widow, and</b> to <b>one</b> whose <i>yevama</i> is <b>a widow awaiting her <i>yavam</i>,</b> i.e., this man in the military ranks, to perform levirate marriage. <b>And even</b> if there are <b>five brothers, and one of them dies in the war, they all return</b> for the widow. In addition, the verse could have singled out one who has <b>not taken</b> a wife. When the verse specifies: <b>“and has not taken her,”</b> this <b>excludes</b> men in forbidden marriages: <b>A widow</b> who is betrothed <b>to a High Priest;</b> either <b>a divorcée or a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>],</b> who is betrothed <b>to a common priest; a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> who is betrothed <b>to an Israelite;</b> or <b>an Israelite woman</b> who is betrothed <b>to a <i>mamzer</i> or to a Gibeonite.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Shall we say</b> that this opinion is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili? As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, he says:</b> When the verse singles out <b>“fearful and fainthearted”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:8), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>one who is afraid because of sins that he has.</b> According to this interpretation, one who marries a woman forbidden to him should return home from war because of his guilt, which seems to contradict the opinion mentioned above that such a man does not return from the ranks.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> such a man does not return, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabba. As Rabba said:</b> A man is <b>never liable</b> for a forbidden marriage <b>until he engages in sexual intercourse</b> with his wife. With regard to the forbidden marriages of a High Priest, the Torah states: “A widow, or a divorcée, or a profaned woman, or a harlot, these he shall not take…And he shall not profane his seed among his people” (Leviticus 21:14–15). <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>“he shall not take”</b> one of these women as a wife? It is <b>due to: “He shall not profane</b> his seed” by engaging in sexual intercourse. <b>Due to that</b> reason, <b>he is not flogged until he engages in sexual intercourse</b> with a woman who is forbidden to him. Therefore, even according to Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, one who merely betroths a forbidden wife might not return home from the ranks.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 7:20-21): The Torah states: “What man is there <b>that has built”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:5), and then <b>“that has planted”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:6), and finally <b>“that has betrothed”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:7). <b>The Torah</b> has <b>taught</b> a person <b>the desired mode of behavior: A person should build a house,</b> then <b>plant a vineyard, and afterward marry a woman. And even</b> King <b>Solomon said in his wisdom: “Prepare your work outside, and make it fit for yourself in the field; and afterward build your house”</b> (Proverbs 24:27). The Sages explained: <b>“Prepare your work outside”; this</b> is <b>a house. “And make it fit for yourself in the field”; this</b> is <b>a vineyard. “And afterward you shall build your house”; this</b> is <b>a wife.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Alternatively,</b> this verse may be understood as relating to Torah study: <b>“Prepare your work outside”; this</b> is the study of <b>Bible. “And make it fit for yourself in the field”; this</b> is the study of <b>Mishna. “Afterward you shall build your house”; this</b> is the study of <b>Gemara,</b> the analysis of and deliberation over the statements of the Sages. <b>Alternatively: “Prepare your work outside”; this</b> is the study of <b>Bible and Mishna. “And make it fit for yourself in the field”; this</b> is the study of <b>Gemara. “Afterward you shall build your house”; these</b> are <b>good deeds. Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, says: “Prepare your work outside”; this</b> is the study of <b>Bible, and Mishna, and Gemara. “And make it fit for yourself in the field”; these</b> are <b>good deeds. “Afterward you shall build your house”; expound</b> upon new understandings of Torah <b>and receive reward,</b> which is possible only after the initial steps.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And these</b> are the men <b>who do not return</b> from the ranks: <b>One who builds a gateway,</b> or an enclosed veranda, or a balcony…Rabbi Yehuda says: Even one who rebuilds a house as it stood originally would not return. A Sage taught (<i>Tosefta</i> 7:18): <b>If</b> one <b>adds one</b> additional <b>row of stones [<i>dimos</i>] to</b> the original structure, <b>he returns</b> from the ranks. That is enough to render it a new building. The mishna further teaches: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Even one who builds a</b> new <b>brick house in the Sharon would not return.</b> A Sage <b>taught:</b> This is <b>because</b> the owners <b>renew it twice in</b> a period of <b>seven years,</b> and it is therefore not considered a permanent structure.

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches: <b>These</b> are the men <b>who do not</b> even <b>move from their places:</b> One who <b>built a house and dedicated it</b> within the year; one who planted a vineyard and used its fruit for less than a year; one who marries his betrothed and one who marries his <i>yevama</i>, as it is stated: “When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go out with the army, neither shall he be charged with any business; he shall be free for his house one year, and shall cheer his wife whom he has taken” (Deuteronomy 24:5). With respect to a new husband’s exemption, <b>the Sages taught</b> a number of <i>halakhot</i> from this verse. From the term: <b>“A new wife” I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a man returns only for <b>a new</b> virgin <b>wife. From where</b> do I derive that it applies to <b>a widow or a divorcée? The verse states: “A wife,” in any case. If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “A new wife?”</b> It is referring to <b>one who is new for him, excluding one who remarries his divorcée, who is not new to him.</b>

### Part 10
<b>The Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse: <b>“He shall not go out with the army”</b> (Deuteronomy 24:5); one <b>might</b> have thought it is <b>with the army that he does not go out, but</b> he does go to <b>supply water and food</b> to the army <b>and to repair the roads</b> for them. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Neither shall he be charged with any business.”</b> One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I include even one who has built a house and has not dedicated it,</b> or <b>one who has planted a vineyard and has not used its fruit,</b> or <b>one who has betrothed a woman and has not taken her</b> as his wife? <b>The verse states:</b> “Neither shall <b>he</b> be charged with any business”; <b>you do not charge him with any</b> responsibilities, <b>but you do charge others.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And since</b> the Torah <b>states: “Neither shall he be charged</b> with any business,” <b>why do I</b> need to be taught: <b>“He shall not go out with the army”?</b> The Gemara answers: The Torah adds this clause <b>so that he will violate two prohibitions</b> if he goes out to war: “He shall not go out with the army,” and: “Neither shall he be charged.”

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna continues its discussion of the speech given before battle. <b>“And the officers shall speak further to the people,</b> and they shall say: What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? Let him go and return unto his house” (Deuteronomy 20:8). <b>Rabbi Akiva says: “That is fearful and fainthearted”</b> is to be understood <b>as it indicates, that</b> the man is <b>unable to stand in the battle ranks and to see a drawn sword</b> because it will terrify him. <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: “That is fearful and fainthearted”; this is one who is afraid because of the sins that he has;</b> he, too, returns. <b>Therefore, the Torah provided him</b> with <b>all these</b> additional reasons for exemption from the army so he can ascribe <b>his leaving to</b> one of <b>them.</b> In this way, the sinner may leave the ranks without having to publicly acknowledge that he is a sinner.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to one who has betrothed a woman forbidden to him, including <b>a widow</b> betrothed <b>to a High Priest; a divorcée or a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> [<b><i>ḥalutza</i></b>] betrothed <b>to a common priest; a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> betrothed <b>to an Israelite;</b> or <b>a daughter of an Israelite</b> betrothed <b>to a <i>mamzer</i> or a Gibeonite; this</b> man <b>is he</b> whom the verse calls <b>“fearful and fainthearted.”</b> He fears that his sin will jeopardize his safety in the war.

### Part 13
The mishna continues its discussion. The verse states: <b>“And it shall be, when the officers conclude speaking to the people, that captains of legions shall be appointed at the head of the people”</b> (Deuteronomy 20:9). The mishna adds: <b>As well as at the rear of the people.</b> The officers <b>station guards [<i>zekifin</i>] in front of them, and other</b> guards <b>behind them, and</b> they have <b>iron rods [<i>kashilin</i>] in their hands. And</b> with regard to <b>anyone who attempts to turn back</b> and flee from the war, the guard <b>has license to beat [<i>lekape’aḥ</i>] his legs</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC