
### Part 1
A woman <b>who</b> confesses and <b>says: I am defiled,</b> and therefore prohibited <b>to you; and</b> a woman <b>with regard to whom witnesses came</b> and testified <b>that she is defiled; and</b> a woman <b>who says: I will not drink</b> the bitter water of a <i>sota</i>, even if she does not confess her guilt; <b>and</b> a woman <b>whose husband</b> changed his mind and <b>does not want to force her to drink; and</b> a woman <b>whose husband engaged in sexual intercourse with her on the way</b> to the Temple.

### Part 2
<b>And all the</b> women <b>who are married to priests, their meal-offerings are</b> always <b>burned,</b> as the verse states: “And every meal-offering of a priest shall be completely burned; it shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 6:16). <b>An Israelite woman who is married to a priest, her meal-offering is burned; and</b> the <b>daughter of a priest who is married to an Israelite, her meal-offering is eaten.</b>

### Part 3
The mishna asks a general question: <b>What</b> are the differences <b>between a priest and the daughter of a priest? The meal-offering of the daughter of a priest is eaten</b> by the priests, <b>but the meal-offering of a priest is not eaten.</b> The <b>daughter of a priest can become disqualified</b> from marrying a priest and from partaking of <i>teruma</i> by engaging in sexual intercourse with someone forbidden to her, <b>but a priest does not become desacralized</b> by engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman forbidden to him.

### Part 4
The <b>daughter of a priest may become impure</b> with impurity imparted <b>by a corpse, but a priest may not become impure</b> with impurity imparted <b>by a corpse</b> except for the burial of his seven closest relatives. <b>A priest may eat from offerings of the most sacred order, but</b> the <b>daughter of a priest may not eat from offerings of the most sacred order.</b>

### Part 5
<b>What</b> are the halakhic differences <b>between a man and a woman? A man lets</b> his hair <b>grow and rends</b> his garments when he is a leper, <b>but a woman does not let</b> her hair <b>grow or rend</b> her garments when she is a leper. <b>A man can vow</b> that <b>his</b> minor <b>son</b> shall <b>be a nazirite,</b> obligating the son to remain a nazirite even during his adulthood, <b>but a woman cannot vow</b> that <b>her son</b> shall <b>be a nazirite. A man can shave</b> at the culmination of his naziriteship <b>by</b> using offerings originally designated for <b>his father’s naziriteship,</b> i.e., if one’s father was also a nazirite and he died having already designated offerings for the culmination of his naziriteship; <b>but a woman cannot shave</b> at the culmination of her naziriteship <b>by</b> using offerings designated for <b>her father’s naziriteship.</b>

### Part 6
<b>A man can betroth his daughter</b> to another man while she is a minor, <b>but a woman cannot betroth her daughter</b> even while she is a minor. <b>A man can sell his daughter</b> as a maidservant while she is a minor, <b>but a woman cannot sell her daughter</b> as a maidservant even while she is a minor. <b>A man is stoned naked, but a woman is not stoned naked. A man is hanged</b> after he is stoned for certain transgressions, <b>but a woman is not hanged. A man is sold for his</b> committing an act of <b>theft</b> in order to pay his debt, <b>but a woman is not sold for her</b> committing an act of <b>theft.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 2:6): <b>All</b> the women <b>who are married into the priesthood, their meal-offerings are burned. How so?</b> With regard to <b>the daughter of a priest,</b> or <b>the daughter of a Levite or an Israelite woman who is married to a priest, her meal-offering is not eaten due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> her father or husband, respectively, <b>has a share in</b> the meal-offering, and it is therefore treated as the meal-offering of a priest, which is not eaten. <b>But it is not completely burned</b> without removing a handful from it, as the Torah states with regard to the meal-offering of a priest, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that she</b> also <b>has a share in it. Rather, the handful is sacrificed by itself, and the remainder</b> of the meal-offering <b>is sacrificed by itself.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: One should <b>apply here</b> the principle that in the case of <b>any</b> offering <b>that is</b> meant to be <b>partly</b> burned <b>on the flames</b> of the altar, one who burns the remainder of the offering <b>is</b> subject <b>to</b> the prohibition: <b>Do not burn.</b> This prohibition is derived from the verse: “You shall not burn of it as an offering made by fire unto the Lord” (Leviticus 2:11). <b>Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi, said that</b> the priest <b>burns</b> the remainder not as an offering but <b>for the purpose of firewood.</b> This is permitted, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> With regard to those parts of an offering which may not be burned, <b>for a pleasing aroma you may not burn</b> them; <b>however, you may burn them</b> on the altar <b>for the purpose of firewood.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara continues: <b>This works out well according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who holds</b> in accordance with <b>this reasoning</b> and permits burning the remainder of an offering as firewood; <b>however,</b> according <b>to the Rabbis, who do not hold</b> in accordance with <b>this reasoning, what can be said?</b> How is the remainder burned on the altar? The Gemara answers: <b>With regard to</b> the remainder, <b>they act in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, says</b> with regard to the meal-offering of a sinner who is a priest: <b>The handful is</b> removed from the meal-offering and <b>sacrificed by itself, and the remainder</b> is neither eaten nor burned on the altar; rather, it <b>is scattered on the place of the ashes.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC