
### Part 1
This is <b>as it is written</b> there: “Thus said the Lord: <b>Behold, I will raise up evil against you out of your own house”</b> (II Samuel 12:11), and this prophecy was fulfilled through Absalom. <b>Similarly, you can say</b> about Joseph, who was sent by his father to inquire as to the well-being of his brothers, where the verse states: <b>“And he sent him from the valley [<i>emek</i>] of Hebron”</b> (Genesis 37:14). <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa says: From the deep [<i>amukka</i>] counsel of that righteous individual who is interred in Hebron,</b> i.e., Abraham, <b>as it is written:</b> “And He said unto Abram: <b>Know that your seed shall be a stranger</b> in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years” (Genesis 15:13). The journey Joseph took to his brothers set in motion the descent of the Jewish people to Egypt.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues its discussion of Absalom. The verse states concerning Absalom: <b>“For he said: I have no son</b> to keep my name in remembrance; and he called the pillar after his own name; and it is called Absalom’s monument to this day” (II Samuel 18:18). The Gemara asks: <b>And did</b> Absalom <b>not have sons? But isn’t it written: “And to Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter”</b> (II Samuel 14:27)? <b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi says:</b> He meant <b>that he did not have a son worthy for royalty. Rav Ḥisda said: It is learned</b> as a tradition: <b>Anyone who burns the produce of another does not leave a son to inherit</b> from <b>him, and he,</b> Absalom, <b>burned</b> the produce <b>of Joab, as it is written: “Therefore he said to his servants: See, Joab’s field is near mine, and he has barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom’s servants set the field on fire”</b> (II Samuel 14:30).

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And the same</b> is so <b>with regard to the</b> reward for <b>good</b> deeds. <b>Miriam</b> waited for the baby Moses for one hour at the shore of the Nile; therefore, the Jewish people delayed their travels in the desert for seven days to wait for her when she was smitten with leprosy. The Gemara asks: <b>Are</b> these matters <b>comparable? There,</b> Miriam waited <b>one hour,</b> while <b>here,</b> the Jewish people waited for her for <b>seven days. Abaye said: Say</b> this with a slight change: <b>And with regard to</b> the repaying of <b>good it is not so,</b> as a person is not rewarded precisely measure for measure, as the reward may be greater than the good deed.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said to him: But</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the mishna: <b>And the same</b> is so <b>with regard to the</b> reward of <b>good</b> deeds. <b>Rather, Rava said: This is what</b> the mishna <b>is teaching: And the same</b> is so <b>with regard to the</b> reward of <b>good</b> deeds. It is rewarded <b>with the same measure,</b> i.e., a person is rewarded in the same manner as the good deed, <b>but the measure of good is always greater than the measure of punishment.</b> Therefore, Miriam was rewarded in the same manner as, but in a greater measure than, her deed.

### Part 5
With regard to Miriam’s deed the verse states: <b>“And his sister stood afar off,</b> to know what would be done to him” (Exodus 2:4). <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: This entire verse is stated in reference to the Divine Presence,</b> i.e., each phrase alludes to the Divine Presence watching over Moses. <b>“And</b> his sister <b>stood”; as it is written: “And the Lord came, and stood”</b> (I Samuel 3:10). <b>“His sister”; as it is written: “Say to wisdom: You are my sister”</b> (Proverbs 7:4). <b>“Afar off”; as it is written: “From afar the Lord appeared to me”</b> (Jeremiah 31:2). <b>“To know”; as it is written: “For the Lord is a God of knowledge”</b> (I Samuel 2:3). <b>“What”; as it is written: “What does the Lord God require of you”</b> (Deuteronomy 10:12). <b>“Would be done”; as it is written: “For the Lord God will do nothing”</b> (Amos 3:7). <b>“To him”; as it is written: “And the Lord said to him: Peace</b> be with you” (Judges 6:23).

### Part 6
§ The Gemara proceeds to discuss the sojourn of the Jewish people in Egypt. The verse states: <b>“And there arose a new king</b> over Egypt, who knew not Joseph” (Exodus 1:8). <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagree about the interpretation of this verse. <b>One says</b> that this means he was <b>actually a new</b> king, <b>and one says</b> that this means <b>that his decrees were transformed</b> as if he were a new king. <b>The one who says</b> that he was <b>actually a new</b> king holds that it is <b>because it is written “new.” And the one who says that his decrees were transformed</b> holds that it is <b>because it is not written: “And</b> the previous king of Egypt <b>died and</b> a new king <b>reigned.”</b> This indicates that the same king remained. According to this interpretation, the words: <b>“Who knew not Joseph”</b> (Exodus 1:8), mean <b>that he was like someone who did not know him at all.</b> Although he certainly knew Joseph and his accomplishments, he acted as if he didn’t.

### Part 7
The next verse states: <b>“And he said to his people: Behold, the people of the children of Israel</b> are too many and too mighty for us” (Exodus 1:9). It was <b>taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 4:11): <b>He,</b> Pharaoh, <b>initiated the proposal. Therefore,</b> of his people, <b>he was stricken first. He initiated the proposal, as it is written: “And he said to his people.” Therefore, he was stricken first, as it is written:</b> “And the frogs shall come up <b>both upon you, and upon your people, and upon all your servants”</b> (Exodus 7:29).

### Part 8
The next verse states that Pharaoh said: <b>“Come, let us deal wisely with him [<i>lo</i>],</b> lest he multiply, and it come to pass that when there befalls us any war, he will also join our enemies, and fight against us” (Exodus 1:10). The Gemara comments: <b>He should have</b> said in plural: <b>With them [<i>lahem</i>],</b> rather than the singular: “With him.” <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says</b> that Pharaoh was saying: <b>Come, let us deal wisely with regard to the savior of Israel,</b> referring to God.

### Part 9
His advisors asked: <b>With what</b> form of death <b>shall we judge</b> and decree upon <b>them?</b> If <b>we shall judge them with fire,</b> perhaps we will be punished measure for measure by fire, as <b>it is written: “For behold, the Lord will come in fire”</b> (Isaiah 66:15), and <b>it is written</b> in the verse that follows it: <b>“For by fire will the Lord contend”</b> (Isaiah 66:16). Similarly, we cannot judge them <b>with the sword,</b> as <b>it is written</b> in the continuation of that verse: <b>“And by His sword with all flesh”</b> (Isaiah 66:16).

### Part 10
<b>Rather, let us come and judge them with water,</b> by drowning the Jewish babies. God will not punish us with water, <b>for the Holy One, Blessed be He, already took an oath that He will not bring a flood upon the world, as it is stated: “For this is as the waters of Noah unto Me;</b> for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth” (Isaiah 54:9). The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> Pharaoh’s advisors <b>did not know that He will not bring a flood upon all the world, but He</b> may <b>bring</b> destruction by water <b>upon one nation.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is an additional way to punish the Egyptians with water: <b>He does not bring</b> a flood upon them, <b>but they</b> may <b>come and fall into</b> water, <b>and so it says:</b> “And the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared; <b>and the Egyptians fled toward it;</b> and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea” (Exodus 14:27), indicating that the Egyptians fell into the water. <b>And this is what Rabbi Elazar says: What is the</b> meaning of that <b>which is written:</b> “Now I know that the Lord is greater than all gods, <b>for in that which they conspired [<i>zadu</i>] against them”</b> (Exodus 18:11)? The phrase means: <b>In the pot in which they cooked, they</b> themselves <b>were cooked,</b> as they were punished through drowning, measure for measure, for drowning the Jewish babies. The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred that this</b> word <b>“<i>zadu</i>” is a term</b> meaning <b>a pot?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written: “And Jacob simmered a pot [<i>vayyazed Ya’akov nazid</i>]”</b> (Genesis 25:29).

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Simai says: Three</b> noteworthy people <b>were</b> consulted by Pharaoh <b>in that counsel</b> where Pharaoh questioned what should be done with the Jewish people. They were <b>Balaam, and Job, and Yitro.</b>

### Part 13
Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba teaches what occurred to each of them: <b>Balaam, who advised</b> Pharaoh to kill all sons born to the Jewish people, <b>was</b> punished by being <b>killed</b> in the war with Midian (see Numbers 31:8). <b>Job, who was silent</b> and neither advised nor protested, <b>was punished by suffering,</b> as detailed in the eponymous book in the Bible. <b>Yitro, who ran away</b> as a sign of protest, <b>merited that</b> some <b>of his children’s children sat</b> in the Sanhedrin <b>in the Chamber of Hewn Stone, as it is stated: “And the families of scribes who dwelt at Jabez, Tirathites, Shimeathites, and Sucathites, these were the Kenites who descended from Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab”</b> (I Chronicles 2:55). <b>And it is written: “The children of the Kenite, Moses’ father-in-law”</b> (Judges 1:16). This teaches that the Kenites, descendants of Yitro, the father-in-law of Moses, dwelt at Jabez [Yabetz], referring to the place where the Jewish people go for advice [<i>eitza</i>], i.e., the Chamber of Hewn Stone.

### Part 14
The verse states: “Come, let us deal wisely with him, lest he multiply, and it come to pass that when there befalls us any war, he will also join our enemies, <b>and fight against us, and get him up out of the land”</b> (Exodus 1:10). The Gemara comments: <b>He should have</b> said: <b>And get us up,</b> as Pharaoh’s fear was that the Jewish people would join the enemies of Egypt and drive Pharaoh and the Egyptians out of Egypt. <b>Rabbi Abba bar Kahana says:</b> By stating this, Pharaoh <b>is like a person who curses himself</b> but <b>applies his curse to another.</b>

### Part 15
The next verse states: <b>“Therefore they did set over him taskmasters</b> in order to afflict him with their burdens” (Exodus 1:11). The Gemara comments: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>Over them,</b> in the plural. <b>The school of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, taught:</b> This <b>teaches</b> that at first <b>they brought a brick mold and they hung it on the neck of Pharaoh</b> to create the appearance that he was also participating in the labor. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>each and every Jew who said to</b> the Egyptians: <b>I am a delicate person [<i>istenis</i>]</b> and I cannot participate in the labor, <b>they said to him: Are you at all more of a delicate person than Pharaoh,</b> and he is participating. Therefore, the verse states: “They did set over him,” as they first placed the burden on Pharaoh as an artifice to enslave the Jewish people.

### Part 16
The term <b>“Taskmasters [<i>sarei missim</i>]”</b> is formed from the term: <b>A matter that compels [<i>shemesim</i>]</b> the manufacture of <b>bricks,</b> as the Jewish people were forced into labor when these taskmasters were assigned to them.

### Part 17
The verse continues: <b>“In order to afflict him with their burdens”</b> (Exodus1:11). The Gemara comments: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>“In order to afflict them,”</b> in the plural. Rather, the intention is, as mentioned previously, <b>in order to afflict Pharaoh, with</b> the result of causing <b>the burdens of the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 18
The verse concludes: <b>“And they built for Pharaoh storage cities [<i>miskenot</i>],</b> Pithom and Raamses” (Exodus 1:11). <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagree as to the precise interpretation of the word miskanot. <b>One says</b> that they are called this because they were the type of structures <b>that endanger [<i>mesakenot</i>] their owners,</b> as it is dangerous to work in cities with tall buildings. <b>And one says</b> that they are called this because this is the type of property <b>that impoverishes [<i>memaskenot</i>] their owners, as the Master said: All who engage in construction become poor.</b>

### Part 19
The verse states that the names of the cities they built were <b>“Pithom and Raamses”</b> (Exodus 1:11). <b>Rav and Shmuel</b> disagree as to the precise interpretation of this verse, both assuming that only one city was built, which had primary and secondary names. <b>One says</b> that <b>Pithom</b> was <b>its</b> real <b>name, and why was it called Raamses?</b> It is an appellation indicating <b>that</b> as the buildings were constructed <b>they collapsed [<i>mitroses</i>] one by one</b> and needed to be rebuilt. <b>And one says</b> that <b>Raamses</b> was <b>its</b> real <b>name, and why was it called Pithom?</b> Because <b>the opening of the abyss [<i>pi tehom</i>] swallowed</b> each building they constructed <b>one by one, and it sunk into the ground.</b>

### Part 20
The next verse states: <b>“But the more they afflicted him, the more he would multiply and the more he would spread about”</b> (Exodus 1:12). The Gemara comments: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>The more they multiplied and the more they spread about,</b> in the past tense. <b>Reish Lakish says: Divine inspiration proclaimed to</b> the Egyptians: As long as this nation is afflicted, <b>the more he will multiply and the more he will spread about.</b> As the verse states: <b>“And they became disgusted [<i>vayyakutzu</i>] due to the children of Israel.”</b> The Gemara explains: This <b>teaches that</b> the Jewish people <b>appeared in their eyes like thorns [<i>kotzim</i>].</b>

### Part 21
The next verse states: <b>“And the Egyptians made the children of Israel work</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC