
### Part 1
§ The mishna states: From here <b>ben Azzai states: A person is obligated to teach</b> his daughter Torah, so that if she drinks and does not die immediately, she will know that some merit of hers has delayed her punishment. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Anyone who teaches his daughter Torah is teaching her promiscuity.</b> The Gemara asks: Could it <b>enter your mind</b> to say that teaching one’s daughter Torah is actually teaching her <b>promiscuity? Rather, say:</b> It is considered <b>as if he taught her promiscuity.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Abbahu says: What is the reason for Rabbi Eliezer’s</b> statement? It is <b>as it is written: “I, wisdom, dwell with cunning”</b> (Proverbs 8:12), which indicates that <b>once wisdom enters into a person, cunning enters with it.</b> Rabbi Eliezer fears that the woman will use the cunning she achieves by learning the wisdom of the Torah to engage in promiscuous behavior.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis</b> who disagree with him, <b>what do they do with this</b> verse: <b>“I, wisdom,</b> dwell with cunning [<i>orma</i>]”; how do they interpret it? The Gemara responds: <b>He requires that</b> verse <b>for that which Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> states, interpreting the word “<i>orma</i>” as nakedness rather than cunningness, <b>as Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: The matters of Torah do not endure except in one who stands naked for them, as it is stated: “I, wisdom, dwell with nakedness [<i>orma</i>]”</b> (Proverbs 8:12). This means that wisdom dwells only in one who is prepared to give away all of his possessions for the sake of Torah study. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The matters of Torah do not endure except in one who considers himself as one who does not</b> exist, <b>as it is stated: “But wisdom, it can be found in nothingness”</b> (Job 28:12).

### Part 4
§ The mishna states that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: A woman desires</b> to receive the amount of a <i>kav</i> of food and a sexual relation-ship rather than to receive nine <i>kav</i> of food and abstinence. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying? This is what</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>is saying: A woman desires to</b> receive the amount of <b>a <i>kav</i></b> of food <b>and with it a sexual relationship,</b> i.e., her husband’s availability to fulfill her sexual desires, rather <b>than nine <i>kav</i></b> of food <b>and</b> with it <b>abstinence,</b> and since her desires are of a sexual nature, it is undesirable for her to study Torah.

### Part 5
§ The mishna continues: <b>He,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua, <b>would say: A foolish man of piety,</b> and a conniving wicked person, and an abstinent woman, and those who injure themselves out of false abstinence; all these are people who erode the world. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is considered a foolish man of piety? For example,</b> it is one who sees <b>that a woman is drowning in a river, and he says:</b> It is <b>not proper conduct to look at her</b> while she is undressed <b>and save her.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Who is considered a conniving wicked person? Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This is one who presents his statement to the judge before the other litigant comes</b> and thereby prejudices the judge in his favor. <b>Rabbi Abbahu says: This</b> is referring to <b>one who gives a dinar to a poor man</b> in order <b>to complete</b> the sum of <b>two hundred dinars for him,</b> so that he will no longer be entitled to receive charity, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Pe’a</i> 8:8): <b>One who has two hundred dinars may not collect gleanings, forgotten</b> sheaves, <b><i>pe’a</i>, and</b> the <b>poor man’s tithe,</b> since he is not defined as poor. However, if <b>he has two hundred less</b> one <b>dinar, even</b> if <b>he is given one thousand</b> dinars <b>at once, he may collect.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Asi</b> says that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> A conniving wicked person is <b>one who provides advice</b> to male orphans <b>to sell from the small quantity of property</b> left to them by their father, before it is appropriated by the court for the purpose of providing for the daughters, who do not inherit property. This causes the daughters to lose their right to sustenance, because although it is improper to do so, the sale is valid, <b>as Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> With regard to male <b>orphans who preemptively sold</b> the property <b>from a small estate, that which they sold, they sold,</b> and the sons retain the money.

### Part 8
<b>Abaye says:</b> A conniving wicked person <b>is one who provides advice to sell property in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to one who said: <b>My property</b> is given <b>to you, and after you</b> die, <b>to so-and-so, and the first</b> beneficiary <b>entered</b> the property <b>and sold</b> it <b>and consumed</b> the profits, <b>the second</b> beneficiary <b>repossesses</b> the property <b>from the purchasers,</b> as the property belongs to him after the death of the first beneficiary; <b>this is the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: The second</b> beneficiary receives <b>only that which the first</b> beneficiary <b>left,</b> since his sale is valid. However, it is not permitted to sell the property <i>ab initio</i>, since the giver intended for the second beneficiary to receive the property.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yosef bar Ḥama</b> says that <b>Rav Sheshet says:</b> A conniving wicked person is <b>one who persuades others with his ways,</b> convincing others to mimic his seemingly righteous behavior, in order to hide his faults. <b>Rabbi Zerika</b> says that <b>Rav Huna says:</b> A conniving wicked person is <b>one who is lenient</b> in the <i>halakha</i> <b>for himself and strict for others. Ulla says: This</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC