
### Part 1
<b>and then there shall be an extension to your tranquility”</b> (Daniel 4:24). <b>And it is written: “All this came upon King Nebuchadnezzar”</b> (Daniel 4:25), <b>and it is written</b> in the following verse that this occurred: <b>“At the end of twelve months”</b> (Daniel 4:26). None of the opinions in the <i>baraita</i> are in accordance with the mishna’s statement that merit can delay punishment for up to three years.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> who states that merit delays punishment for one year, <b>and he found a verse which states and repeats</b> the possibility that punishment can be delayed, indicating that merit can delay punishment up to three times, <b>as it is written: “Thus says the Lord: For three transgressions of Edom,</b> yes, but for four, I will not reverse it” (Amos 1:11). Punishment can therefore be delayed for three consecutive periods of one year.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> does Rabbi Yishmael mean by stating: <b>Although there is no</b> explicit <b>proof for the concept</b> of merit delaying punishment for twelve months, there is <b>an allusion to the concept?</b> The verses he cites state explicitly that punishment can be delayed for twelve months. The Gemara answers: The proof is not explicit, as <b>perhaps gentiles are different, as</b> swift <b>judgment is not administered upon them</b> as readily as it is upon the Jewish people, with whom God is more precise in executing judgment.

### Part 4
§ The mishna states: <b>And there is a merit</b> that <b>delays</b> punishment for <b>three years.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Which merit</b> can delay the punishment of a <i>sota</i>? <b>If we say</b> it is the <b>merit of</b> the <b>Torah</b> that she has studied; <b>but</b> a woman who studies Torah <b>is</b> one who is <b>not commanded</b> to do so <b>and performs</b> a mitzva, whose reward is less than that of one who is obligated? Therefore, it would be insufficient to suspend her punishment. <b>Rather,</b> perhaps it is the <b>merit of a mitzva</b> that she performed.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Does</b> the <b>merit of a mitzva protect</b> one <b>so much</b> as to delay her punishment? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Menaḥem bar Yosei interpreted this</b> verse <b>homiletically: “For the mitzva is a lamp and the Torah is light”</b> (Proverbs 6:23). <b>The verse associates the mitzva with a lamp and the Torah with</b> the <b>light</b> of the sun. <b>The mitzva</b> is associated <b>with a lamp</b> in order <b>to say to you: Just as a lamp does not protect</b> one by its light extensively but <b>only temporarily,</b> while the lamp is in one’s hand, <b>so too, a mitzva protects</b> one <b>only temporarily,</b> i.e., while one is performing the mitzva.

### Part 6
<b>And the Torah</b> is associated <b>with light</b> in order <b>to say to you: Just as</b> the <b>light</b> of the sun <b>protects</b> one <b>forever, so too,</b> the <b>Torah</b> one studies <b>protects</b> one <b>forever; and it states</b> in the previous verse with regard to the Torah: <b>“When you walk, it shall lead you;</b> when you lie down, it shall watch over you; and when you awake, it shall talk with you” (Proverbs 6:22). The Gemara explains: <b>“When you walk, it shall lead you”; this is</b> referring to when one is in <b>this world. “When you lie down, it shall watch over you”; this is</b> referring to the time of <b>death,</b> when one lies in his grave. <b>“And when you awake, it shall talk with you”;</b> this is referring <b>to the time to come</b> after the resurrection of the dead. The Torah that one studies protects and guides him both in this world and in the next world.

### Part 7
This can be illustrated by <b>a parable,</b> as it is comparable <b>to a man who is walking in</b> the <b>blackness of night and the darkness, and he is afraid of the thorns, and of the pits, and of the thistles,</b> which he cannot see due to the darkness. <b>And</b> he is also afraid <b>of</b> the <b>wild animals and of the bandits</b> that lurk at night, <b>and he does not know which way he is walking.</b>

### Part 8
If <b>a torch of fire comes his way,</b> which is analogous to a mitzva, <b>he is safe from the thorns and from the pits and from the thistles, but he is still afraid of</b> the <b>wild animals and of the bandits, and</b> still <b>does not know which way he is walking. Once the light of dawn rises,</b> which is analogous to Torah study, <b>he is safe from</b> the <b>wild animals and from the bandits,</b> which no longer roam the roads, <b>but he still does not know which way he is walking.</b> If <b>he arrives at a crossroads</b> and recognizes the way, <b>he is saved from all of them.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Alternatively,</b> the verse associates the mitzva with a lamp and the Torah with the light of the sun in order to teach that <b>a transgression extinguishes</b> the merit of <b>a mitzva</b> one performed, <b>but a transgression does not extinguish</b> the merit of the <b>Torah</b> one studied, <b>as it is stated: “Many waters cannot extinguish the love,</b> neither can the floods drown it” (Song of Songs 8:7). The Torah is compared to love several times in the Song of Songs. One can conclude from the <i>baraita</i> that the merit of performing a mitzva is insufficient to suspend punishment.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> that with regard to <b>a mitzva, at the time when one is engaged in its</b> performance it <b>protects</b> one from misfortune <b>and saves</b> one from the evil inclination; <b>at the time when one is not engaged in its</b> performance, it <b>protects</b> one from misfortune but it <b>does not save</b> one from the evil inclination. With regard to <b>Torah</b> study, <b>both at the time when one is engaged in it and at the time when one is not engaged in it,</b> it <b>protects</b> one from misfortune <b>and saves</b> one from the evil inclination. Therefore, the merit of the woman’s mitzvot does protect her from misfortune and delay her punishment.

### Part 11
<b>Rabba objects to this</b> explanation: <b>If that is so,</b> then with regard to <b>Doeg</b> (see I Samuel, chapters 21–22) <b>and Ahithophel</b> (see II Samuel, chapter 16), who were both wise scholars despite their wickedness, <b>did they not engage in the</b> study of <b>Torah? Why did</b> it <b>not protect them</b> from sinning? <b>Rather, Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>Torah</b> study, <b>at the time when one is engaged in it, it protects and saves; at the time when one is not engaged in it, it protects</b> one from misfortune but <b>it does not save</b> one from the evil inclination. With regard to <b>a mitzva, both at the time when one is engaged in its</b> performance <b>and at the time when one is not engaged in its</b> performance, <b>it protects</b> one from misfortune but it <b>does not save</b> one from the evil inclination.

### Part 12
<b>Ravina said: Actually,</b> the merit that delays the punishment of the <i>sota</i> is the <b>merit of Torah</b> study, <b>and</b> with regard to that <b>which you say,</b> i.e., that <b>she is not commanded</b> to do so <b>and performs</b> a mitzva, the mishna is not referring to the merit of her own Torah study. <b>Granted, she is not commanded</b> to study Torah herself; however, <b>in reward for causing their sons to read</b> the Written Torah <b>and to learn</b> the Mishna, <b>and</b> for <b>waiting for their husbands until they come</b> home <b>from the study hall, don’t they share</b> the reward <b>with their</b> sons and husbands? Therefore, if the <i>sota</i> enabled her sons and husband to study Torah, the merit of their Torah study can protect her and delay her punishment.

### Part 13
With regard to the aforementioned parable, the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the <b>crossroads,</b> which provide clarity? <b>Rav Ḥisda says: This</b> is referring to <b>a Torah scholar and</b> his <b>day of death.</b> Due to his continued commitment to the Torah, when the time comes for him to die, it is clear to him that he will go to the place of his eternal reward. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: This is a Torah scholar</b> who has also acquired <b>fear of sin,</b> as his fear of sin guides him to the correct understanding of the Torah. <b>Mar Zutra says: This is a Torah scholar who reaches</b> conclusions from <b>his discussion in accordance with the <i>halakha</i>,</b> as that is an indication that he is following the right path.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>Alternatively: A transgression extinguishes</b> the merit of <b>a mitzva, but a transgression does not extinguish</b> the merit of the <b>Torah. Rav Yosef says: Rabbi Menaḥem bar Yosei interpreted this verse as</b> it was given on Mount <b>Sinai, and had Doeg and Ahithophel only interpreted it in this way they would not have pursued David, as it is written:</b> “For my enemies speak concerning <b>me…saying, God has forsaken him;</b> pursue and take him, for there is none to deliver” (Psalms 71:10–11). Doeg and Ahithophel incorrectly thought that since David had sinned, his sins had extinguished his merits and God had forsaken him.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> verse <b>did</b> Doeg and Ahithophel <b>interpret</b> incorrectly, causing them to err? They interpreted this verse: “For the Lord your God walks in the midst of your camp…to give up your enemies before you…<b>that He see no licentious matter in you,</b> and turn away from you” (Deuteronomy 23:15), to indicate that God turns away from one who engaged in forbidden relations, and since David had sinned with Bathsheba God must have turned away from him. <b>But they did not know that a transgression extinguishes</b> the merit of <b>a mitzva, but a transgression does not extinguish</b> the merit of the <b>Torah.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara interprets the continuation of the verse cited by the <i>baraita</i> with regard to Torah study: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: “Many waters cannot extinguish the love…if a man would give all the fortune of his house for love, <b>he would utterly be condemned”</b> (Song of Songs 8:7)? The Torah is compared to love several times in the Song of Songs. Therefore, the verse indicates that one cannot acquire a share in the reward for Torah study with money. <b>Ulla says:</b> The verse is <b>not</b> speaking of individuals <b>like Shimon, brother of Azarya,</b> whose brother Azarya supported him and enabled him to study Torah. <b>And</b> it is <b>not</b> speaking of individuals <b>like Rabbi Yoḥanan of the house of the <i>Nasi</i>,</b> whom the <i>Nasi</i> supported so that he could study Torah.

### Part 17
<b>Rather,</b> it is speaking of individuals <b>like Hillel and Shevna, as when Rav Dimi came</b> to Babylonia <b>he said: Hillel and Shevna were brothers; Hillel engaged in Torah</b> study and remained impoverished, whereas <b>Shevna entered into a</b> business <b>venture</b> and became wealthy. <b>In the end,</b> Shevna <b>said to</b> Hillel: <b>Come, let us join</b> our wealth <b>together and divide</b> it between us; I will give you half of my money and you will give me half of the reward for your Torah study. In response to this request <b>a Divine Voice issued forth and said: “If a man would give all the fortune of his house</b> for love, he would utterly be condemned” (Song of Songs 8:7).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC