
### Part 1
<b>Until his days the hammer</b> of smiths <b>would strike in Jerusalem</b> on the intermediate days of a Festival, but he banned the practice. <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>in his days there was no need to inquire about doubtfully tithed produce [<i>demai</i>],</b> as everyone was careful to tithe.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: From where</b> is it derived <b>that if the heifer’s neck was broken and afterward the killer was found,</b> then the breaking of the neck <b>does not exempt him</b> from punishment? <b>The verse states: “And the land shall not be atoned, for the blood that was spilled in it, but by the blood of he who spilled it”</b> (Numbers 35:33).

### Part 3
The mishna taught that if <b>one witness says: I saw the killer,</b> and another testifies: You did not see him, they would break the heifer’s neck. The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> they break the neck <b>is</b> because the second witness <b>contradicts him, but</b> if <b>no</b> one <b>contradicts him, one witness is relied upon,</b> and they do not break the heifer’s neck.

### Part 4
<b>From where are these matters</b> derived? The Gemara answers that it is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It states with regard to the heifer whose neck is broken: <b>“It is not known who has smitten him”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:1). <b>Consequently,</b> if <b>it was known who smote him, even</b> if it was only <b>one</b> person <b>at the end of the world</b> who knew, <b>they would not break the neck</b> of the heifer. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> if the members of the <b>Sanhedrin</b> themselves <b>saw one</b> person <b>kill someone, but they do not recognize him,</b> then <b>they would not break the neck</b> of the heifer? <b>The verse states: “Nor did our eyes see”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:7), <b>and</b> did they <b>not see?</b> Seeing the murder alone obviates the need for the performance of the ritual.

### Part 5
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Now that you have said</b> that in this case <b>one witness is relied upon,</b> if so, <b>how is the other one able</b> to <b>contradict him? Didn’t Ulla say: Wherever the Torah relies on one witness, there is</b> the equivalent of the testimony of <b>two</b> witnesses <b>here,</b> and <b>the statement of one</b> witness <b>has no</b> standing <b>in a place where</b> it is contradicted by <b>two</b> witnesses. The Gemara answers: <b>Ulla</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that the text of the mishna should be emended and <b>teach</b> the mishna in this way: <b>They would not break the neck</b> of the heifer. <b>And Rabbi Yitzḥak also said</b> to <b>teach: They would not break the neck.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Ḥiyya said</b> that one should <b>teach: They would break the neck.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> the above ruling <b>of Ulla</b> is <b>difficult.</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> in the mishna, the case is discussing when two witnesses came <b>simultaneously,</b> and therefore both of their testimonies are rejected; whereas <b>there,</b> with regard to the statement of Ulla, it is referring to a case when they testified <b>one after the other.</b> Ulla rules that once the testimony of the first witness has been accepted the testimony of the second witness cannot nullify it.

### Part 7
<b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>one witness says: I saw the killer, and two say: You did not see, they would break the neck.</b> This cannot be stated just to teach us this <i>halakha</i>, as the fact that two witnesses override one witness is well known. The Gemara assumes that it is stated for the following inference: <b>Therefore,</b> if <b>one</b> testified, <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> then testified, <b>they would not break the neck.</b> This appears to be <b>a conclusive refutation of Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> who has the text of: They would break the neck.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>And according to your reasoning</b> that the mishna states its cases in order to teach an inference, <b>say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If <b>two</b> witnesses <b>say: We saw, and one</b> witness <b>says: You did not see, they would not break the neck.</b> The Gemara makes an inference from this clause: <b>Therefore,</b> if <b>one</b> came <b>and</b> then the other <b>one</b> came, i.e., they did not come simultaneously, <b>they would break the neck.</b> The two inferences from the different clauses of the mishna consequently contradict one another, and the mishna needs to be explained differently.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> the correct understanding is that <b>the entire mishna</b> is not dealing with valid witnesses and stating an obvious <i>halakha</i> in order to enable an inference, but instead it is dealing <b>with</b> people who are <b>disqualified</b> from <b>bearing witness</b> and is also teaching us a novel ruling. <b>And</b> the mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Neḥemya, who says: Wherever the Torah relies on one witness, follow the majority of opinions.</b> In other words, if the testimonies of two disqualified witnesses conflict, the court rules in accordance with the testimony provided by more witnesses, whether or not they are qualified to testify. <b>And they established</b> that with regard to the testimony of <b>two women,</b> who are usually disqualified from testifying, when they testify <b>against one man,</b> it should be <b>like</b> that of <b>two men against one man,</b> and the court will rule in accordance with the testimony of the two women.

### Part 10
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different version of Rabbi Neḥemya’s opinion: <b>Anywhere that one valid witness came at the outset, even one hundred women</b> who later contradict him <b>are considered like one</b> witness, and do not override his testimony. <b>And with what are we dealing here</b> in the mishna? A case <b>where a woman came at the outset,</b> and testified that she saw the killer. Then two other women arrived to contradict her statement. <b>And</b> according to this interpretation you must <b>emend the</b> statement <b>of Rabbi Neḥemya</b> so that it reads <b>like this: Rabbi Neḥemya says: Wherever the Torah relies on one witness, follow the majority of opinions. And they established</b> that <b>two women against one woman</b> are <b>like two men against one man. But two women</b> in opposition <b>to one man</b> who is a valid witness <b>is like half</b> of a pair of witnesses <b>and half</b> of a pair of witnesses, and the mishna did not address that case.

### Part 11
The Gemara poses a question on these two interpretations of the mishna: <b>And why do I</b> need <b>two</b> cases in the mishna to teach the <i>halakha</i> that the majority opinion of <b>those disqualified</b> from <b>bearing witness</b> is followed? The Gemara explains: It is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>when we follow the majority opinion</b> in the case of invalid witnesses, this is when it results in a decision <b>to be stringent</b> and require the performance of the ritual. <b>But</b> when it results in a decision <b>to be lenient</b> and say that the ritual is not required, we do <b>not</b> follow the majority opinion, and the performance of the ritual is required even if there is one witness saying that the killer was not seen. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that there is no difference in this regard, and the majority opinion is followed in any case.

### Part 12
§ The mishna taught that <b>from</b> the time <b>when murderers proliferated,</b> the ritual of the heifer whose neck is broken was nullified. <b>The Sages taught: From</b> the time <b>when murderers proliferated,</b> the ritual of <b>the heifer whose neck is broken was nullified, because it comes only for</b> a case involving <b>uncertainty</b> with regard to the identity of the murderer. Therefore, <b>when there was an increase of murderers</b> acting <b>openly</b> so that their identities were known, the ritual of <b>the heifer whose neck is broken was nullified.</b>

### Part 13
The mishna also taught that <b>from</b> the time <b>when adulterers proliferated,</b> the performance of the ritual of the bitter water of a <i>sota</i> was nullified. <b>The Sages taught:</b> It states: <b>“And the man shall be cleared of transgression,</b> and that woman shall bear her transgression” (Numbers 5:31), which indicates that <b>when the man is clear of transgression the waters evaluate</b> if <b>his wife</b> was unfaithful, but <b>if the man is not clear of transgression the waters do not evaluate</b> if <b>his wife</b> was unfaithful. <b>And it states: “I will not punish your daughters when they commit harlotry,</b> nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery; for they consort with lewd women, and they sacrifice with prostitutes; and the people that is without understanding is distraught” (Hosea 4:14).

### Part 14
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is</b> the purpose of the addition of: <b>And it states?</b> What is lacking in the exposition from the verse of the Torah? The Gemara explains: <b>And if you would say</b> that based on the verse: “And the man shall be cleared of transgression,” the <i>halakha</i> would be that with regard to <b>his transgression, yes,</b> it will cause the waters to be ineffective, but the transgression <b>of his sons and daughters</b> does <b>not</b> impact the effectiveness, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> the verse: <b>“I will not punish your daughters,”</b> i.e., I will not punish your wives, due to your daughters, <b>“when they commit harlotry, nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery.”</b>

### Part 15
<b>And if you would say:</b> With regard to the <b>transgression of</b> adultery with <b>a married woman, yes,</b> it will cause the waters to be ineffective, but the <b>transgression of</b> one who engaged in sexual intercourse with <b>an unmarried woman</b> does <b>not</b> impact the effectiveness, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> the continuation of the verse: <b>“For they consort with lewd women, and they sacrifice with prostitutes.”</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara turns its attention to the end of the verse. <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>“And the people that is without understanding is distraught”? Rabbi Elazar says: The prophet said to the Jewish people: If you are particular about yourselves, the water evaluates your wives; but if not, the water does not evaluate your wives.</b> This would make people distraught, as they would not know how to overcome their suspicion if they are concerned that their wives have been unfaithful.

### Part 17
§ The Gemara cites statements similar to those of the mishna. <b>From</b> the time <b>when those who accept benefit</b> from others <b>proliferated, the laws became twisted and deeds became corrupted, and there was no comfort in the world. From</b> the time <b>when those who look at</b> the <b>faces</b> of the litigants <b>in judgment,</b> in order to rule based on the appearance of the litigants, <b>proliferated,</b> the fulfillment of the verse: <b>“You shall not fear</b> the face of any man” (Deuteronomy 1:17), <b>ceased, and</b> the fulfillment of the verse: <b>“You shall not respect</b> faces in judgment” (Deuteronomy 1:17), <b>halted, and they removed the yoke of Heaven</b> from themselves, <b>and placed upon themselves the yoke of flesh and blood.</b>

### Part 18
<b>From</b> the time <b>when those who whisper whisperings in judgment,</b> advising judges surreptitiously, <b>proliferated, fierce anger proliferated in Israel, and the Divine Presence departed, because it is stated:</b> “God stands in the congregation of God; <b>in the midst of the judges He judges”</b> (Psalms 82:1). The Divine Presence that dwells among judges leaves if they judge improperly. <b>From</b> the time <b>when</b> those who are referred to in the verse: <b>“Their heart goes after their covetousness”</b> (Ezekiel 33:31), <b>proliferated, “Those who say to evil good, and to good evil”</b> (Isaiah 5:20) <b>proliferated,</b> i.e., those who treat wicked people as though they were righteous proliferated as a result. <b>From</b> the time <b>when</b> the fulfillment of the verse: <b>“Those who say to evil good, and to good evil,” proliferated,</b> the cry of: <b>Woe, woe, proliferated in the world.</b> There was an increase in troubles that cause people to cry out.

### Part 19
<b>From</b> the time <b>when those who</b> show their arrogance by <b>drawing</b> out <b>spittle proliferated,</b> the number of <b>haughty people</b> in general <b>proliferated, and the</b> number of <b>students decreased,</b> as they would say haughtily that there was nothing left for them to learn, <b>and the Torah</b> needs to <b>go around to</b> seek <b>those who study it,</b> as people do not learn of their own initiative. Furthermore, <b>from</b> the time <b>when haughty people proliferated, the daughters of Israel began marrying haughty men, as our generation looks only at the face,</b> i.e., the external aspects of a person, and ignores the inner aspects of a person.

### Part 20
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Is that so?</b> Do women wish to marry arrogant men? <b>But didn’t the Master say: One who is haughty is not even accepted by the members of his household, as it is stated: “The haughty man abides not”</b> (Habakkuk 2:5)? <b>“Abides [<i>yinaveh</i>] not”</b> means that <b>even in his abode [<i>naveh</i>],</b> he is not accepted. The Gemara explains: <b>Initially, she jumps at</b> the chance to marry <b>him,</b> because he appears to be a great person to her, but <b>in the end,</b> once she gets to know him, <b>he is demeaned in her eyes.</b>

### Part 21
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>From</b> the time <b>when there was an increase</b> in those who <b>placed upon homeowners</b> the obligation to designate the profits from <b>merchandise</b> for the upkeep of judges, <b>bribery and corruption of judgment proliferated and good ceased. From</b> the time <b>when</b> those judges and leaders who say: <b>I accept your favor, and: I hold your favor, proliferated,</b> the fulfillment of the verse: <b>“Every man did that which was right in his eyes”</b> (Judges 17:6), <b>proliferated. Lowly ones were raised and lofty ones were lowered, and the monarchy is increasingly on the decline. From</b> the time <b>when misers and those greedy for profit proliferated, those hardened of heart and who closed their hands from lending proliferated, and they transgressed that which is written in the Torah:</b> “You shall not harden your heart, nor shut your hand from your needy brother…<b>Guard yourself in case</b> there is a base thought in your heart…and you do not give him” (Deuteronomy 15:7, 9).

### Part 22
<b>From</b> the time <b>when</b> women with <b>“stretched-forth necks and wanton eyes”</b> (Isaiah 3:16) <b>proliferated, the bitter waters</b> of a <i>sota</i> <b>proliferated,</b> as more people were suspected of committing adultery; <b>but they</b> eventually <b>ceased</b> when licentiousness became too widespread. <b>From</b> the time <b>when those who accept gifts proliferated, the days decreased and the years shortened, as it is written: “And he who hates gifts lives”</b> (Proverbs 15:27). <b>From</b> the time <b>when those with boastful [<i>zeḥuḥei</i>] hearts proliferated, dispute proliferated in Israel. From</b> the time <b>when the students of Shammai and Hillel who did not serve</b> their Rabbis <b>sufficiently proliferated, dispute proliferated in Israel, and the Torah became like two Torahs. From</b> the time <b>when those who accept charity from gentiles proliferated, the Jewish people were above and they below; the Jewish people ahead and they behind.</b> This last statement is a euphemism; it was the Jewish people that were below and behind, but the Gemara did not want to say so explicitly.

### Part 23
§ The mishna taught that <b>from</b> the time <b>when Yosei ben Yo’ezer died</b> the clusters ceased. The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>clusters [<i>eshkolot</i>]? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It means <b>a man who contains all [<i>ish shehakol bo</i>]</b> elements of Torah and mitzvot. The mishna further taught that <b>Yoḥanan the High Priest took away the declaration of the tithe.</b> The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is the reason</b> he did this? <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: Because they did not give</b> the tithe <b>in the proper manner</b> as stated by the Torah. In what way is that? <b>As the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah <b>that they should give</b> the first tithe <b>to the Levites,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC