
### Part 1
<b>You learned it</b> in the <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Pe’a</i> 3:7): In the case of <b>a sheaf that had been held</b> by its owner in order <b>to take it to the city, and he placed it on top of another</b> sheaf, <b>and he forgot</b> both sheaves, <b>the lower</b> sheaf is deemed to be <b>a forgotten sheaf, and the upper one is not</b> deemed to be <b>a forgotten sheaf. Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon: Both of them are not</b> deemed to be <b>forgotten sheaves; the lower one because it is concealed and the upper one because it is floating</b> and not directly touching the field. The Sages <b>assumed that these <i>tanna’im</i></b> in the <i>baraita</i> basically <b>hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who <b>says</b> that the phrase <b>“in the field”</b> serves <b>to exclude a concealed</b> sheaf.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues Abaye’s statement: <b>What, is it not</b> the case <b>that they disagree about this, as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds</b> that <b>a substance</b> in contact <b>with</b> the <b>same</b> type of <b>substance is</b> considered to be <b>concealed,</b> and therefore the lower sheaf is not deemed to be a forgotten sheaf, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>it is not</b> considered to be <b>concealed,</b> which means it is deemed to be a forgotten sheaf. The same dispute would apply to the two corpses.

### Part 3
The Gemara refutes this claim: <b>No, if they hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> then it could be <b>that everyone agrees</b> that <b>a substance</b> in contact <b>with</b> the <b>same</b> type of <b>substance is</b> considered to be <b>concealed,</b> and they would maintain this with regard to the two corpses as well. <b>And here they disagree with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute of Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis,</b> in <b>that</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> of this <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> there, which claims that the <i>halakha</i> of a forgotten sheaf applies even to a concealed sheaf, <b>and Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda</b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who maintains that a concealed sheaf is exempt from the <i>halakha</i> of forgotten sheaves.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> that is <b>so,</b> that their dispute is with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of concealed sheaves, <b>why</b> did they <b>specifically</b> disagree in the case of a sheaf that was <b>on top of another</b> sheaf; <b>the same would hold true even</b> in a case where the sheaf was concealed <b>in dirt and pebbles?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so.</b> They disagree with regard to all concealed sheaves, <b>and</b> their dispute is stated with regard to a case of one sheaf on top of another in order <b>to convey to you the far-reaching</b> nature of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> that <b>even a substance</b> that is in contact <b>with</b> the <b>same</b> type of <b>substance is</b> considered <b>concealed.</b> Therefore, a substance concealed in a different type of matter is all the more so considered concealed.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara returns to discuss when the ritual of breaking the neck of the heifer is performed. <b>The Sages taught,</b> expounding the verse “If one be found slain in the land which the Lord your God has given you to possess it, lying in the field” (Deuteronomy 21:1): <b>“Slain”</b> indicates one killed by a sword, <b>but not</b> one who was <b>strangled; “slain,” but not</b> one who was found <b>twitching</b> in his death throes; <b>“in the land,” but not concealed in a pile</b> of stones; <b>“lying,” but not hanging on a tree; “in the field,” but not floating on the surface of the water. Rabbi Elazar says: In all these</b> cases, <b>if</b> a person <b>was slain</b> by the sword, the judges <b>break the neck</b> of the heifer, and it does not matter where the corpse was found.

### Part 6
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says</b> that the Sages <b>said to Rabbi Elazar: Do you not concede that if he was strangled and left in a garbage</b> heap, <b>that they do not break the</b> heifer’s <b>neck? Apparently, “slain”</b> is a precise term that means slain <b>but not strangled.</b> If you accept that, <b>here too</b> the words <b>“in the land”</b> should indicate: In the land, <b>but not concealed in a pile</b> of stones; <b>“fallen”</b> should indicate: Fallen <b>but not hanging on a tree;</b> and <b>“in the field”</b> should indicate in the field <b>but not floating on the surface of the water. And Rabbi Elazar</b> holds that those other situations are not excluded, and that because in that first case the Torah <b>writes “slain” an extra</b> time in the next verse: “About him that is slain” (Deuteronomy 21:2), this repetition teaches that a victim of strangulation is not included in this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 7
§ The mishna taught: If a corpse <b>was found close to the border</b> of the country <b>or</b> close <b>to a city in which the majority</b> of its inhabitants <b>are gentiles,</b> the judges would not break the heifer’s neck, <b>as it is written: “If one be found</b> slain” (Deuteronomy 21:1). This <b>excludes</b> places where murdered bodies <b>are</b> commonly <b>found,</b> such as the aforementioned locations.

### Part 8
The mishna taught: <b>Or</b> if the victim was discovered close <b>to a city that is without</b> a rabbinical <b>court</b> of twenty-three judges, they would not measure the distance to that city. The Gemara explains: This is <b>because</b> the verse <b>requires “the Elders of that city”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:3), <b>and</b> this is <b>not</b> the case here; therefore the rite was not performed. The mishna also taught that the Elders <b>measure</b> the distance from the corpse <b>only to a city</b> that contains a rabbinical court of twenty-three judges. The Gemara asks: This <b>is obvious. Since</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> that they do not measure the distance <b>to a city that does not have</b> a rabbinical <b>court</b> of twenty-three judges, <b>I know</b> that <b>they measure</b> the distance <b>only to a city that has</b> a rabbinical <b>court</b> of twenty-three judges.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that if</b> the corpse <b>was found close to a city that does not have</b> a rabbinical <b>court</b> of twenty-three judges, <b>that they leave</b> the city aside <b>and measure</b> the distance from the corpse <b>to a city that has</b> a rabbinical <b>court</b> of twenty-three judges? <b>The verse states: “And the Elders of that city shall take”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:3), which indicates that the Elders of a city are involved <b>in any case,</b> and the measurement is taken even if it is not to the city closest to the body.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the slain person <b>is found precisely between two cities,</b> the inhabitants of <b>the two of them bring two heifers</b> total; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. And</b> the inhabitants of <b>Jerusalem do not bring a heifer whose neck is broken,</b> even if Jerusalem is the city closest to the slain victim. If the <b>head of</b> the corpse <b>was found in one place and his body</b> was found <b>in a different place, they bring the head next to the body;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> They bring <b>the body next to the head. From where</b> on the body <b>would they measure</b> the distance? <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: From his navel. Rabbi Akiva says: From his nose. Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: From the place where he became a slain</b> person, which is <b>from the neck.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reasoning of Rabbi Eliezer,</b> that when a body is found precisely between two cities, the inhabitants of each city bring a heifer? His ruling is based on two factors. First, <b>he holds</b> that <b>it is possible to measure precisely</b> and that it is a real possibility to determine that both cities are exactly the same distance from the corpse. <b>And</b> second, he interprets the term <b>“That is nearest”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:3), to be referring not only to one city. It can <b>even</b> be understood as: <b>That are nearest,</b> so that the <i>halakhot</i> apply to more than one city.

### Part 12
The mishna taught: <b>And</b> the inhabitants of <b>Jerusalem do not bring a heifer whose neck is broken.</b> The Gemara explains: This is <b>because the verse states:</b> “If one be found slain in the land which the Lord your God has given <b>you to possess it”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:1), <b>and</b> this <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that <b>Jerusalem was not divided among the tribes</b> in the division of Eretz Yisrael. It was not given as a possession to any particular person but belongs to all; therefore the <i>halakha</i> of the heifer whose neck is broken does not apply to it.

### Part 13
§ With regard to the <i>halakha</i> of a corpse whose <b>head was found in</b> one <b>place</b> and its body elsewhere, the Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>do they disagree? If we say they disagree with regard to</b> whether the <b>measurement</b> is taken from the head or the body, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches: From where would they measure</b> the distance, <b>it may be inferred that</b> in <b>the first clause we are not dealing with measurement. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: They disagree with regard to</b> a different matter, the question of whether <b>a corpse with no one to bury it [<i>met mitzva</i>] acquires its place,</b> meaning if an unattended corpse must be buried where it is found.

### Part 14
<b>And this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying:</b> With regard <b>to burying him,</b> the victim <b>acquires his place,</b> and he is buried there. The mishna continues: <b>And</b> in a case <b>where his head is found in one place and his body</b> is found <b>in a different place, they bring the head next to the body</b> and bury him there; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> They bring <b>the body next to the head.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>With regard to what do they disagree?</b> They both agree that he should be buried in the place where he was killed, but one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds</b> that <b>his body fell in its place,</b> and it was <b>the head that rolled away and fell. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>holds</b> that <b>his head fell where it fell,</b> and <b>it was the body that went and continued</b> onward. Therefore, the body is brought to the head.

### Part 15
§ The mishna taught that there is a dispute concerning the question: <b>From where</b> on the body <b>would they measure</b> the distance? The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what do they disagree?</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>holds:</b> A person’s <b>life is</b> sustained <b>mainly in his nose,</b> in his respiratory system. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Eliezer, <b>holds: His life is mainly in</b> the area of <b>his navel,</b> in his digestive system.

### Part 16
The Gemara suggests: <b>Shall we say that these <i>tanna’im</i> are like those <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> who had a dispute as it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where is an embryo formed? From its head, and so</b> the verse <b>states: “Out of my mother’s womb You pulled me [<i>gozi</i>]”</b> (Psalms 71:6). <b>And</b> the proof that “<i>gozi</i>” is referring to the head is from the verse that <b>states: “Cut off [<i>gozi</i>] your hair, and cast it away”</b> (Jeremiah 7:29). In this verse, the term <i>gozi</i> relates to the hair of the head. <b>Abba Shaul says:</b> An embryo is formed <b>from its navel, and it sends its roots forth.</b> This dispute concerning the initial formation of an embryo also appears to depend on where the main source of life in a person is.

### Part 17
The Gemara refutes this comparison: <b>You</b> can <b>even say</b> that both <i>tanna’im</i> of the mishna agree with <b>Abba Shaul,</b> as <b>Abba Shaul says</b> his opinion <b>only with regard to the forming</b> of an embryo, <b>that when an embryo is formed,</b> it is <b>formed from its middle. But with regard to life, everyone,</b> i.e., both <i>tanna’im</i> in the <i>baraita</i>, agree that <b>it is in his nose, as it is written: “All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life”</b> (Genesis 7:22).

### Part 18
The mishna taught another opinion. <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> The distance should be measured <b>from the place where</b> the victim <b>became a slain</b> person, <b>from his neck.</b> The Gemara poses a question: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written: “To lay you upon the necks of the wicked who are to be slain”</b> (Ezekiel 21:34), which shows that being slain occurs at the neck.

### Part 19
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna continues to describe the ritual. After they would take the measurement, <b>the Elders of Jerusalem took their leave and went</b> away. <b>The Elders of the city</b> that is closest to the corpse <b>bring a heifer from cattle, which has not pulled a yoke. But a blemish does not disqualify it,</b> because, unlike the description of the red heifer, the Torah does not state that it must be without blemish. <b>And they bring it down to a stream</b> that is <b><i>eitan</i>. <i>Eitan</i></b> in this context means <b>as</b> the word generally <b>indicates,</b> powerful. The stream must have <b>a forceful</b> flow. The mishna comments: <b>Even if it is not forceful, it is a valid</b> site for the ritual. <b>And they break the neck of</b> the heifer <b>from behind with a cleaver. And</b> with regard to <b>its place,</b> where the heifer was standing when its neck was broken, <b>it is prohibited</b> for that ground <b>to be sown or to be worked, but</b> it is <b>permitted to comb flax there or to cut stones there.</b>

### Part 20
<b>The Elders of that city</b> would then <b>wash their hands in water in</b> the <b>place of the breaking of the neck of the heifer, and they would recite: “Our hands did not spill this blood, nor did our eyes see”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:7). The mishna explains: <b>But did it enter our minds that the Elders of the court are spillers of blood,</b> that they must make such a declaration? <b>Rather,</b> they mean to declare <b>that</b> the victim <b>did not come to us and</b> then <b>we let him take his leave without food, and we did not see him and</b> then <b>leave him</b> alone to depart <b>without accompaniment.</b> They therefore attest that they took care of all his needs and are not responsible for his death even indirectly.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC