
### Part 1
<b>the netherworld has enlarged her desire, and opened her mouth without measure, and down goes their glory and their tumult and their uproar, and he who rejoices among them”</b> (Isaiah 5:14). Their punishment is that they shall descend into the netherworld.

### Part 2
§ The mishna taught: <b>From</b> the time <b>when the early prophets died,</b> the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> was nullified. The Gemara poses a question: <b>Who</b> are <b>the early prophets? Rav Huna says: This is</b> referring to <b>David, and Samuel, and Solomon,</b> and after their death the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> was no longer used. <b>Rav Naḥman said: In the days of David</b> there were <b>times</b> an answer <b>rose up</b> for them from the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>and</b> there were <b>times</b> an answer <b>did not rise up,</b> i.e., they did not receive an answer. The proof for this is <b>that Tzadok,</b> the High Priest in David’s time, <b>asked</b> the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>and</b> an answer <b>rose up for him,</b> whereas <b>Abiathar asked and</b> an answer <b>did not rise up for him, as</b> it <b>is stated: “And Abiathar went up”</b> (II Samuel 15:24), and he was removed from serving as the High Priest as a result.

### Part 3
<b>Rabba bar Shmuel raises an objection:</b> The verse states concerning Uzziah: <b>“And he set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had an understanding of the vision of God”</b> (II Chronicles 26:5). <b>What, is</b> the verse <b>not</b> stating that Uzziah would seek God by asking questions <b>of</b> the <b><i>Urim VeTummim</i>,</b> despite the fact that he lived after the time of Solomon? The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>No,</b> he would seek God by asking questions <b>of</b> the <b>prophets,</b> but not of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 13:2) with regard to when the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> ceased: <b>From</b> the time <b>when the First Temple was destroyed, the cities with fields</b> that were allocated to the Levites <b>were nullified, and the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> ceased, and the monarchy ceased from the house of David.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And if a person would whisper to you saying</b> that the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> was still extant, as it states with regard to when the Second Temple first stood: <b>“And the Tirshatha said to them that they should not eat of the most sacred things, until there stood a priest with the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>”</b> (Ezra 2:63), which seems to indicate that they merely had to wait until the Second Temple was built for the reappearance of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>; you should <b>say to him</b> that this is not referring to an expectation of a short-term development, but it is <b>like a person who says to his friend,</b> with regard to something that will occur in the distant future: <b>Until the dead live and the Messiah,</b> the <b>son of David, comes.</b> In any case, the <i>baraita</i> indicates that the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> ceased only from the time when the First Temple was destroyed, and not in the time of Solomon.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Who</b> are <b>the early prophets,</b> with regard to whom it states that use of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> ceased immediately after their death? This term early prophets serves <b>to exclude Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi,</b> who <b>are</b> the <b>latter prophets.</b> The <i>Urim VeTummim</i> was used throughout the First Temple period, up to, but not including, their time. <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i> 13:3): <b>From</b> the time <b>when Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi died the Divine Spirit departed from the Jewish people,</b> as these three were considered to be the last prophets. <b>And</b> even after the Urim VeTummim ceased to exist, they would <b>nevertheless</b> still <b>make use of a Divine Voice</b> to receive instructions from Above, even after this time.

### Part 7
<b>For on one occasion</b> the Sages <b>were reclining in the upper story of the house of Gurya in Jericho. A Divine Voice from Heaven was issued to them, and it said: There is one person among you</b> for <b>whom it is fitting that the Divine Presence should rest upon him</b> as a prophet, <b>but his generation is not fit for it;</b> they do not deserve to have a prophet among them. The Sages present <b>directed their gaze to Hillel the Elder. And when he died, they eulogized him</b> in the following manner: <b>Alas pious one, alas humble one, student of Ezra.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And again, on another occasion</b> several generations later, the Sages <b>were reclining in an upper story</b> of a house <b>in Yavne,</b> and <b>a Divine Voice from Heaven was issued to them, and said: There is one person among you</b> for <b>whom it is fitting that the Divine Presence should rest upon him, but his generation is not fit for it.</b> The Sages present <b>directed their gaze to Shmuel HaKatan. And when he died, they eulogized him</b> in the following manner: <b>Alas humble one, alas pious one, student of Hillel.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And he too,</b> Shmuel HaKatan, <b>said</b> the following statement of divinely inspired prediction <b>at the time of his death: Shimon,</b> i.e., Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, <b>and Yishmael,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha the High Priest, are slated <b>for the sword, and their colleagues for killing, and the rest of the people for plunder, and great troubles are destined to befall the people.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>And they also sought to say about Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava,</b> when eulogizing him: <b>Alas pious one, alas humble one, but the moment was disturbed</b> and they could not do so. That is because <b>eulogies are not given for those killed by the monarchy,</b> which was Rabbi Yehuda ben Baba’s fate, in order not to arouse the monarchy’s wrath.

### Part 10
§ The mishna taught: <b>From</b> the time <b>when the</b> First <b>Temple was destroyed the <i>shamir</i> ceased</b> to exist. <b>The Sages taught:</b> This <b><i>shamir</i></b> is the creature <b>with which Solomon built the Temple, as it is stated: “For the house, when it was built, was built of whole stone from the quarry”</b> (I Kings 6:7). Now <b>these words</b> should be understood exactly <b>as they are written,</b> that King Solomon took whole stones and shaped them by having the <i>shamir</i> do the cutting. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Neḥemya said to him: And is it possible to say so? But isn’t it already stated: “All these were costly stones,</b> according to the measures of hewn stones, <b>sawed with saws”</b> (II Kings 7:9), which indicates that saws, which are iron implements, were used to shape the stones? <b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states:</b> “And hammer, ax, and any tool of iron <b>were not heard in the house when it was being built”</b> (I Kings 6:7)? It means <b>that he would prepare</b> the stones <b>outside</b> the Temple Mount using tools, <b>and bring</b> them <b>inside</b> already cut, so that no iron tools were used inside the Temple itself. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: The statement of Rabbi Yehuda</b> that no iron tools were used <b>appears</b> to be correct <b>with regard to the Temple stones, and the statement of Rabbi Neḥemya</b> that tools were used appears to be correct <b>with regard to the stones of the</b> king’s own <b>house.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara poses a question: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Neḥemya,</b> who maintains that they used iron tools even in the cutting of the stones for the Temple, <b>for what</b> purpose <b>did the <i>shamir</i> come?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It</b> was <b>necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>These stones</b> in the breastplate and ephod, upon which were inscribed the names of the tribes, <b>they may not be written on with ink, because it is stated: “Like the engravings of a signet”</b> (Exodus 28:21), which means the names must be engraved onto the stones. <b>And they may not be scratched on with a scalpel [<i>izemel</i>], because it is stated: “In their full settings”</b> (Exodus 28:20), indicating that the stones must be complete and not missing any of their mass.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rather,</b> one <b>writes</b> the letters <b>on them in ink, and shows them,</b> i.e., he places the <b><i>shamir</i></b> close to the ink markings <b>from outside,</b> without having it touch the stones, <b>and they split</b> open along the lines of the ink <b>of their own accord, like this fig that splits in the summer without losing anything</b> of its mass, <b>and like this</b> field in <b>a valley that cracks in the rainy season without losing anything</b> of its mass. The <i>shamir</i> was used in this way for these engravings.

### Part 14
<b>The Sages taught: This <i>shamir</i>, its size is that of a barleycorn, and it was created in the six days of creation, and nothing hard can withstand it. In what is it kept,</b> so that it will not break everything in the vicinity? <b>They wrap it in tufts [<i>sefogin</i>] of wool and place it in a leaden vessel [<i>itenei</i>], full of barley bran,</b> which is soft and will not be broken by the <i>shamir</i>.

### Part 15
§ <b>Rabbi Ami says: From</b> the time <b>when the First Temple was destroyed, shiny [<i>peranda</i>] silk [<i>shira</i>] and white glass ceased</b> to exist. <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From</b> the time <b>when the First Temple was destroyed, shiny silk, white glass, and iron chariots ceased; and some say</b> that <b>even congealed wine that comes from Senir,</b> the Hermon, <b>which is similar to round fig cakes</b> after it congeals, ceased to exist as well.

### Part 16
The mishna taught: <b>And</b> the <b>sweetness of the honeycomb [<i>nofet tzufim</i>]</b> also ceased when the First Temple was destroyed. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b><i>nofet tzufim</i>? Rav says: Fine flour that floats</b> up and remains <b>on the top of the sieve [<i>nafa</i>], which is similar</b> in taste <b>to dough kneaded with honey and oil. And Levi says</b> that <i>nofet tzufim</i> is the term for <b>two loaves stuck together in an oven, which keep swelling until they reach each other. And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: This is honey that comes from elevated areas [<i>tzipiyya</i>].</b> The Gemara explains: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred</b> that this is what <i>nofet tzufim</i> is? <b>As Rav Sheshet would translate</b> the words: “As the bees do” (Deuteronomy 1:44): <b>Like the bees spread out and fly all over the world and bring honey from mountainous plants.</b> Similarly, Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi states that honey comes from elevated areas.

### Part 17
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Makhshirin</i> 5:9): <b>Anything that is poured</b> remains <b>ritually pure.</b> In other words, even if a liquid is poured into a ritually impure utensil, the stream of the liquid does not defile the contents that remain in the ritually pure utensil from which they were poured, <b>apart from <i>zifim</i> honey and wafer</b> batter. These substances are too viscous to be considered liquids. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>zifim</i>? Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Honey</b> of such rare quality that <b>they</b> could <b>falsify [<i>mezayyefin</i>] it,</b> by diluting it with other substances, and it would not be noticed. <b>And Reish Lakish says:</b> It is named <b>after its place, as it is written: “Ziph and Telem and Bealoth”</b> (Joshua 15:24).

### Part 18
<b>Similarly, you</b> can <b>say</b> with regard to the verse: <b>“When the <i>zifim</i> came and said to Saul, does not David</b> hide himself with us” (Psalms 54:2). <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b><i>zifim</i>,</b> mentioned in this verse? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It means <b>people who</b> would <b>falsify [<i>hamzayyefin</i>] their words. And Rabbi Elazar says:</b> They are called <b>after their place, as it is written: “Ziph and Telem and Bealoth.”</b>

### Part 19
§ The mishna states that from the time when the Second Temple was destroyed <b>men of faith ceased. Rabbi Yitzḥak says: These are people who believe in the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> and place their trust in Him in all their ways. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer the Great says</b> that <b>whoever has bread in his basket</b> to eat today <b>and says: What shall I eat tomorrow,</b> meaning he does not know how he will acquire bread for tomorrow, <b>he is nothing other</b> than <b>from those of little faith.</b> One must trust in God to provide him with his sustenance.

### Part 20
<b>And this is what Rabbi Elazar said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For who plunders the day of small things”</b> (Zechariah 4:10)? <b>What caused the table,</b> i.e., the reward, <b>of the righteous to be plundered,</b> meaning wasted, <b>in the future?</b> It was <b>the</b> small-mindedness <b>they possessed.</b> And what is this small-mindedness? <b>That they did not believe in the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> with a complete faith. <b>Rava said:</b> Who plunders the day of small things? <b>These are the small children of the wicked ones of the Jewish people,</b> who die young,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC