
### Part 1
but <b>rather</b> as <b><i>vayyakri</i>, and he caused</b> others <b>to call.</b> This <b>teaches that Abraham our forefather caused the name of the Holy One, Blessed be He, to be called</b> out <b>in the mouth of all passersby. How so? After</b> the guests of Abraham <b>ate and drank, they arose to bless him. He said to them: But did you eat from</b> what is <b>mine?</b> Rather, <b>you ate from</b> the food of <b>the God of the world.</b> Therefore, <b>you</b> should <b>thank and praise and bless the One Who spoke and the world was</b> created. In this way, Abraham caused everyone to call out to God.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues its discussion of the incident of Judah and Tamar. It is written: <b>“When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a prostitute, for she had covered her face”</b> (Genesis 38:15). The Gemara asks: <b>Because she had covered her face he thought her to be a prostitute?</b> Prostitutes usually uncover their faces in order to attract men.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The verse means <b>that</b> Tamar <b>covered her face in the home of her father-in-law,</b> Judah. Therefore, he did not recognize her when her face was uncovered. <b>As Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: Any daughter-in-law who is modest in the house of her father-in-law merits that kings and prophets emerge from her. From where do we</b> derive this? <b>From Tamar. Prophets</b> emerged from her, <b>as it is written: “The vision of Isaiah, the son of Amoz”</b> (Isaiah 1:1). <b>Kings</b> emerged from her, as seen <b>from David. And Rabbi Levi says: This matter is a tradition</b> that <b>we</b> received <b>from our ancestors: Amoz,</b> father of Isaiah, <b>and Amaziah,</b> king of Judea, <b>were brothers.</b> This indi-cates that Isaiah was also from the house of David and therefore a descendant of Tamar.

### Part 4
The verse describes Tamar’s court hearing: <b>“When she was brought forth [<i>mutzet</i>],</b> she sent to her father-in-law, saying: By the man whose these are, am I with child” (Genesis 38:25). The Gemara comments: <b>It should have</b> stated: <b>When she was <i>mitutzet</i>.</b> The word <i>mutzet</i> also carries the implication of being found. What then, is taught by the use of that term? <b>Rabbi Elazar says: After her signs,</b> which she was using to prove that she was impregnated by Judah, <b>were brought out,</b> the evil angel <b>Samael came and distanced them</b> from each other in an attempt to prevent Judah’s admission and Tamar’s survival, which would enable the birth of King David. The angel <b>Gabriel</b> then <b>came and moved</b> the signs <b>closer</b> again. Therefore, the word <i>mutzet</i> is used, as it alludes to the signs being found again.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>This is as it is written: “For the leader, upon <i>yonat eilem reḥokim</i>, a psalm [<i>mikhtam</i>] of David”</b> (Psalms 56:1). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> the verse means: <b>From the moment that her signs were distanced [<i>reḥokim</i>], she became like a mute dove [<i>yona illemet</i>].</b> And the phrase <b>“a psalm [<i>mikhtam</i>] of David”</b> means: The one <b>from whom David emerged, as he was modest [<i>makh</i>] and flawless [<i>tam</i>] with everyone. Alternatively, <i>mikhtam</i></b> indicates <b>that <i>makkato</i>,</b> the place on his body that would have required wounding [<i>makka</i>], <b>was complete [<i>tama</i>],</b> i.e., <b>that</b> David <b>was born circumcised. Alternatively, <i>mikhtam</i></b> indicates that <b>just as in his youth</b> David <b>made himself small in front of one who was greater than him</b> in order <b>to learn Torah</b> from that person, <b>so too, when he became great</b> and was crowned king, he still behaved in this manner, so that his modesty, <i>makh</i>, was complete, <i>tam</i>, all of his life.

### Part 6
The verse concerning Tamar then states: <b>“She sent to her father-in-law, saying: By the man whose these are, am I with child”</b> (Genesis 38:25). The Gemara comments: <b>And let her say to him</b> explicitly that she was impregnated by him. <b>Rav Zutra bar Tuviyya says</b> that <b>Rav says, and some say Rav Ḥana bar Bizna says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon Ḥasida says, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: It is more amenable for a person to throw himself into a fiery furnace</b> if faced with the choice of publicly embarrassing another or remaining silent even if it leads to being burned, <b>and not humiliate another in public. From where do we</b> derive this? <b>From Tamar,</b> as she was prepared to be burned if Judah did not confess, rather than humiliate him in public.

### Part 7
The verse continues: “And she said: <b>Discern, please,</b> whose are these, the signet, and the cords, and the staff” (Genesis 38:25). <b>Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: With</b> use of the word <b>discern</b> Judah <b>informed his father</b> that Joseph was lost, and also <b>with</b> use of the word <b>discern they informed</b> Judah about the signs. The Gemara explains: <b>With</b> the word <b>discern he informed</b> Jacob his father when he brought him the coat of Joseph and said to his father: “And they sent the coat of many colors, and they brought it to their father; and said: This have we found. <b>Discern now whether it is your son’s coat</b> or not” (Genesis 37:32). <b>With</b> the word <b>discern they informed him:</b> “And she said: <b>Discern, please, whose are</b> these.”

### Part 8
It states: “Discern, <b>please [<i>na</i>].”</b> The word <b><i>na</i></b> is <b>nothing other</b> than <b>a language of request.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>She said to him: I request of you: Discern the image of your Creator</b> in every person, <b>and do not avert your eyes from me.</b>

### Part 9
The verse states: <b>“And Judah acknowledged them, and said: She is more righteous than I;</b> forasmuch as I gave her not to Shelah my son” (Genesis 38:26). <b>This is</b> the same <b>as Rav Ḥanin bar Bizna says</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon Ḥasida says: Joseph, who sanctified the name of Heaven in private</b> by not committing adultery with the wife of Potiphar, <b>merited that one letter from the name of the Holy One, Blessed be He, was added to his</b> name, <b>as it is written: “He appointed it in Joseph [<i>bihosef</i> ] for a testimony in his name,</b> when He went forth against the land of Egypt” (Psalms 81:6). In this verse the name Joseph is written with an additional letter <i>heh</i>, found in the ineffable name of God.

### Part 10
He continues: <b>Judah, who sanctified the name of Heaven in public, merited that his entire</b> name <b>is called by the name of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> for all the letters of the ineffable name of God are included within the name of Judah, with the addition of the letter <i>dalet</i>. <b>When he confessed and said: “She is more righteous than I,” a Divine Voice went forth and said: You saved Tamar and her two children</b> in her womb <b>from</b> being burned by <b>the fire.</b> By <b>your life,</b> i.e., <b>in your merit, I will save three of your children from the fire.</b> And <b>who are they? Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah</b> (see Daniel, chapter 3).

### Part 11
Judah said: <b>“She is more righteous than I [<i>mimmenni</i>].”</b> The word “<i>mimmenni</i>” can also be understood as “from me,” with Judah thereby admitting that he is the father. The Gemara asks: <b>From where did he know</b> that it was in fact from him that Tamar was pregnant? The Gemara answers: <b>A Divine Voice went forth and said: From Me these hidden</b> matters <b>emerged,</b> and this woman will be the mother of royalty, which requires that Judah be the father.

### Part 12
The same verse continues: <b>“And he knew her [<i>leda’atah</i>] again no more [<i>velo yasaf</i> ],”</b> seemingly indicating that Judah did not engage in sexual intercourse with Tamar again. <b>Shmuel the Elder, father-in-law of Rav Shmuel bar Ami, says in the name of Rav Shmuel bar Ami:</b> The verse actually means that <b>once he knew</b> of <b>her</b> that her intentions were for the sake of Heaven, <b>he did not desist from</b> engaging in sexual intercourse with <b>her again,</b> as <b>it is written here: “<i>Velo yasaf od leda’atah</i>,” and it is written there</b> at the giving of the Torah: “These words the Lord spoke unto all your assembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, <b>with a great voice and it went on no more [<i>velo yasaf</i> ]”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:18), which is interpreted to mean: A great voice that did not cease.

### Part 13
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Absalom was</b> excessively <b>proud of his hair,</b> and therefore he was hung by his hair. <b>The Sages taught</b> (<i>Tosefta</i> 3:16): <b>Absalom rebelled</b> and sinned <b>due to his hair, as it is stated:</b> “Now in all Israel <b>there was none</b> to be so much praised <b>as Absalom for his beauty;</b> from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him. <b>And when he shaved his head, as it was at every year’s end that he shaved it; because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he shaved it, and he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, by the king’s stone”</b> (II Samuel 14:25–26). What is the king’s stone? The Sages <b>taught: A stone with which the people of Tiberias and the people of Tzippori weigh</b> items.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: And since he was proud of his hair, <b>therefore, he was hung by his hair, as it is stated</b> in the verse describing the battle between the forces of David and Absalom: <b>“And Absalom chanced to meet the servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great terebinth, and his head caught hold of the terebinth, and he was taken up between the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went on”</b> (II Samuel 18:9). After he was spotted by the opposing troops, Absalom <b>took a sword [<i>safseira</i>] and wanted to cut his hair</b> to save himself. <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: At that moment,</b> the gates of <b>the netherworld opened beneath him</b> and he was afraid to fall into it, so he did not cut his hair, and he was killed by the opposing troops.

### Part 15
It is written with regard to David’s reaction after he learns of the death of Absalom: <b>“And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept; and as he went about he said: O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would I had died in your place, O Absalom, my son, my son”</b> (II Samuel 19:1), and a few verses later it adds: <b>“And the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice: O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son”</b> (II Samuel 19:5). The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> are there <b>these eight</b> mentions of <b>“my son”</b> by David, i.e., to what do they correspond? The Gemara answers: <b>Seven</b> times he said “my son,” by <b>which he raised him up from the seven chambers of Gehenna. And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> eighth, time, <b>some say that</b> David <b>brought</b> the <b>head</b> of Absalom <b>close to</b> Absalom’s <b>body, and some say that</b> with this eighth mention David <b>brought</b> Absalom <b>to the World-to-Come.</b>

### Part 16
It is written there: <b>“Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself</b> the pillar, which is in the king’s valley; for he said: I have no son to keep my name in remembrance” (II Samuel 18:18). The Gemara asks: <b>What did</b> Absalom <b>take? Reish Lakish says: He engaged in a bad transaction for himself</b> by accepting bad advice for which he was punished. The verse continues: <b>“The pillar, which is in the king’s valley [<i>be’emek hammelekh</i>].” Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa says:</b> This alludes to the pillar that is <b>in the deep [<i>amukka</i>] counsel of the King [<i>melekh</i>] of the universe,</b> as God had already decreed in the aftermath of the incident with Bathsheba that this would occur.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC