
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: It is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that the <i>sota</i> ritual does not apply with regard to forbidden relatives, as the Torah states: “And she <b>was defiled”</b> (Numbers 5:13), “And she <b>was defiled”</b> (Numbers 5:14), <b>two times. One</b> verse teaches that she is defiled and forbidden <b>to</b> her <b>husband, and one</b> verse teaches that she is forbidden <b>to</b> her <b>paramour.</b> One might understand that the <i>sota</i> ritual applies only <b>where she is forbidden</b> to the paramour <b>due to this licentious intercourse; however,</b> with regard to <b>that</b> woman, who secluded herself with a forbidden relative, <b>since</b> the woman already <b>stands prohibited</b> to him due to the prohibition of incest, one might <b>say</b> that the <i>sota</i> ritual <b>does not</b> apply. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that one can issue a warning even with regard to forbidden relatives.

### Part 2
§ The mishna states: A husband can issue a warning to his wife with regard to all those with whom relations are forbidden, <b>with the exception of a minor</b> and of one who is not a man. The Gemara cites the source for this <i>halakha</i>: <b>The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: “And <b>a man</b> lay with her” (Numbers 5:13), indicating that one can warn his wife with regard to a man <b>but not</b> with regard to <b>a minor.</b> The Gemara asks: The phrase: <b>And</b> of one <b>who is not a man,</b> serves <b>to exclude what? If we say</b> that it serves <b>to exclude a sick man who lacks the ability to complete intercourse [<i>shaḥuf</i>], but didn’t Shmuel say: One can issue a warning with regard to a <i>shaḥuf</i>, and</b> if a <i>shaḥuf</i> engages in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest, he <b>disqualifies</b> her <b>from</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 3
With regard to Shmuel’s statement that <b>one can issue a warning with regard to</b> a <i>shaḥuf</i>, the Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that one cannot issue a warning with regard to a <i>shaḥuf</i>, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“And a man lay with her carnally [<i>shikhvat zera</i>]”</b> (Numbers 5:13), literally, a lying of seed, <b>and this</b> man <b>is not capable of that,</b> as he cannot ejaculate. Shmuel therefore <b>teaches us</b> that one can issue a warning with regard to a <i>shaḥuf</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks with regard to Shmuel’s statement that a <i>shaḥuf</i> who engages in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest <b>disqualifies</b> her <b>from</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>: Isn’t</b> that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that a <i>shaḥuf</i> does not disqualify the daughter of a priest from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah with regard to a priest: “And <b>he shall not disqualify his offspring</b> among his people” (Leviticus 21:15). One might infer from this verse that one <b>who</b> can <b>have offspring disqualifies</b> a woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, through forbidden sexual intercourse, and that one <b>who cannot have offspring does not disqualify</b> a woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i>. Shmuel therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so. In any event, Shmuel states that one can issue a warning on account of a <i>shaḥuf</i>, unlike the initial interpretation of the mishna.

### Part 5
Since Shmuel’s statement contradicts the suggestion that the mishna excludes a <i>shaḥuf</i>, the Gemara suggests another explanation: <b>Rather,</b> the mishna serves <b>to exclude a gentile,</b> and teaches that one cannot issue a warning with regard to him. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rav Hamnuna say: One can issue a warning with regard to a gentile, and</b> if a gentile engages in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest, he <b>disqualifies</b> her <b>from</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks with regard to Rav Hamnuna’s statement that <b>one can issue a warning with regard to</b> a gentile: <b>Isn’t</b> that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that one cannot issue a warning in this case, as the verse states: “And she <b>was defiled”</b> (Numbers 5:13), “And she <b>was defiled”</b> (Numbers 5:14), <b>twice. One</b> verse teaches that she is defiled and forbidden <b>to</b> her <b>husband, and one</b> verse teaches that she is forbidden <b>to</b> her <b>paramour.</b> One might understand that the <i>sota</i> ritual applies only <b>where she is forbidden</b> to the paramour <b>due to this licentious intercourse; however,</b> with regard to <b>that</b> woman, who engaged in sexual intercourse with a gentile, <b>since</b> she already <b>stands prohibited</b> to him, one might <b>say</b> that the <i>sota</i> ritual <b>does not</b> apply. Rav Hamnuna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that one can issue a warning even with regard to a gentile.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks with regard to Rav Hamnuna’s statement that a gentile who engages in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest <b>disqualifies</b> her <b>from</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>: Isn’t</b> that <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that he does not disqualify her, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“And if a priest’s daughter should be unto a strange man,</b> she shall not eat of that which is set apart from the holy things” (Leviticus 22:12), indicating that if a woman engages in sexual intercourse with one who is unfit for her, he disqualifies her from partaking of <i>teruma</i>. Since the term “should be unto” denotes marriage, one might say <b>that one who is eligible for betrothal, yes,</b> he disqualifies the woman; but a gentile, <b>who is not eligible for betrothal, does not</b> disqualify her. Rav Hamnuna therefore <b>teaches us that</b> a gentile <b>disqualifies</b> the woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, as one can learn <b>from</b> the ruling <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 8
This is <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Yishmael: From where</b> is it derived <b>that a gentile or a slave who engaged in sexual intercourse with the daughter of a priest or with the daughter of a Levite or with</b> the <b>daughter of an Israelite, disqualified her</b> from marrying a priest and from partaking of <i>teruma</i>? This is derived <b>as</b> it <b>is stated: “But if a priest’s daughter should be a widow or a divorcée…</b>she returns to her father’s house…she may eat of her father’s bread” (Leviticus 22:13). This indicates that the daughter of a priest returns to eat of her father’s bread, i.e., <i>teruma</i>, if she engaged in sexual intercourse with <b>one whose</b> marriage <b>to her has</b> the potential to end in <b>widowhood or divorce,</b> i.e., a Jew whom she is permitted to marry. This <b>excludes a gentile and a slave, whose</b> marriage <b>to her does not have</b> the potential to end in <b>widowhood or divorce,</b> as their betrothal is invalid.

### Part 9
Since Rav Hamnuna’s statement contradicts the suggestion that the mishna excludes a gentile, the Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what</b> does the term: And of one who is not a man, serve <b>to exclude? Rav Pappa says:</b> This serves <b>to exclude an animal, as</b> the concept of <b>licentiousness does not</b> apply <b>with regard to an animal.</b> Therefore, the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>sota</i> do not apply in this case.

### Part 10
<b>Rava of Parzakya said to Rav Ashi: From where is this matter that the Sages stated</b> derived, that <b>licentiousness does not</b> apply <b>with regard to an animal?</b> Rav Ashi replied that it is <b>as it is written: “You shall not bring the hire of a harlot, or the price of a dog,</b> into the house of the Lord your God for any vow; for both of them are an abomination to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 23:19). This verse prohibits one from sacrificing an animal that served as payment to a prostitute or as payment for the purchase of a dog.

### Part 11
<b>And it is taught</b> in a mishna (<i>Temura</i> 30a): In the converse cases, <b>the hire of a dog,</b> i.e., a kosher animal that was given to the owner of a dog as payment for engaging in intercourse with it, <b>and the price of a prostitute,</b> i.e., a kosher animal which served as payment in the purchase of a maidservant acquired for prostitution, <b>are permitted</b> to be sacrificed, <b>as</b> it <b>is stated</b> in the aforementioned verse: <b>For both of them.</b> This term indicates that only those <b>two</b> animals may not be sacrificed, i.e., those which served as the hire of a harlot and as the price of a dog; <b>and not four</b> animals, as the reverse cases are excluded from this <i>halakha</i>. This indicates that the concept of licentiousness does not apply with regard to animals, as the payment for intercourse with a dog is not considered payment for prostitution.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: Shmuel states that one can issue a warning with regard to a <i>shaḥuf</i> even though he is unable to discharge semen. <b>But rather, why do I</b> need the verse to state: “And a man lay with her <b>carnally [<i>shikhvat zera</i>]”</b> (Numbers 5:13)? The Gemara answers: It is <b>necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The term <b>“<i>shikhvat zera</i>” excludes something else.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> meant by the term: <b>Something else? Rav Sheshet said:</b> This <b>excludes</b> a case <b>where</b> the husband <b>issued a warning to</b> his wife not to engage in sexual intercourse <b>in an atypical manner,</b> i.e., anal intercourse, with another man, and teaches that this is not considered a valid warning. <b>Rava said to</b> Rav Sheshet: Intercourse <b>in an atypical manner</b> is considered sexual intercourse, as <b>it is written: “The cohabitations of a woman”</b> (Leviticus 18:22), indicating that there are two forms of sexual intercourse with a woman, vaginal and anal, and there is no halakhic differentiation between them.

### Part 14
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> It <b>excludes</b> a case <b>where</b> the husband <b>issued a warning to</b> his wife not to engage in intimate contact with another man <b>by way of</b> other <b>limbs,</b> as this is not considered sexual intercourse. <b>Abaye said to</b> Rava: That <b>is merely licentious</b> behavior, <b>and does the Merciful One render</b> a woman <b>forbidden</b> to her husband on account of merely <b>licentious</b> behavior, without sexual intercourse? Since this does not render her forbidden to her husband, it is obvious that if the husband issues a warning in this manner, violating the warning does not cause her to become a <i>sota</i>. The verse is therefore not required to exclude this case.

### Part 15
<b>Rather, Abaye said:</b> The verse <b>excludes</b> a case <b>where</b> the husband <b>issued a warning to</b> his wife <b>with regard to</b> engaging in genital <b>contact</b> without actual penetration. The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that the definition of the <b>initial stage of intercourse is the insertion of the corona but</b> that genital <b>contact is nothing; this is</b> the reason <b>that the verse came to exclude</b> genital <b>contact. However, according to the one who says</b> that the definition of the <b>initial stage of intercourse is</b> genital <b>contact, what is there to say?</b> Why should this case be excluded from the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>sota</i>?

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> the verse serves <b>to</b> exclude a case <b>where</b> the husband <b>issued a warning to</b> his wife not to engage in intimate contact with another man <b>by way of</b> other <b>limbs. And</b> the verse explicitly excludes this case from the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>sota</i>, <b>lest you say that</b> the woman is rendered a <i>sota</i> due to this warning, as <b>the Merciful One made</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>dependent on</b> the <b>husband’s objection, and</b> the <b>husband objects</b> to contact of this nature. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this is not considered a warning, as it does not involve sexual intercourse.

### Part 17
§ <b>Shmuel says:</b> It is better that <b>a man marry</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC