
### Part 1
<b>who planted</b> seeds in <b>the vineyard of an another</b> when the grapes on the vines were <b>budding, and</b> the <b>incident came before the Sages and they deemed the seeds prohibited</b> due to the prohibition against planting diverse kinds in a vineyard, <b>but they deemed the vines permitted.</b> The Gemara continues: <b>But why</b> did they deem the seeds prohibited? <b>Let</b> the Sages <b>say</b> through an analogous <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that the seeds should be permitted: <b>And if that which renders</b> an item <b>prohibited,</b> i.e., the vine, which causes the seeds to be prohibited, <b>is</b> itself <b>not prohibited,</b> then with regard to the seeds, <b>which come to render</b> the vines <b>prohibited but did not render</b> the vines <b>prohibited, is it not logical that they should not be rendered prohibited?</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects the comparison: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, only <b>hemp and arum</b> are <b>prohibited</b> by <b>Torah</b> law to be sown in a vineyard, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Kilayim</i> 2:5): If <b>one’s field was sown</b> with <b>hemp and arum, he should not sow above them, as they produce</b> a yield only once every <b>three years. Other seeds are prohibited by rabbinic</b> law. Therefore, with regard to <b>this</b> person <b>who committed a transgression</b> by planting the seeds in the vineyard of another, <b>the Sages penalized him</b> and deemed his seeds prohibited, but as for <b>that</b> person <b>who did not commit a transgression,</b> i.e., the owner of the vineyard, <b>the Sages did not penalize him. But here,</b> in the case of <i>piggul</i>, which is a biblical prohibition, <b>let us say</b> such <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference.

### Part 3
<b>And there are those who teach</b> the dilemma of Rabbi Elazar <b>with regard to the lambs</b> brought with the two loaves, and not with regard to a thanks offering. <b>Rabbi Elazar raised a dilemma before Rav:</b> In a case where <b>one slaughters the lambs</b> with the intent <b>to consume an olive-bulk from them and from their loaves</b> the next day, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 4
Rabbi Elazar elaborated: <b>I do not raise the dilemma with regard to rendering</b> the <b>lambs <i>piggul</i></b> for the following reason: <b>Now</b> that in a case where his intent was to consume <b>an entire</b> olive-bulk <b>from the loaves</b> alone, the lambs <b>are not rendered <i>piggul</i>,</b> as the mishna teaches that <i>piggul</i> intent with regard to the loaves does not render the lambs <i>piggul</i>, then in a case where his intent is to consume half an olive-bulk <b>from them and</b> half an olive-bulk <b>from their loaves, is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to teach that the lambs are not <i>piggul</i>? Rather, <b>when I raised the dilemma,</b> it was <b>with regard to rendering the loaves <i>piggul</i>. Does</b> his intention with regard to the <b>lambs combine</b> with his intention with regard to the loaves <b>to render the loaves <i>piggul</i> or not?</b>

### Part 5
Rav <b>said to</b> Rabbi Elazar: <b>Even in this</b> case, <b>the loaves are rendered <i>piggul</i> and the lambs are not rendered <i>piggul</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But why</b> should the loaves be rendered <i>piggul</i>? <b>Let us say</b> the following <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And if that which renders</b> an item <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> i.e., the lambs, since it is maintained that intent to consume half an olive-bulk from the lambs assists to render the loaves <i>piggul</i>, <b>is</b> itself <b>not rendered <i>piggul</i>,</b> then with regard to the loaves, <b>which come to render</b> the lambs <b><i>piggul</i>, but do not render</b> them <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> as the intent to consume half an olive-bulk from the loaves does not combine with the intent to consume half an olive-bulk from the lambs to render them <i>piggul</i>, <b>is it not logical that</b> the loaves themselves <b>should not be rendered <i>piggul</i>?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And do we say an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>of this kind? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that there was <b>an incident involving one who planted</b> seeds in <b>the vineyard of his friend</b> when the grapes on the vines were <b>budding,</b> and the incident came before the Sages and they deemed the seeds prohibited due to the prohibition against planting diverse kinds in a vineyard, but they deemed the vines permitted. The Gemara continues: <b>But why</b> did they deem the seeds prohibited? <b>Let</b> the Sages <b>say</b> through an analogous <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that the seeds should be permitted: <b>And</b> if <b>that which renders</b> an item <b>prohibited,</b> i.e., the vine, which causes the seeds to be prohibited, <b>is</b> itself <b>not prohibited,</b> then with regard to the seeds, <b>which come to render</b> the vines <b>prohibited but did not render</b> the vines <b>prohibited, is it not logical that</b> they <b>should not be rendered prohibited?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects the comparison: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, only <b>hemp and arum</b> are <b>prohibited</b> by <b>Torah</b> law to be sown in a vineyard. <b>Other seeds are prohibited by rabbinic</b> law. Therefore, with regard to <b>this</b> person <b>who committed a transgression</b> by planting the seeds in the vineyard of another, <b>the Sages penalized him</b> and deemed his seeds prohibited, but as for <b>this</b> person <b>who did not commit a transgression,</b> i.e., the owner of the vineyard, <b>the Sages did not penalize him. But here,</b> in the case of <i>piggul</i>, which is a biblical prohibition, <b>let us say</b> such <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: <b>The one who teaches</b> that the dilemma of Rabbi Elazar was raised <b>with regard to the thanks offering</b> and the accompanying loaves, <b>all the more so</b> will hold that the dilemma may be raised <b>with regard to</b> the case of <b>the lambs</b> brought with the two loaves on <i>Shavuot</i>. <b>But the one who teaches</b> that Rabbi Elazar’s dilemma was raised <b>with regard to the lambs</b> and the two loaves, it is possible that he holds that the dilemma <b>was</b> raised only with regard to the <b>lambs</b> and the two loaves, <b>as they were bound to one another by waving,</b> since the priest waves the lambs and loaves together (see Leviticus 23:20). <b>But</b> with regard to <b>a thanks offering</b> and its loaves, <b>as they were not bound to one another by waving,</b> the dilemma was <b>not</b> raised, since it is obvious in this case that his intentions do not combine.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Abba the small</b> taught that Rabbi Elazar <b>raises the dilemma</b> in <b>this</b> manner: <b>Rabbi Elazar raised a dilemma before Rav:</b> If <b>one slaughters</b> one of <b>the lambs</b> brought on <i>Shavuot</i> with the two loaves intending <b>to consume an olive-bulk from the other the next day, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? When this individual thinks of <b>the other,</b> does he <b>mean</b> the other <b>lamb, and</b> if so, the lamb <b>is not rendered <i>piggul</i>,</b> as one permitting factor does not render another permitting factor <i>piggul</i>? <b>Or perhaps</b> when this individual thinks of the other he <b>means</b> the other part of the offering, i.e., the two <b>loaves, and</b> if so his intention <b>renders it <i>piggul</i>,</b> as taught in the mishna.

### Part 10
Rav <b>said to</b> Rabbi Elazar: <b>You learned</b> in a mishna (16a): If <b>one slaughtered one of the lambs</b> with the intent <b>to partake of it the next day, that</b> lamb is <b><i>piggul</i> and the other</b> is <b>fit.</b> If he slaughtered one lamb with the intent <b>to partake of the other the next day, both</b> lambs <b>are fit,</b> as one permitting factor does not render another permitting factor <i>piggul</i>. Rav concludes: <b>Evidently,</b> in this context the term: <b>The other, means</b> the other <b>lamb.</b> The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the mishna is discussing a case <b>where he clarifies and says: The other lamb,</b> but the mishna is not referring to a case where he merely thought: The other.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The</b> animal <b>offering renders the</b> accompanying <b>libations</b> and meal offerings <b><i>piggul</i> from</b> the moment <b>that they were consecrated in the vessel,</b> but not before; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. The libations do not render the</b> animal <b>offering <i>piggul</i>. How so?</b> In the case of <b>one who slaughters the offering</b> with the intent <b>to partake of it the next day,</b> the offering <b>and its libations are rendered <i>piggul</i>.</b> But if one slaughters the offering with the intent <b>to sacrifice its libations the next day, the libations are rendered <i>piggul</i>,</b> while <b>the offering is not <i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the <b>libations of an animal</b> offering, <b>one is liable for</b> eating <b>them due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>, as the blood of the offering permits them to be offered</b> on the altar, and any item that becomes permitted for consumption or for sacrifice through a permitting factor can be rendered <i>piggul</i>, and one who partakes of such an item after its permitting factors were sacrificed is liable to receive <i>karet</i>. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 13
The Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Meir: But a person may bring his offering today and</b> the accompanying <b>libations from now until</b> even <b>ten days</b> later. Evidently, then, the blood of the offering does render the libations permitted. Rabbi Meir <b>said to them: I, too, spoke only about</b> libations that <b>come</b> to be sacrificed together <b>with the offering</b> and were already sanctified in a service vessel for that purpose. The Rabbis <b>said to him:</b> But <b>it is possible to switch</b> the libations <b>for</b> use with <b>another offering.</b> Clearly, then, they are not considered an indispensable part of that offering.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said: Rabbi Meir holds</b> that the libations <b>are fixed</b> to this particular offering <b>at</b> the time of its <b>slaughter,</b> and one may not use them with another offering. Accordingly, these libations are rendered <i>piggul</i> on account of intent during the slaughter of the offering, just <b>like the loaves of a thanks offering,</b> which are fixed to a particular thanks offering upon its slaughter and become <i>piggul</i> on account of intent during the slaughter of that particular thanks offering.

### Part 15
In a similar vein, <b>the Sages taught:</b> With regard to the <b><i>log</i> of oil of the leper</b> (see Leviticus 14:10–20), <b>one is liable for</b> eating <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i></b> if the guilt offering that this oil accompanied became <i>piggul</i>, <b>as</b> the <b>blood</b> of the offering <b>permits it to</b> be placed on <b>the</b> right <b>thumb and big toe</b> of the leper. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b> The Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Meir: But a person may bring his guilt offering today and</b> the accompanying <b><i>log</i></b> of oil <b>from now until</b> even <b>ten days</b> later. Evidently, the <i>log</i> of oil is not considered part of the guilt offering, and therefore it should not be rendered <i>piggul</i> on account of it.

### Part 16
Rabbi Meir <b>said to them: I, too, spoke only about</b> a <i>log</i> of oil that <b>comes with the guilt</b> offering. The Rabbis said to him: But even in this case, the oil should not be considered part of the offering, as <b>it is possible to switch</b> the oil <b>for</b> use with <b>another guilt offering. Rava said: Rabbi Meir holds</b> that the <i>log</i> of oil <b>is fixed</b> to this particular guilt offering <b>at</b> the time of its <b>slaughter</b> and is therefore rendered <i>piggul</i> on account of it, just <b>like the loaves of a thanks offering,</b> as the slaughter of the thanks offering fixes the accompanying loaves to that particular offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC