
### Part 1
the <b>numerous rams</b> t hat are required to be sacrificed on that day <b>and they did not</b> also <b>have</b> sufficient funds for the <b>ephah,</b> i.e., the prescribed measure, of flour <b>for</b> all of the rams, <b>they should bring one ram and its ephah</b> of flour, <b>and they should not sacrifice all of them without their ephahs</b> of flour.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> On <i>Shavuot</i> there is an obligation to sacrifice burnt offerings, a sin offering, and peace offerings together with the offering of the two loaves. The burnt offerings consists of a bull, two rams, and seven sheep. A goat is brought for the sin offering. Two sheep are brought as peace offerings and waved together with the two loaves. Failure to sacrifice <b>the bull, the rams, and the sheep,</b> which are all brought as burnt offerings, <b>and the goat</b> that is brought as a sin offering, <b>does not prevent</b> the bringing of <b>the</b> two <b>loaves,</b> and they are sacrificed nevertheless. Failure to bring <b>the</b> two <b>loaves does not prevent</b> sacrifice of the accompanying animal offerings.

### Part 3
Failure to bring <b>the</b> two <b>loaves prevents</b> sacrifice of <b>the</b> accompanying peace offering of two <b>sheep, but</b> failure to sacrifice <b>the</b> two <b>sheep does not prevent</b> the bringing of <b>the</b> two <b>loaves;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Nannas says: No, rather</b> the opposite is true. Failure to sacrifice <b>the</b> peace offering of two <b>sheep prevents</b> the bringing of <b>the</b> two <b>loaves, but</b> failure to bring <b>the</b> two <b>loaves does not prevent</b> sacrifice of <b>the</b> accompanying peace offering of two <b>sheep. As we found that when the Jewish people were in the wilderness</b> for <b>forty years</b> after the exodus from Egypt, <b>they sacrificed</b> the two <b>sheep</b> as a peace offering on <i>Shavuot</i> <b>without</b> the two <b>loaves,</b> as the two loaves may be brought only from wheat grown in Eretz Yisrael after the Jewish people entered the land. <b>Here too,</b> whenever wheat is unavailable, <b>they</b> should <b>sacrifice</b> the two <b>sheep</b> without the two <b>loaves.</b> However, the two loaves are not sacrificed without the peace offering of two sheep.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with the statement of</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>ben Nannas</b> that failure to sacrifice the two sheep prevents the bringing of the two loaves but failure to bring the two loaves does not prevent sacrifice of the accompanying peace offering of two sheep, <b>but the reason</b> for that ruling <b>is not in accordance with his statement.</b>

### Part 6
<b>As all</b> the offerings that must be sacrificed on <i>Shavuot</i> <b>that</b> are <b>stated in the book of Numbers</b> (see 28:27), i.e., two bulls, one ram, and seven sheep as additional offerings and a goat as a sin offering, were <b>sacrificed</b> when the Jewish people were <b>in the wilderness. But all</b> the offerings <b>stated in Leviticus</b> (see 23:18–20), i.e., the offerings accompanying the two loaves, were <b>not sacrificed</b> when the Jewish people were <b>in the wilderness.</b> Not only were the two loaves not sacrificed, but the accompanying offerings, including the peace offering of the two sheep, were also not sacrificed, because it was only <b>when they arrived in Eretz</b> Yisrael that <b>these</b> additional offerings <b>and those</b> offerings accompanying the two loaves <b>were sacrificed.</b> Neither the additional offerings of <i>Shavuot</i> nor the two loaves, and the offerings that accompany them, were sacrificed in the wilderness, contrary to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Nannas.

### Part 7
Rather, <b>for what</b> reason <b>do I</b> nevertheless <b>say that the sheep should be sacrificed without</b> the <b>loaves,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Nannas? It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that the sheep permit themselves,</b> as the sprinkling of their blood and the burning of the portions consumed on the altar renders it permitted to partake of their meat. <b>And</b> why are <b>the loaves not</b> sacrificed <b>without the sheep?</b> It is <b>because there is no</b> item <b>to permit</b> the loaves, as the loaves are permitted only after the sheep are sacrificed.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches the <i>halakhot</i> of the sacrifices that generally accompany the two loaves on <i>Shavuot</i> in a case when the two loaves are not available. The Gemara cites a relevant <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse that mandates these offerings states: “And you shall sacrifice with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bull, and two rams” (Leviticus 23:18). The phrase <b>“and you shall sacrifice with the bread”</b> indicates that it is <b>obligatory</b> to sacrifice these burnt offerings <b>with the loaves</b> of bread, and if the loaves are not available, then these offerings are not sacrificed. The continuation of the verse: <b>“Seven lambs without blemish,”</b> teaches that the lambs are sacrificed <b>even if there are no loaves</b> available.

### Part 9
<b>If so,</b> that the animal offerings may be sacrificed even without loaves, <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states “with the bread”?</b> It <b>teaches that they were not obligated to</b> sacrifice <b>the sheep before they were obligated to</b> sacrifice <b>loaves,</b> i.e., they became obligated to sacrifice all of these offerings only when they entered Eretz Yisrael. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Tarfon.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that the <b>sheep mentioned here</b> in Leviticus, which accompany the two loaves, <b>are the very same ones mentioned in the book of Numbers</b> (see 28:27), in the passage prescribing the additional offerings. You must <b>say when you reach</b> the <b>bulls and rams</b> that are enumerated in the two passages that the offerings mentioned in one <b>are not those</b> mentioned in the other, as the number of bulls and rams are not equal. Whereas in Leviticus the verse requires the sacrifice of one bull and two rams, in Numbers the verse requires the sacrifice of two bulls and one ram. <b>Rather,</b> the two passages are referring to different offerings. <b>These</b> mentioned in Numbers <b>come</b> upon the altar <b>for their own sake, and those</b> mentioned in Leviticus <b>come</b> upon the altar <b>for the sake of</b> the two <b>loaves.</b>

### Part 11
It is therefore <b>found</b> that the offerings <b>that are mentioned in the book of Numbers were sacrificed</b> even when the Jewish people were <b>in the wilderness</b> and could not bring the offering of the two loaves, <b>but</b> the offerings <b>that are mentioned in Leviticus were not sacrificed in the wilderness,</b> due to the fact that the two loaves could not be sacrificed in the wilderness.

### Part 12
The Gemara challenges: <b>But perhaps the bulls and rams</b> mentioned in Numbers <b>are not those</b> mentioned in Leviticus, <b>but the sheep</b> mentioned in Numbers <b>are</b> the same as <b>those</b> mentioned in Leviticus. The Gemara explains: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that these</b> bulls and rams <b>are different,</b> it is apparent that <b>those</b> sheep <b>are also different</b> offerings.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But from where</b> is it proven <b>that</b> the <b>bulls and rams</b> in Numbers <b>are different</b> offerings than the bulls and rams mentioned in Leviticus? <b>Perhaps</b> they are actually the same offerings, and <b>this</b> is what <b>the Merciful One is saying: If</b> you <b>want, sacrifice a bull and two rams,</b> as the verse states in Leviticus; and <b>if</b> you <b>want, sacrifice two bulls and one ram,</b> as the verse states in Numbers. The Gemara answers: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that the order of</b> the offerings <b>is different</b> in the two passages, as the verse in Leviticus mentions the sheep, then the bull, and then the rams, whereas the verse in Numbers mentions the bulls, then the ram, and then the sheep, one may <b>conclude from it</b> that <b>they are different</b> offerings.

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches: Failure to bring <b>the</b> two <b>loaves prevents</b> sacrifice of <b>the</b> accompanying peace offering of two <b>sheep,</b> but failure to sacrifice the two sheep does not prevent the bringing of the two loaves; this is the statement of Rabbi Akiva. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of Rabbi Akiva?</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: <b>He derived</b> the <i>halakha</i> based upon a verbal analogy between two verses. One verse states: “And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the first fruits for a wave offering before the Lord, with the two lambs; <b>they shall be [<i>yihyu</i>]</b> holy to the Lord for the priest” (Leviticus 23:20). The term “they shall be” indicates that it is essential that the offering be brought precisely as commanded, but it is unclear whether this is referring to the loaves or to the sheep brought as peace offerings. This is clarified by means of a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the verse: “You shall bring out of your dwellings two loaves of waving of two tenth parts of an ephah; <b>they shall be [<i>tihyena</i>]</b> of fine flour” (Leviticus 23:17).

### Part 16
The verbal analogy teaches that <b>just as there</b> the requirement that it be done as prescribed is referring to the <b>loaves</b> rather than the sheep, <b>so too here</b> it is referring to the <b>loaves</b> rather than the sheep. Consequently, failure to bring the loaves prevents sacrifice of the sheep, but failure to sacrifice the sheep does not prevent the bringing of the loaves.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how did Rabbi Shimon <b>ben Nannas,</b> who holds that failure to sacrifice the sheep prevents the bringing of the loaves but failure to bring the loaves does not prevent sacrifice of the sheep, derive his ruling? <b>He derived</b> the <i>halakha</i> through a verbal analogy between the verse: <b>“They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>]</b> holy to the Lord for the priest,” and the verse that states, concerning the seven sheep brought as burnt offerings: <b>“They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>]</b> a burnt offering to the Lord” (Leviticus 23:18). <b>Just as there</b> the requirement that it be done as prescribed is referring to the <b>sheep, so too here</b> it is referring to <b>sheep</b> rather than loaves.

### Part 18
The Gemara challenges: <b>And</b> according to Rabbi Shimon <b>ben Nannas also, we should derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> based upon a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the word <b><i>tihyena</i></b> as Rabbi Akiva does, and conclude that <b>just as there</b> it is referring to the <b>loaves, so too here</b> it is referring to the <b>loaves.</b> The Gemara responds: It is preferable to <b>derive</b> the meaning of the term <b><i>yihyu</i> from</b> a verbal analogy using the identical form <b><i>yihyu</i>, and</b> one should <b>not derive</b> the meaning of the term <b><i>yihyu</i> from</b> a verbal analogy using the term <b><i>tihyena</i>.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>What difference is</b> there whether or not the words are identical? <b>Didn’t the school of Rabbi Yishmael teach</b> a verbal analogy with regard to leprosy of houses? The verse states: <b>“And the priest shall return [<i>veshav</i>]</b> on the seventh day” (Leviticus 14:39), and another verse with regard to the priest’s visit seven days later states: <b>“And the priest shall come [<i>uva</i>]</b> and look” (Leviticus 14:44). <b>This returning</b> and <b>this coming</b> have the same meaning, and one can therefore derive by verbal analogy that the <i>halakha</i> which applies if the leprosy had spread at the conclusion of the first week likewise applies if it had spread again by the end of the following week. Certainly, if the <i>halakha</i> can be derived via a verbal analogy with the words <i>veshav</i> and <i>uva</i>, the even slighter difference in form between <i>yihyu</i> and <i>tihyena</i> should not prevent the application of a verbal analogy.

### Part 20
The Gemara answers: <b>This matter</b> applies only <b>when there are no</b> terms that are <b>identical to it. But where there are</b> terms that are <b>identical to it, we derive</b> the verbal analogy <b>from</b> terms <b>identical to it</b> rather than from the terms that are not precisely identical. Consequently, it is preferable to derive the meaning of the term <i>yihyu</i> from the identical term rather than from <i>tihyena</i>.

### Part 21
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let Rabbi Akiva also derive</b> the meaning of the term <b><i>yihyu</i> from</b> a verbal analogy to the identical term <b><i>yihyu</i>,</b> as Rabbi Shimon ben Nannas does. The Gemara responds: Rabbi Akiva holds that it is preferable to <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>an item that</b> is given as <b>a gift to the priest,</b> such as the loaves or the sheep brought as peace offerings, which are the subject of Leviticus 23:20, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>an item that</b> is also <b>a gift to the priest,</b> i.e., the two loaves, which are the subject of Leviticus 23:17. This is <b>to the exclusion of these</b> seven sheep that are mentioned in Leviticus 23:18, <b>which are burnt offerings</b> and wholly consumed by the altar, and are not a gift to the priest. Consequently, it is preferable to derive the meaning of the term <i>yihyu</i> in verse 20 from the term <i>tihyena</i> in verse 17, rather than from the term <i>yihyu</i> in verse 18.

### Part 22
The Gemara presents an alternative explanation for the basis of their divergent opinions: <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that they <b>disagree about the</b> interpretation of the <b>verse itself: “They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>] holy to the Lord for the priest”</b> (Leviticus 23:20). <b>Rabbi Akiva holds: Which item is entirely</b> given <b>to the priest? You must say</b> that <b>it is</b> the loaves of <b>bread.</b> Therefore he concludes that the word <i>yihyu</i> is referring to the loaves of bread, and if they are not sacrificed, the two sheep cannot be sacrificed as peace offerings.

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how would Rabbi Shimon <b>ben Nannas</b> respond to this? He would say: <b>Is it</b> in fact <b>written: They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>] holy for the priest,</b> in which case one should interpret it as Rabbi Akiva does? <b>It is written</b> in the verse: <b>“They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>] holy to the Lord for the priest.”</b> Therefore, it should be understood in the following manner: <b>Which item is partially</b> given <b>to the Lord and partially</b> given <b>to the priest? You must say</b> that <b>it is</b> the <b>sheep,</b> which are sacrificed as a peace offering, part of which is burned on the altar and part of which is consumed by the priests. Consequently, the word <i>yihyu</i> should be understood as referring to the sheep, and if they are not sacrificed, the two loaves cannot be sacrificed either.

### Part 24
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how would <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> respond to this? He would say: <b>Is it</b> in fact <b>written: They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>] holy for the Lord and for the priest? It is written</b> in the verse: “They shall be [<i>yihyu</i>] holy <b>to the Lord for the priest.”</b> Therefore, it should be understood to mean that it is given to the Lord, and it is then given by Him entirely to the priests, <b>in accordance with</b> the statement of <b>Rav Huna, as Rav Huna says: The Lord acquired it</b> initially <b>and</b> then <b>gave it to the priest.</b>

### Part 25
§ With regard to the dispute in the mishna about whether failure to sacrifice the two sheep as peace offerings prevents the bringing of the two loaves or vice versa, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Everyone concedes</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC