
### Part 1
Can <b>you say</b> the same <b>with</b> regard to <b>the Paschal offering</b> of the <b>generations, which requires</b> the <b>placement of blood</b> on the altar <b>and</b> that the <b>sacrificial portions</b> be consumed <b>by the altar?</b>

### Part 2
Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him:</b> The Paschal offerings should be compared, <b>as the</b> verse <b>states</b> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations: “And it shall be when the Lord shall bring you into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which He swore to your fathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, <b>that you shall perform this service in this month”</b> (Exodus 13:5). This indicates <b>that all the services of this month</b> for the generations <b>shall be like this,</b> the Paschal offering of Egypt.

### Part 3
The Gemara discusses the opinion of Rabbi Akiva: Initially, Rabbi Akiva rejects the statement of Rabbi Eliezer based on the claim that one cannot derive the possible from the impossible. He then rejects the statement of Rabbi Eliezer on a technicality, namely that the two Paschal offerings have different sacrificial requirements. The Gemara therefore challenges: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Akiva, if he holds that one does not derive</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible,</b> then <b>let him stand by his statement.</b>

### Part 4
And <b>if he retracted</b> and conceded that one derives the possible from the impossible, <b>and</b> the fact <b>that he did not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the Paschal offering</b> in <b>Egypt is due to that refutation</b> that he proposed, i.e., that the Paschal offerings are different, then <b>the Paschal offering</b> that was sacrificed in the second year in <b>the wilderness will prove</b> that this refutation is incorrect. That offering did require placement of the blood and sacrificial portions on the altar, yet it was brought only from non-sacred money, as there were no tithes in the wilderness.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: Rabbi Akiva <b>stated</b> this objection <b>in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Eliezer.</b> He meant as follows: <b>According to my</b> opinion, <b>one does not derive</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible,</b> and this is a sufficient reason why one cannot derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations from the <i>halakha</i> of the Paschal offering in Egypt. And even <b>according to your</b> opinion, in <b>which you said</b> that <b>one derives</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible,</b> this comparison can be refuted: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about the Paschal offering</b> sacrificed in <b>Egypt?</b> It is notable in <b>that</b> it <b>did not require</b> the <b>placement of blood</b> on the altar nor that the <b>sacrificial portions</b> be consumed <b>by the altar.</b> Can <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to the Paschal offering</b> of the <b>generations, which requires</b> the <b>placement of blood</b> on the altar <b>and</b> that the <b>sacrificial portions</b> be consumed <b>by the altar?</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> in response to this, <b>Rabbi Eliezer said to him</b> that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations should be derived from the <i>halakha</i> of the Paschal offering in Egypt, since the verse states with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations: <b>“That you shall keep</b> this service in this month.”

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why must <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> cite this verse? <b>Let him say to</b> Rabbi Akiva: <b>The Paschal offering</b> brought in <b>the wilderness will prove</b> that this refutation is incorrect, since it did require placement of the blood and consumption of sacrificial portions on the altar, yet it was brought only from non-sacred money.

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: Rabbi Eliezer <b>stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b> He meant as follows: <b>In my</b> opinion, <b>one derives</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible. And as</b> for <b>that refutation</b> that you raised, that the Paschal offering in Egypt and the Paschal offering of the generations have different sacrificial requirements, <b>the Paschal offering</b> of <b>the wilderness will prove</b> that this is not a valid refutation. <b>According to your</b> opinion, in <b>which you said</b> that <b>one does not derive</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible,</b> the verse states: <b>“That you shall keep</b> this service in this month,” indicating that the Paschal offering of the generations is compared to the Paschal offering in Egypt.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: <b>But even now, let</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>refute</b> this comparison by the same claim that one cannot derive the possible from the impossible. <b>Rav Sheshet says: That is to say</b> that <b>one cannot refute a juxtaposition,</b> i.e., one cannot refute such a derivation based on reasoning.

### Part 10
<b>And in the study hall [<i>uvetarbitza</i>]</b> they discussed the statement of the mishna that the <i>halakha</i> that all obligatory offerings must be brought from non-sacred property is derived from the Paschal offering of the generations, and <b>they said: But can a matter derived via juxtaposition,</b> i.e., the Paschal offering of the generations, whose <i>halakha</i> is derived by juxtaposition from the Paschal offering in Egypt, <b>again teach a matter via</b> another <b>juxtaposition?</b> The Gemara responds: This is not considered an instance of a matter derived by juxtaposition teaching a matter derived by another juxtaposition. Rather, the statement of the mishna that all offerings are juxtaposed to the Paschal offering <b>was stated in a general</b> manner, since <b>the entire Paschal offering is one matter.</b> The Paschal offering in Egypt and the Paschal offering of the generations are both referred to as a Paschal offering.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> who rejects the proofs of Rabbi Eliezer, <b>from where does he</b> derive <b>that the Paschal offering comes only from non-sacred</b> money? The Gemara responds: Rabbi Akiva <b>derives it from that which Shmuel said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer:</b> It is stated: <b>“This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meal offering, and of the sin offering, and of the guilt offering, and of the inauguration offering, and of the sacrifice of peace offerings”</b> (Leviticus 7:37). This verse connects all of the specified offerings, such that individual aspects of each offering are applicable to all of the offerings.

### Part 12
The Gemara details these aspects. The verse states: “Of the <b>burnt offering,”</b> to teach that all of the offerings are like a burnt offering in that <b>just as a burnt offering requires a utensil</b> in its preparation, <b>so too do all</b> animal offerings <b>require a utensil. What</b> is the <b>utensil? If we say</b> it is <b>a bowl,</b> a utensil used for collecting the blood, as is learned from the burnt offerings that were sacrificed at Mount Sinai, that cannot be correct, as a utensil for collecting blood does not need to be learned from a burnt offering. <b>With regard to communal peace offerings it is also written:</b> “And they offered burnt offerings, and they sacrificed peace offerings…<b>And Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins”</b> (Exodus 24:5–6).

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> the term utensil must be referring to <b>a knife,</b> as the slaughter may be performed only with a knife and not with a sharp stone or reed. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>a burnt offering itself, from where do we</b> derive that it must be slaughtered with a knife? This is learned from <b>that which is written: “And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slaughter his son”</b> (Genesis 22:10); <b>and there,</b> Abraham was sacrificing <b>a burnt offering, as it is written: “And offered it up for a burnt offering instead of his son”</b> (Genesis 22:13).

### Part 14
The Gemara continues to expound the aforementioned verse (Leviticus 7:37). When the verse mentions <b>a meal offering,</b> it teaches that <b>just as a meal offering is eaten only by males of</b> the <b>priesthood</b> (see Leviticus 6:9–11), <b>so too are all</b> of the offerings mentioned in this verse <b>eaten only by males of</b> the <b>priesthood.</b> The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>what</b> offering <b>is it</b> that this <i>halakha</i> must be derived? <b>If</b> one suggests that it is with regard to the <b>sin offering and</b> the <b>guilt offering,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC