
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Yosei HaḤorem says:</b> This is no proof, as <b>we have found that</b> the <b>right</b> hand is also <b>called <i>yad</i>, as it is stated: “And when Joseph saw that his father was laying his right hand [<i>yad yemino</i>]”</b> (Genesis 48:17). The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, who maintains that the right hand is not called <i>yad</i>, how does he respond to this proof? He maintains that the right hand <b>is called “his right hand [<i>yad yemino</i>],”</b> but it <b>is not called a <i>yad</i> without</b> further <b>specification.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Natan says:</b> This proof is <b>not necessary,</b> as <b>it says: “And you shall bind them</b> for a sign upon your arm” (Deuteronomy 6:8), and then it states: <b>“And you shall write them</b> upon the doorposts of your house” (Deuteronomy 6:9). This teaches that <b>just as writing is with</b> the <b>right</b> hand, as most people write with their right hands, <b>so too,</b> the <b>binding</b> of phylacteries must be performed <b>with</b> the <b>right</b> hand. <b>And since binding is with</b> the <b>right</b> hand, this means that <b>donning is on</b> the <b>left</b> arm, as one cannot bind the phylacteries with the same hand upon which he is donning them. The Gemara asks: <b>And from where does Rabbi Yosei HaḤorem,</b> who holds that the right hand is also called <i>yad</i> in the Torah, <b>derive that donning</b> phylacteries is <b>on</b> the <b>left</b> arm? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from where Rabbi Natan derives it.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The requirement that phylacteries be donned on the left arm is derived <b>from</b> the verse: “It shall be for a sign upon <b>your arm [<i>yadkha</i>]”</b> (Exodus 13:16), which <b>is written with</b> a letter <b><i>heh</i></b> at the end. This is expounded as though it stated: Your <b>weak [<i>keha</i>]</b> arm. <b>Rabbi Abba said to Rav Ashi: But</b> one can <b>say</b> that <i>yadkha</i> should be interpreted as <i>yadko’aḥ</i>, with a letter <i>ḥet</i> at the end instead of a <i>heh</i>. If so, this would mean: <b>Your arm that is of strength [<i>shebeko’aḥ</i>],</b> which is the right arm. Rav Ashi <b>said to</b> Rabbi Abba: <b>Is</b> this word <b>written with a <i>ḥet</i>?</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara notes that Rav Ashi’s opinion, that the <i>halakha</i> that phylacteries are donned on the left arm is derived from the term <i>yadkha</i>, is <b>subject to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as it is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b><i>Yadkha</i></b> is written <b>with a <i>heh</i>,</b> indicating weakness, and <b>this</b> is referring to the <b>left</b> arm. <b>Others say: “Your arm,”</b> i.e., <i>yadkha</i>, serves <b>to include one without</b> a complete <b>arm,</b> i.e., one whose arm ends at the elbow, in the obligation to don phylacteries, as the remaining part is also categorized as a weak arm. It <b>is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>does not have</b> a left <b>arm,</b> i.e., not even above the elbow, he is <b>exempt from the</b> mitzva of <b>phylacteries. Others say: <i>Yadkha</i></b> serves <b>to include one without</b> a left <b>arm</b> even above the elbow, teaching that he must don phylacteries on his right arm.

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A left-handed person dons phylacteries on his right</b> arm, <b>which is</b> equivalent to <b>his left</b> arm, i.e., his weaker arm. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that a left-handed person <b>dons</b> phylacteries <b>on his left</b> arm, <b>which is the left</b> arm <b>of every</b> other <b>person? Abaye said: When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught,</b> it is referring <b>to one who has</b> equal <b>control with both his hands,</b> i.e., an ambidextrous person. Since such an individual also uses his right hand, he dons phylacteries on his left arm.

### Part 6
<b>The school of Menashe taught</b> with regard to the verse: “And you shall bind them for a sign on your arm, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes” (Deuteronomy 6:8): <b>“On your arm”; this</b> is the <b>bicep. “Between your eyes”; this</b> is the <b>crown</b> of the head. The Gemara asks: <b>Where</b> exactly on the crown of the head are the phylacteries placed? <b>The school of Rabbi Yannai say:</b> Phylacteries are placed on the <b>place where</b> the bone above <b>the baby’s brain is soft</b> after birth.

### Part 7
§ The Sage <b>Peleimu raised a dilemma before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: In the case of <b>one who has two heads, on which of them does he don phylacteries?</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: Either get up</b> and <b>exile</b> yourself from here <b>or accept upon yourself excommunication</b> for asking such a ridiculous question. <b>In the meantime, a certain man arrived</b> and <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: A firstborn <b>child has been born to me who has two heads. How much</b> money <b>must I give to the priest</b> for the redemption of the firstborn? <b>A certain elder came</b> and <b>taught him: You are obligated to give him ten <i>sela</i>,</b> the requisite five for each head.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But Rami bar Ḥama teaches: Since it is stated</b> with regard to the redemption of the firstborn: <b>“The firstborn of man you shall redeem”</b> (Numbers 18:15), <b>I</b> would <b>derive</b> that <b>even</b> if <b>he was ravaged,</b> e.g., by an animal, <b>within thirty</b> days of his birth, one should redeem him. To counter this, <b>the verse states:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC