
### Part 1
<b>The verse states: “And every meal offering that is baked in the oven…shall all the sons of Aaron have, each man like the other”</b> (Leviticus 7:9–10). This verse emphasizes that the sons of Aaron must divide the meal offering equally among themselves, without exchanging it for a portion of any other offering.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>meal offerings in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings since they do not substitute for them in</b> the case of <b>poverty.</b> One who is too poor to afford to bring an animal offering, e.g., in the case of a sin offering determined on a sliding scale, does not bring a meal offering in its stead. Since meal offerings are not brought in place of animal offerings, there is clearly no connection between them. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of <b>meal offerings in exchange for</b> portions of <b>bird offering</b>s, <b>since they do substitute for them in</b> the case of <b>poverty.</b> If one is so destitute that he cannot afford to bring a bird offering he brings a meal offering. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “And all that is prepared in the deep pan…shall all the sons of Aaron have,”</b> again emphasizing that all must have an equal share in that meal offering.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>meal offerings in exchange for</b> portions of <b>bird offering</b>s <b>since these,</b> i.e., bird offerings, <b>are types of</b> offerings that involve <b>blood</b> sprinkled on the altar, <b>and those,</b> i.e., meal offerings, <b>are types</b> of offerings made <b>of flour. But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of portions of <b>bird offering</b>s <b>in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings, since both</b> categories are <b>types of</b> offerings that involve <b>blood</b> sprinkled on the altar. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “And on a pan…shall all the sons of Aaron have,”</b> a seemingly superfluous phrase, which teaches that one may not receive a share even of bird offerings in exchange for portions of animal offerings.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of <b>bird offering</b>s <b>in exchange for</b> portions of animal <b>offerings because</b> with regard to <b>these,</b> i.e., the birds, <b>their processing,</b> i.e., killing, is executed <b>by hand,</b> by pinching the nape of the neck, <b>and</b> with regard to <b>those,</b> i.e., the animals, <b>their processing,</b> i.e., killing, is executed <b>with a utensil,</b> by slaughtering with a knife. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of <b>meal offerings in exchange for</b> portions of other <b>meal offerings, since the processing of</b> both <b>these and those</b> are carried out <b>by hand.</b> Therefore, <b>the</b> next <b>verse states: “And every meal offering mixed with oil…shall all the sons of Aaron have”</b> (Leviticus 7:10).

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>they may not receive a share</b> of a meal offering prepared on <b>a pan in exchange for</b> portions of a meal <b>offering</b> prepared in <b>a deep pan, or</b> portions of a meal offering prepared in <b>a deep pan in exchange for</b> portions of a meal <b>offering</b> prepared on <b>a pan, since the actions</b> with <b>this pan</b> result in <b>a hard</b> product, <b>and the actions</b> with <b>that</b> deep pan result in <b>a soft</b> product. <b>But</b> perhaps <b>they may receive a share</b> of a meal offering prepared on <b>a pan in exchange for</b> the portions of a different meal offering prepared on <b>a pan, or</b> a share of a meal offering prepared in <b>a deep pan in exchange for</b> portions of a different meal offering prepared in <b>a deep pan.</b> Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “Or dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have”</b> (Leviticus 7:10).

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that they <b>may not receive a share of offerings of the most sacred order,</b> e.g., meal offerings, in exchange for a portion of another similar offering, <b>but they may receive a share of offerings of lesser sanctity</b> in exchange for a portion of another similar offering. Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states</b> with regard to meal offerings: “Shall all the sons of Aaron have, <b>one as well as another”</b> (Leviticus 7:10), <b>and</b> near it appears the verse: <b>“If</b> he offers it <b>for a thanks offering”</b> (Leviticus 7:12), from which is derived: <b>Just as one may not receive a share</b> of one offering in exchange for a portion of another similar offering in the case <b>of offerings of the most sacred order, so too, one may not receive a share</b> of one offering in exchange for a portion of another similar offering in the case <b>of offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> e.g., a thanks offering.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> further expounds this verse: It states: <b>“One</b> as well as another <b>[<i>ish</i></b> <i>ke’aḥiv</i>],” which teaches that with regard to priests, <b>a man [<i>ish</i>]</b> who is an adult <b>receives a share even</b> if he is <b>blemished, but</b> a priest who is <b>a minor may not receive a share even</b> if he is <b>unblemished.</b> This <i>baraita</i> evidently interprets the verse: “And every meal offering, mixed with oil, or dry, shall all the sons of Aaron have, one as well as another” (Leviticus 7:10), as referring to the prohibition against priests exchanging shares of offerings. If so, how does Ḥizkiyya state that this verse is referring to the priests’ eating of the remainder of the <i>omer</i> offering and the meal offering of a <i>sota</i>?

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: With regard to the prohibition against exchanging priestly shares, <b>that is derived from</b> the term: <b>“Every</b> meal offering.” By contrast, Ḥizkiyya derives his principle with regard to these two meal offerings from the rest of the verse. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> haven’t you already <b>derived</b> from the word “every” <b>that which Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> states, that when one vows to offer a meal offering baked in an oven, all the baked items must be of a uniform type, either loaves or wafers (see 63b)? The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, that</b> <i>halakha</i> concerning the exchange of shares of offerings is derived <b>from</b> the addition of the word “and,” in the term: <b>“And every [<i>vekhol</i>]</b> meal offering.”

### Part 9
§ <b>Ravina said:</b> According to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, the source for the <i>halakha</i> that the <i>omer</i> offering and the meal offering of a <i>sota</i> are eaten <b>comes from</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>that Levi teaches, as Levi teaches:</b> The verse states with regard to the priestly gifts: “This shall be yours of the most sacred items, reserved from the fire: <b>Every offering of theirs, and every meal offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every guilt offering of theirs,</b> which they may restore to Me, shall be most holy for you and for your sons” (Numbers 18:9). The word “every” in each clause includes a number of additional offerings that are eaten by the priests.

### Part 10
The Torah states: <b>“Every offering of theirs,” to include</b> the <b><i>log</i> of oil</b> that accompanies the guilt offering <b>of</b> a recovered <b>leper,</b> teaching that it is also eaten by the priests. As, it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>the Merciful One writes</b> in this verse: <b>“From the fire,”</b> this would exclude this oil, which is not brought onto the altar. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us:</b> “Every offering,” to include the leper’s oil.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues expounding the verse: <b>“And every meal offering of theirs,”</b> serving <b>to include the <i>omer</i> meal offering, and the meal offering of jealousy</b> brought by a <i>sota</i>, teaching that they are also eaten by the priests. As, it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since <b>the Merciful One states: “And they shall eat those wherewith atonement was made”</b> (Exodus 29:33), the verse thereby indicates that the priests may eat only those offerings that help the owner achieve atonement. <b>And this</b> <i>omer</i> <b>comes to permit</b> eating from the new grain (see Leviticus 23:9–14), not to achieve atonement; <b>and</b> concerning <b>the other</b> offering, i.e., the meal offering of a <i>sota</i>, <b>as well,</b> it <b>comes to clarify</b> whether or not the accused woman is guilty of adultery, but not to achieve atonement. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us:</b> “Every meal offering,” to teach that these two meal offerings are included.

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> continues to expound the verse. The verse states: <b>“And every sin offering of theirs,” to include a bird sin offering,</b> teaching that it is also eaten by the priests. As, it might <b>enter your mind to say:</b> The priests may not eat it because <b>it is an unslaughtered animal carcass,</b> as it is killed by pinching the nape of the neck (see Leviticus 5:8), not by conventional slaughter. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us:</b> “Every sin offering,” teaching that bird sin offerings are included.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues to expound the verse. The Torah states: <b>“And every guilt offering of theirs,” to include the guilt offering of the nazirite</b> who has become ritually impure (see Numbers 6:12) <b>and the guilt offering of the leper,</b> teaching that they are also eaten by the priests. The Gemara objects: With regard to <b>the guilt offering of the leper, it is explicitly written with regard to it: “For as the sin offering is the priest’s, so is the guilt offering”</b> (Leviticus 14:13), which already teaches that it is eaten by the priests.

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the verse serves <b>to include</b> the <b>guilt offering of the nazirite,</b> stating that its status is <b>like</b> the <b>guilt offering of the leper.</b> As, it might <b>enter your mind to say:</b> The guilt offering of the nazirite is not sacrificed for atonement, but rather <b>it comes to prepare</b> the nazirite to begin his period of naziriteship anew, and therefore its meat would not be eaten by the priests. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us:</b> “Every guilt offering,” teaching that the guilt offering of the nazirite is included.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: “This shall be yours of the most sacred items…<b>which they may restore”; this</b> is referring to an item <b>stolen</b> from <b>a convert</b> who has no heirs and subsequently dies. In this case, the stolen item is given to the priests together with an additional one-fifth of its worth. The phrase <b>“for you and for your sons”</b> means that <b>it is yours and your sons’</b> personal property, and it may be used <b>even to betroth a woman with it,</b> and it does not belong to the Temple treasury.

### Part 16
§ <b>Rav Huna said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC