
### Part 1
<b>and</b> consequently, <b>let</b> the mouth of the lamps <b>be fashioned from gold of any</b> quality, not necessarily from pure gold. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that even the mouth of the lamps must be fashioned from pure gold.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: <b>A half-<i>log</i> of oil</b> was used to measure oil <b>for the thanks offering.</b> The thanks offering was accompanied by four different types of loaves; three types were unleavened and one was leavened, as the verse states: “If he offers it for a thanks offering, than he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanks offering: Unleavened loaves mixed with oil; and unleavened wafers spread with oil; and poached fine flour, loaves mixed with oil. With loaves of leavened bread he shall present his offering, with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for a thanks offering” (Leviticus 7:12–13).

### Part 3
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Why</b> must <b>the verse state: “With oil,” “with oil,”</b> writing it <b>twice;</b> why was the first time not sufficient? Because <b>were</b> the term <b>“with oil” stated only once, I would have said</b> that, with regard to the amount of oil required, the meal offerings that accompany the thanks offerings <b>are like all</b> other <b>meal offerings to</b> the extent that they require one <b><i>log</i></b> of oil. <b>Now that</b> the verse <b>wrote “with oil,” “with oil,” it constitutes</b> one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification, and</b> the principle is that one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification</b> serves <b>only to restrict</b> the extent of the <i>halakha</i>. Accordingly, in this case <b>the verse restricted</b> the amount of oil used in the three types of unleavened meal offerings <b>to a half-<i>log</i></b> for all of them together.

### Part 4
The Gemara interjects the citation of the <i>baraita</i> to ask: Is this a case of one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification?</b> It would appear that there is only <b>one amplification,</b> as according to the <i>baraita</i> the first mention of the term “with oil” is necessary to teach the basic requirement that the meal offerings of the thanks offering require oil, like other meal offerings. How then can it be considered an amplification?

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Akiva’s statement should be emended, as follows: <b>Were</b> the term <b>“with oil,” not written at all, I would</b> still <b>have said</b> that the thanks offering meal offerings <b>are like all</b> other <b>meal offerings to</b> the extent that they requires one <b><i>log</i></b> of oil. <b>Now that</b> the verse <b>wrote “with oil,” “with oil,” it constitutes</b> one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification, and</b> the principle is that one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification</b> serves <b>only to restrict</b> the extent of the <i>halakha</i>. Accordingly, in this case <b>the verse restricted</b> the amount of oil used in the three types of unleavened meal offerings <b>to a half-<i>log</i></b> for all three together.

### Part 6
The Gemara resumes its citation of the <i>baraita</i>: Once it has been established that the meal offerings require only a half-<i>log</i> of oil, one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>this half-<i>log</i> should be</b> equally <b>divided between</b> the <b>three types</b> of unleavened meal offerings, i.e., one-sixth of a <i>log</i> <b>for</b> the <b>loaves,</b> one-sixth <b>for</b> the <b>wafers, and</b> one-sixth <b>for</b> the <b>poached</b> loaves. <b>When</b> the verse <b>states: “With oil,” with regard to</b> the <b>poached</b> loaves, that is seemingly superfluous, <b>as</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state</b> the requirement to use part of the half-<i>log</i> of oil, being that this requirement has already been established. It must therefore serve to <b>amplify</b> the amount of <b>oil</b> used <b>for a poached</b> loaf as opposed to the other two types. <b>How so? One brings a half-<i>log</i> of oil and divides it</b> equally into two. <b>Half of it</b> is further divided and used both <b>for</b> the ten regular <b>loaves and for</b> the ten <b>wafers, and</b> the other <b>half of it</b> is used entirely <b>for</b> the ten <b>poached</b> loaves.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said to</b> Rabbi Akiva: <b>Akiva,</b> even <b>if you</b> were to <b>amplify</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>the entire day</b> from the terms <b>“with oil,” “with oil,” I</b> would <b>not listen to you</b> and accept your claims. <b>Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a half-<i>log</i> of oil</b> is required <b>for</b> the <b>thanks offering, and</b> similarly, the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a quarter-<i>log</i> of oil</b> is required <b>for</b> the loaves of <b>a nazirite, and</b> the <i>halakha</i> that a woman who experiences an emission of blood during the <b>eleven days that are between</b> one seven-day period of <b>menstruation</b> and the next period of <b>menstruation</b> is a <i>zava</i>, each of these is <b>a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted <b>to Moses from Sinai;</b> they are not derived from verses.

### Part 8
§ The mishna states that with the vessel of one <b><i>log</i> one would measure</b> the oil for all the standard meal offerings. It then cites a dispute between the Rabbis, who hold that one <i>log</i> of oil is required for each tenth of an ephah of flour used, and Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, who holds that each meal offering, irrespective of its size, requires only one <i>log</i> of oil.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>With regard to a poor leper,</b> who cannot afford the standard offerings that are required as part of the purification process and is instead required to bring one lamb as a guilt offering and a tenth of an ephah of flour as a meal offering, <b>it is written:</b> “And <b>a tenth</b>-<b>part</b> of an ephah of fine flour <b>mixed</b> with oil for a meal offering, <b>and a <i>log</i></b> of oil” (Leviticus 14:21). The verse juxtaposes the need for a <i>log</i> of oil with the fact the offering is made of a tenth of an ephah of flour. Accordingly, it <b>teaches about</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>that it requires</b> one <b><i>log</i> of oil;</b> this is <b>the statement of the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Neḥemya and Rabbi Eliezer say:</b> Each meal offering, irrespective of its size, and <b>even a meal offering of sixty tenths</b> of an ephah of flour, requires <b>only its</b> single <b><i>log</i></b> of oil, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to offering of a leper: “And a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil <b>for a meal offering, and a <i>log</i> of oil.”</b> The juxtaposition of “a meal offering” with “a <i>log</i> of oil” teaches a principle for all meal offerings: Each offering requires only one <i>log</i> of oil.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>Rabbi Neḥemya and Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, what do they do with this</b> verse: “And <b>a tenth</b>-<b>part</b> of an ephah of fine flour <b>mixed</b> with oil for a meal offering <b>and a <i>log</i></b> of oil,” which links the need for a <i>log</i> of oil with the fact the offering is made of a tenth of an ephah of flour? The Gemara explains: <b>That</b> verse is required <b>to</b> teach the matter <b>itself, as the Merciful One states: Let</b> a poor leper <b>bring</b> an offering of just <b>a tenth of an ephah</b> of flour. Accordingly, it cannot be used to teach a principle about meal offerings.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, how do they respond to this claim? They maintain that <b>it is not necessary to</b> teach the matter <b>itself,</b> as <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the Merciful One revealed with regard to a leper</b> who is not poor that he must bring <b>three</b> animal <b>offerings and</b> a meal offering of <b>three-tenths</b> of an ephah as part of his purification process, it may be inferred that <b>here,</b> with regard to a poor leper, <b>who</b> brings only <b>one offering,</b> that he similarly brings a meal offering of only <b>a tenth of an ephah.</b> Accordingly, the fact that the verse mentions that his offering is only a tenth of an ephah is superfluous and can teach a principle for all meal offerings.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues to ask: <b>And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> Rabbi Neḥemya and Rabbi Eliezer, how would they respond to this claim? They maintain that it <b>was necessary</b> for the verse to state the size of his meal offering, as otherwise it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since the Merciful One spared</b> the money of the poor leper by allowing him <b>to bring</b> an offering affordable <b>in poverty,</b> one might <b>say</b> that the Merciful One <b>does not require from him</b> to bring any meal offering <b>at all.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> the Rabbis, how would they respond to this? They claim that <b>we do not find</b> that the Torah <b>entirely</b> exempts a poor person from the offerings of the purification process, only that it provides a less expensive way to complete that process.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the Rabbis, what do they do with</b> the juxtaposition in the end of <b>this</b> verse: <b>“For a meal offering and a <i>log</i> of oil,”</b> from which Rabbi Neḥemya and Rabbi Eliezer derive the principle that each meal offering requires only one <i>log</i> of oil? The Gemara explains: The Rabbis maintain that <b>that</b> the juxtaposition teaches <b>about one who donates a meal offering,</b> without specifying its size, <b>that he should not</b> bring <b>less than an amount</b> of flour <b>that requires</b> one <b><i>log</i>. And what is this</b> amount? <b>A tenth</b> of an ephah. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the other,</b> Rabbi Neḥemya and Rabbi Eliezer, from where do they derive that <i>halakha</i>, as they maintain the verse teaches the principle for all meal offerings? The Gemara explains: They maintain that <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i> <b>can be derived from</b> this verse.

### Part 15
§ The mishna lists the quantities of oil and wine that were required for the meal offerings and libations that accompanied the sacrifice of an animal. <b>Six</b> <i>log</i>, i.e., one-half of a <i>hin</i>, <b>for</b> those of <b>a bull; and four</b> <i>log</i>, i.e., one-third of a <i>hin</i>, <b>for</b> those of <b>a ram; and three</b> <i>log</i>, i.e., one-quarter of a <i>hin</i>, <b>for</b> those of <b>a lamb.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive these quantities? We derive them from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And their libations shall be one-half of a <i>hin</i> of wine for a bull,</b> and one-third of a <i>hin</i> for the ram, and one-quarter of a <i>hin</i> for a lamb” (Numbers 28:14).

### Part 16
The Gemara elaborates: Now, one <b><i>hin</i> is twelve <i>log</i>, as it is written: “And of olive oil a <i>hin</i>”</b> (Exodus 30:24), <b>and it is written</b> afterward in the same verse: <b>“Sacred anointing oil, this [<i>zeh</i>] shall be for Me, throughout your generations.”</b> The <b>numerical value [<i>gimatriyya</i>] of <i>zeh</i> is twelve.</b> Once it is established that one <i>hin</i> is twelve <i>log</i>, it is possible to calculate how may <i>log</i> are in one-half, one-third, and one-quarter of a <i>hin</i>.

### Part 17
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Three and a half</b> <i>log</i> of oil were required <b>for the Candelabrum,</b> as there were seven lamps and <b>a half-<i>log</i></b> was required <b>for each lamp.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? They are derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to the Candelabrum: “Aaron and his sons shall arrange it <b>from evening to morning,</b> before the Lord” (Exodus 27:21). This indicates that <b>you shall put into</b> each lamp <b>its</b> required <b>quantity</b> of oil <b>so that it will continue burning from evening until morning. Alternatively,</b> the phrase <b>“from evening to morning”</b> indicates that the mitzva is fulfilled throughout the night, and <b>you have no</b> other <b>rite that is valid from evening until morning except for this one alone. And the Sages calculated</b> that <b>a half-<i>log</i></b> of oil for each lamp is necessary to ensure that they continue burning <b>from evening until morning.</b>

### Part 18
How did the Sages reach the conclusion that a half-<i>log</i> of oil is needed? <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that the Sages <b>calculated</b> it <b>by</b> initially using a large quantity of oil, more than necessary to burn throughout the night, and then <b>decreasing</b> the quantity by a small amount each night until they saw that at the end of the night there was no oil remaining. <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>they calculated</b> it <b>by</b> initially using a small quantity of oil and then <b>increasing</b> the quantity each night until they saw that the quantity was sufficient to allow the lamps to burn throughout the night.

### Part 19
The Gemara elaborates: The <b>one who said</b> that <b>they calculated</b> it <b>by increasing</b> the quantity each night holds that they did so in accordance with the principle that <b>the Torah spared the money of the Jewish people,</b> so the Sages wished to minimize the financial cost of their experimentation. <b>And</b> the <b>one who said</b> that <b>they calculated</b> it <b>by decreasing</b> the quantity each night holds that in the Temple one’s actions should not be motivated by a concern for the financial cost, as <b>in a place of wealth there is no poverty.</b>

### Part 20
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Many animal offerings are brought together with a meal offering and a wine libation. These additions are collectively referred to as libations. <b>One may mix together the libations of bulls with the libations of rams;</b> the meal offerings may be mixed as they both share the same ratio of flour to oil, i.e., two <i>log</i> of oil for each tenth of an ephah of flour. Likewise, one may mix together <b>the libations of lambs with the libations of</b> other <b>lambs,</b> as the meal offerings both share the same ratio of three <i>log</i> of oil for each tenth of an ephah of flour. And one may mix together the libations <b>of</b> the offering of <b>an individual with</b> those <b>of a communal</b> offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC