
### Part 1
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the number of compartments in the phylacteries of the head, the verse states: “It shall be for a sign upon your hand, and <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (Exodus 13:16), with the word <i>totafot</i> spelled deficient, without a <i>vav</i> before the final letter, in a way that can be read as singular; and again: “They shall be <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (Deuteronomy 6:8), spelled as a singular word; and again: “They shall be <b>for <i>totafot</i></b> between your eyes” (Deuteronomy 11:18), this time spelled plene, with a <i>vav</i> before the final letter, in a manner that must be plural. <b>There are four</b> mentions of <i>totafot</i> <b>here,</b> as the third one is written in the plural and therefore counts as two. Consequently, it is derived that the phylacteries of the head must have four compartments. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Akiva says: There is no need</b> for this proof, as the requirement of four compartments can be derived from the word <i>totafot</i> itself: The word <b><i>tot</i> in</b> the language of <b>Katfei</b> means <b>two,</b> and the word <b><i>pat</i> in</b> the language of <b>Afriki</b> also means <b>two,</b> and therefore <i>totafot</i> can be understood as a compound word meaning four.

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that a scribe <b>should write</b> the passages of the phylacteries of the head <b>on four</b> separate <b>hides,</b> i.e., parchments, <b>and place them in four compartments of four hides,</b> one passage in each compartment. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And for a memorial between your eyes”</b> (Exodus 13:9). This teaches: <b>I said to you</b> that the phylacteries are <b>one memorial, but not</b> that they are <b>two or three memorials,</b> i.e., the phylacteries themselves must be one unit. <b>How so?</b> One <b>writes</b> the passages <b>on four hides and places them in four compartments</b> fashioned <b>of one hide.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And if</b> a scribe <b>wrote</b> all four of <b>them on one hide and placed them in four compartments</b> by slitting the parchment between each of the passages, one who dons these phylacteries has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. <b>And</b> in such a case it is <b>necessary for there to be a space between</b> each of the passages, so that each can be placed in a separate compartment; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: It is not necessary</b> for there to be a space between them. <b>And</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis <b>agree that one places a string or</b> a thicker <b>band between each and every one</b> of the four compartments. The <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And if their furrows,</b> i.e., the lines marking the separation between the compartments, <b>are not noticeable</b> from the outside, the phylacteries <b>are unfit.</b>

### Part 5
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How does</b> a scribe <b>write them?</b> With regard to <b>the phylacteries of the arm, he writes it on one hide. But if he wrote it on four</b> separate <b>hides and placed it in one compartment,</b> one who wears it has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. <b>And</b> in such a case <b>it is necessary to attach</b> the four parchments, <b>as it is stated: “And it shall be for a sign for you upon your arm”</b> (Exodus 13:9). This teaches that <b>just as</b> the phylacteries of the arm are <b>one sign on the outside,</b> as the compartment is fashioned from a single hide, <b>so too,</b> they must be <b>one sign on the inside,</b> i.e., the four passages must be on a single parchment. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei says: It is not necessary</b> to attach the passages.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: And Rabbi Yehuda the Distinguished [<i>Beribbi</i>] concedes to me that if one does not have phylacteries of the arm but has two phylacteries of the head, that he covers one of them with patches of hide,</b> to render it like one compartment, <b>and places it</b> on his arm. The Gemara asks: How can Rabbi Yosei say that Rabbi Yehuda <b>concedes</b> to him in this case? <b>This is</b> the very situation in which <b>their dispute</b> applies, as they disagree over whether or not the passages of the phylacteries of the arm may be written on separate parchments. <b>Rava said: From Rabbi Yosei’s statement</b> one can infer that <b>Rabbi Yehuda retracted</b> his opinion and accepted Rabbi Yosei’s ruling.

### Part 7
Rabbi Yosei said that all agree that one can convert phylacteries of the head into phylacteries of the arm. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But Rav Ḥananya sent</b> the following ruling <b>in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> If one has <b>phylacteries of the arm,</b> he <b>can convert it to</b> phylacteries <b>of the head, but</b> if one has phylacteries <b>of the head,</b> he <b>cannot convert it to</b> phylacteries <b>of the arm, because one does not reduce</b> the sanctity of an item <b>from</b> a level of <b>greater sanctity</b> of phylacteries of the head <b>to</b> a level of <b>lesser sanctity</b> of phylacteries of the arm.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this</b> ruling is stated <b>with regard to old</b> phylacteries, which have already been worn on one’s head and therefore have a greater level of sanctity, whereas <b>that</b> ruling is stated <b>with regard to new</b> phylacteries, which have not yet been used. The Gemara adds: <b>And according to the one who says</b> that <b>designation is significant,</b> i.e., once one designates an item for use in fulfilling a particular mitzva, it assumes the sanctity of an item used for mitzvot, this ruling is stated with regard to a case <b>where he stipulated with regard to them from the outset</b> that he may convert it from phylacteries of the head to phylacteries of the arm, and only in this circumstance it is permitted to convert them.

### Part 9
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How does one arrange</b> the four passages inside the phylacteries? The passage of: <b>“Sanctify unto Me”</b> (Exodus 13:1–10), and the passage of: <b>“And it shall be when He shall bring you”</b> (Exodus 13:11–16), are placed <b>on the right;</b> the passage of: <b>“Listen,</b> O Israel” (Deuteronomy 6:4–9), and the passage of: <b>“And it shall come to pass, if you shall hearken diligently”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:13–21), are placed <b>on the left.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that one places them in the <b>opposite</b> manner, with the first two passages on the left and the latter two on the right? <b>Abaye said</b> that it is <b>not difficult: Here</b> it means <b>to the right of</b> the <b>reader,</b> i.e., one who is standing opposite the one donning the phylacteries, whereas <b>there</b> it means <b>to the right of</b> the <b>one who is donning</b> the phylacteries. <b>And</b> in this manner <b>the reader reads</b> the passages <b>in their order,</b> as they appear in the Torah, starting with Exodus 13:1–10 to his right.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ḥananel says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> If <b>one exchanged its passages,</b> i.e., placed them in a different order within the compartment, the phylacteries <b>are unfit. Abaye said: We did not say</b> this

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC