
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>From all</b> of the four types of loaves accompanying the thanks offering, <b>one takes one</b> loaf <b>from</b> each set of <b>ten as <i>teruma</i>,</b> to be given to a priest, <b>as it is stated: “And he shall present from it one of each offering as a <i>teruma</i> unto the Lord;</b> to the priest that sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings against the altar it shall be given” (Leviticus 7:14). The verse is analyzed: <b>“One”</b> indicates <b>that one should not take a sliced</b> loaf; <b>“of each offering”</b> indicates <b>that all the offerings should be equal,</b> i.e., <b>that one should not take</b> a loaf <b>from</b> one type of <b>offering for another</b> type; <b>“to the priest that sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings against the altar it shall be given,” and the rest</b> of the loaves are <b>eaten by the owner.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches some of the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>teruma</i> to be taken from the loaves of the thanks offering that are derived from the verse: “And he shall present from it one of each offering as a <i>teruma</i> unto the Lord.” The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> that interprets the same verse: <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The phrase <b>“And he shall present from it”</b> indicates that the loaves must all be as one, i.e., <i>teruma</i> may be taken <b>from</b> the loaves only when they are joined <b>together</b> in one place. <b>“One”</b> indicates <b>that one should not take a sliced</b> loaf. <b>“Of each offering”</b> indicates <b>that all the offerings should be equal,</b> i.e., <b>that one should not take</b> a loaf <b>from one</b> type of <b>offering for another</b> type. When the verse states: <b>“As a <i>teruma</i> unto the Lord,” I do not know from how many</b> loaves the <i>teruma</i> <b>is</b> taken.

### Part 3
<b>I</b> therefore <b>derive</b> this from a verbal analogy: It <b>is stated here,</b> in the passage of the loaves describing the thanks offering: <b>“<i>Teruma</i>,” and</b> it <b>is stated with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe:</b> “Then you shall set apart from it <b>a <i>teruma</i></b> for the Lord, even a tithe of the tithe” (Numbers 18:26). <b>Just as below,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, <b>one</b> out of every <b>ten</b> is separated as <i>teruma</i>, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the loaves of the thanks offering, <b>one</b> out <b>of</b> every <b>ten</b> loaves is separated as <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 4
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way</b> and derive the measure from a different verbal analogy: It <b>is stated here: “<i>Teruma</i>,” and</b> it <b>is stated with regard to first fruits: “<i>Teruma</i>”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:17). <b>Just as below,</b> with regard to first fruits, <b>it has no measure, so too here,</b> say that <b>it has no measure.</b>

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Let us consider to which</b> of the two cases, <i>teruma</i> of the tithe or the first fruits, the case of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering is more <b>similar.</b> It is logical that <b>one derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a <i>teruma</i> that is not followed by</b> another <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> such as <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering, <b>from a <i>teruma</i> that is not followed by</b> another <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> such as <i>teruma</i> of the tithe. <b>And</b> the case of the <b>first fruits will not</b> serve as <b>proof, since they are followed by</b> another <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> as <i>teruma</i> and tithes are taken after the first fruits are separated.

### Part 6
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way</b> and reason that <b>one derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>teruma</i></b> of the loaves of the thanks offering, <b>which is eaten in a sacred place,</b> in Jerusalem, <b>from <i>teruma</i></b> of the first fruits, <b>which is eaten in a sacred place,</b> in Jerusalem. <b>And</b> the case of <b><i>teruma</i> of the tithe will not</b> serve as <b>proof, as it may be eaten anywhere.</b>

### Part 7
Since both of these comparisons are equally plausible, <b>the verse states</b> with regard to the loaves of the thanks offering: <b>“From it…a <i>teruma</i> unto the Lord,” and,</b> similarly, <b>it is written with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe: “From it a <i>teruma</i>,” to</b> indicate that there is <b>a verbal analogy</b> between the two, from which it can be derived that one separates one out of every ten loaves of the thanks offering as <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>We have learned with regard to <i>teruma</i></b> of the loaves of the thanks offering <b>that its</b> measure is <b>one</b> out <b>of</b> every <b>ten. But I do not know</b> from this verbal analogy <b>from how much</b> flour each leavened <b>loaf</b> is to be prepared. <b>I</b> therefore <b>derive</b> this from a verbal analogy: It <b>is stated here,</b> in the passage concerning the loaves of the thanks offering: <b>“Bread”</b> (Leviticus 7:13), <b>and</b> it <b>is stated there, with regard to the two loaves,</b> i.e., the public offering on <i>Shavuot</i> of two loaves from the new wheat: <b>“Bread”</b> (Leviticus 23:17). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the two loaves, one prepares the loaves with <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah <b>per loaf, so too here,</b> with regard to the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering, one prepares the loaves with <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah <b>per loaf.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way</b> and derive the <i>halakha</i> from a different verbal analogy: It <b>is stated here,</b> with regard to the loaves of the thanks offering: <b>“Bread,” and it is stated</b> there, <b>with regard to the shewbread: “Bread”</b> (Leviticus 24:7). One can conclude that <b>just as there,</b> with regard to the shewbread, each of the twelve loaves is baked from <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah flour, <b>so too here,</b> each of the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering should be baked from <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah of flour.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Let us consider to which</b> of the two cases, the two loaves or the shewbread, the case of the leavened loaves of the thanks offering is more <b>similar.</b> It is logical that <b>one derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering, which is <b>a meal offering that comes</b> as <b>leavened bread</b> along <b>with an animal offering, from</b> another <b>meal offering that comes</b> as <b>leavened bread</b> along <b>with an animal offering,</b> such as the two loaves, which are also leavened, and which come with animal offerings (see Leviticus 23:17–19). <b>And the shewbread will not</b> serve as <b>proof, since it does not come</b> as <b>leavened bread,</b> nor does it come <b>with</b> an animal <b>offering.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way</b> and reason that <b>one derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering, which is <b>a meal offering that</b> can <b>come from</b> the grain of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>or</b> of <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>from new</b> grain <b>or from old</b> grain; <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the shewbread, which is also <b>a meal offering that can come from</b> the grain of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>or from outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>from new</b> grain <b>or from old</b> grain. <b>And the two loaves will not</b> serve as <b>proof, since they</b> can <b>come only from new</b> grain <b>and from Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 12
Since both of these comparisons are equally plausible, <b>the verse states</b> concerning the two loaves: <b>“You shall bring out of your dwellings two loaves of waving”</b> (Leviticus 23:17). <b>As</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “You shall bring,” what,</b> then, is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “You shall bring”?</b> This indicates <b>that whatever,</b> i.e., any meal offering, <b>you bring from a different place,</b> it must <b>be like this,</b> i.e., the two loaves. Therefore, <b>just as there,</b> in the case of the two loaves, the measure is <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah <b>per loaf, so too here,</b> in the case of the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering, the measure is <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah <b>per loaf.</b>

### Part 13
But <b>if</b> so, perhaps one can derive that <b>just as there,</b> in the case of the two loaves, the entire measure for the two loaves is <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah, <b>so too here,</b> in the case of the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering, the entire measure for all ten loaves of leavened bread is <b>two-tenths.</b> To exclude this possibility, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “They shall be,”</b> to indicate that each leavened loaf is prepared from a tenth of an ephah. Accordingly, the ten loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering are prepared with a total of ten tenths of an ephah.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>We have learned</b> that there are <b>ten</b> tenths of an ephah of flour <b>for the</b> loaves of <b>leavened bread</b> accompanying the thanks offering. <b>From where</b> is it derived that there are <b>ten</b> tenths of an ephah <b>for the</b> thirty loaves of <b><i>matza</i>? The verse states:</b> “If he brings it for a thanks offering, then he shall bring with the thanks offering unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour poached. <b>With cakes of leavened bread</b> he shall present his offering, with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanks” (Leviticus 7:12–13).

### Part 15
By mentioning all the loaves of unleavened bread in one verse and the loaves of leavened bread in the subsequent verse, it is indicated that one must <b>bring</b> the <b><i>matza</i></b> in a measure <b>corresponding to</b> the measure of the loaves of <b>leavened bread. Consequently,</b> there are <b>twenty tenths</b> of flour for the <b>loaves of the thanks offering, ten for the</b> loaves of <b>leavened bread, and ten for the <i>matza</i>.</b>

### Part 16
One <b>might</b> have thought that one brings <b>ten</b> loaves of <b><i>matza</i>,</b> and that <b>all of them shall be of only one type.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “If he brings it for a thanks offering, then he shall bring with the thanks offering unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour poached.</b> With cakes of leavened bread he shall present his offering.” The verse indicates that one must bring three types of <i>matza</i>. <b>Consequently,</b> there are <b>three-and-one-third</b> of a tenth of an ephah of flour <b>for each and every type, and three loaves to a tenth</b> of an ephah. <b>And consequently,</b> there are a total of <b>forty loaves of the thanks offering.</b> The owner of the offering <b>takes four of them,</b> one loaf of each type, <b>and gives</b> them <b>to the priest, and the remaining</b> loaves <b>are eaten by the owner</b> and any ritually pure Jew to whom he wishes to give the loaves. This concludes the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 17
§ The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Master said: “And he shall present from it,”</b> indicates that the <i>teruma</i> may be taken <b>from</b> the loaves only when they are joined <b>together</b> in one place. The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> then concerning that <b>which is written</b> in the verse with regard to the sacrificial portions of the sin offering consumed on the altar: <b>“And all the fat thereof he shall take off from it</b> and make it smoke upon the altar” (Leviticus 4:19), <b>there, what is there</b> to be joined <b>together?</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara responds: The sacrificial portions of the sin offering must be sacrificed from that which is joined together, <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rav Ḥisda</b> says that <b>Avimi says, as Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Avimi says:</b> The priest <b>may not cut up the meat</b> of the offering <b>before taking</b> from it <b>the sacrificial portions</b> that are to be burned upon the altar.

### Part 19
§ <b>The Master said:</b> It <b>is stated here,</b> in the passage of the loaves of the thanks offering: <b>“<i>Teruma</i>,” and</b> it <b>is stated with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe: “<i>Teruma</i>.”</b> Just as one-tenth of the tithe is separated as <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, so too one out of every ten loaves of the thanks offering is separated as <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 20
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering <b>from <i>teruma</i></b> that was taken following the war <b>of</b> the Jewish people against <b>Midian,</b> where the word <i>teruma</i> also appears (see Numbers 31:28–30). The measure of the <i>teruma</i> there was not one of ten. The Gemara responds: <b>One derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> of the loaves of the thanks offering, <b>which is practiced for</b> all <b>generations, from <i>teruma</i></b> of the tithe, <b>which is</b> also <b>practiced for</b> all <b>generations. And <i>teruma</i> of Midian shall not</b> serve as <b>proof, as it is not practiced for</b> all <b>generations.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering <b>from <i>teruma</i> of <i>ḥalla</i>,</b> i.e., the portion of dough given to the priest, as the verse refers to it as a <i>teruma</i> (see Numbers 15:19–20). That measure is one in twenty-four. The Gemara responds: <b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that <b>one derives a matter,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering, <b>of which it is stated: “From it a <i>teruma</i> unto the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 7:14), <b>from a matter,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, <b>of which it is stated:</b> “From it <b>a <i>teruma</i> for the Lord”</b> (Numbers 18:26). This serves <b>to exclude <i>teruma</i> of <i>ḥalla</i>, of which it is not stated: From it a <i>teruma</i> for the Lord.</b>

### Part 22
§ <b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b><i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering,</b> is a non-priest who intentionally partakes <b>of it liable</b> to receive <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven, as is the <i>halakha</i> concerning a non-priest who intentionally consumes <i>teruma</i> of the tithe? <b>And</b> similarly, is a non-priest who unwittingly partakes of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering liable to pay the value of what he consumed as well as an additional <b>one-fifth</b> of that value, as is the <i>halakha</i> concerning a non-priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i> of the tithe unwittingly (see Leviticus 22:9, 14)? <b>Or is one not</b> liable to receive <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven <b>or</b> to pay an additional <b>one-fifth for their</b> consumption?

### Part 23
Rava elaborates: <b>Since</b> <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering <b>is compared to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> perhaps <b>it is considered like <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> and the same penalties are incurred. <b>Or perhaps,</b> since the verse uses restrictive terms with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe, as the verse states of one who intentionally partakes of it: “They shall die <b>due to it”</b> (Leviticus 22:9), and the verse states with regard to one who unwittingly partakes of it: “Then he shall put <b>its fifth-part</b> unto it” (Leviticus 22:14), <b>the Merciful One restricted</b> this <i>halakha</i> specifically to the case of <i>teruma</i> of the tithe.

### Part 24
Rava raises another dilemma based on the comparison of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering and <i>teruma</i> of the tithe: Does <i>teruma</i> of the loaves of the thanks offering that fell into non-sacred produce <b>render the mixture</b> forbidden, as is the <i>halakha</i> concerning <i>teruma</i> of the tithe? <b>Or</b> does the comparison of <i>teruma</i> of the loaves to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe apply only with regard to the proper measure, and it <b>does not render the mixture</b> forbidden? The Gemara comments: These dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 25
§ <b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The verse states: “They shall be,”</b> indicating that each leavened loaf must come from a tenth of an ephah, so that the loaves of <i>matza</i> of the thanks offering are prepared from ten tenths of an ephah. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> biblical <b>derivation</b> for this? How is this derived from “they shall be”?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC