
### Part 1
<b>And</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a peace offering</b> may be brought from second-tithe money is derived by a verbal analogy between <b>“there”</b> and <b>“there” from</b> the verse discussing second <b>tithe.</b> The verse states with regard to a peace offering: “And you shall sacrifice peace offerings and you shall eat there” (Deuteronomy 27:7), and the verse states with regard to second tithe: “And you shall eat before the Lord your God, in the place that He shall choose to cause His name to dwell there” (Deuteronomy 14:23). <b>And from this</b> it may be concluded: <b>Just as peace offerings are not themselves</b> brought from second <b>tithe,</b> as they are not produce, <b>so too</b> with regard to the loaves of <b>a thanks offering, they are not themselves</b> brought from second <b>tithe. And that wheat which is purchased with second-tithe money is also not itself</b> second <b>tithe;</b> it may therefore be used for the loaves of the thanks offering.

### Part 2
Now <b>I will say my reasoning</b> for why one may not prepare the loaves of a thanks offering with wheat that was purchased with second-tithe money: <b>From where do I derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a thanks offering</b> may be brought from second-tithe money? I derive it <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>a peace offering. And</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>a peace offering</b> may be brought from second-tithe money is derived by a verbal analogy between <b>“there”</b> and <b>“there” from</b> second <b>tithe.</b> Therefore, <b>just as a peace offering is not</b> of the same <b>species</b> as second <b>tithe, so too</b> the loaves of <b>a thanks offering</b> may <b>not</b> be of the same <b>species</b> as second <b>tithe.</b> This serves <b>to exclude wheat purchased with second-tithe money, which is</b> of the same <b>species</b> as second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>Rabbi Ami says:</b> In a case involving <b>one who designates second-tithe money for a peace offering,</b> the money does <b>not assume</b> the status of <b>a peace offering. What is the reason?</b> The reason is <b>that the sanctity of the peace offering is not strong</b> enough <b>to take effect upon</b> items that have <b>the sanctity of second tithe.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a mishna (<i>Ma’aser Sheni</i> 1:4): Ideally, one should use second-tithe money to purchase peace offerings. If one purchases a peace offering with second-tithe money, only the flesh of the animal is consecrated, while its hide is non-sacred. The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>one who</b> uses second-tithe money in an improper manner and <b>purchases an undomesticated animal for a peace offering,</b> a purpose for which an undomesticated animal cannot be used, <b>or</b> purchases <b>a domesticated animal for meat of desire,</b> i.e., ordinary meat, the Sages penalized him and decreed that <b>the hide does not become non-sacred.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that not to say that</b> the hide of the animal purchased with the second-tithe money <b>assumes</b> the status of <b>a peace offering,</b> and it must be sold and the money used to purchase a peace offering, in contradiction to the statement of Rabbi Ami?

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Wasn’t it stated concerning that</b> mishna that <b>Rav said:</b> The hide of the animal purchased with the second-tithe money does <b>not assume</b> the status of <b>a peace offering; and what</b> is the meaning of the mishna that <b>the hide does not become non-sacred? This</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying:</b> The hide, as part of an undomesticated animal, is <b>not in the category of</b> a peace offering at all so that its <b>hide would become non-sacred. What is the reason? Rabba says:</b> Since he used the second-tithe money in an improper manner, <b>it is considered as if he purchased an ox for plowing,</b> to which no sanctity of second tithe applies.

### Part 6
§ It <b>was stated</b> that there is an amoraic dispute with regard to <b>one who designates second-tithe money for a peace offering. Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The money <b>assumes</b> the status of a peace offering, and <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The money does <b>not assume</b> the status of a peace offering.

### Part 7
The Gemara elaborates: <b>And according to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, who said:</b> Second <b>tithe is non-sacred property, everyone agrees that</b> the money <b>assumes</b> the status of a peace offering. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>according to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir, who said:</b> Second <b>tithe is property</b> belonging to the <b>Most High. The one who says</b> that the money does <b>not assume</b> the status of a peace offering holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> and one may not designate property of the Most High for another purpose. <b>And the one who says</b> that the money <b>assumes</b> the status of a peace offering holds that <b>since</b> second <b>tithe is called a peace offering,</b> as an animal purchased with second-tithe money without specification is brought as a peace offering, <b>when he designates</b> the money for a peace offering, it <b>as well</b> is <b>designated</b> with the sanctity of a peace offering.

### Part 8
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the statement of Rabbi Elazar from a <i>baraita</i>: In a case involving <b>one who designates second-tithe money for a peace offering,</b> the sanctity of a peace offering is applied to this money in addition to the sanctity of second tithe. Therefore, <b>when he redeems</b> this money, <b>he adds to it two-fifths:</b> One-fifth <b>for the</b> redemption of the <b>sacrificial</b> sanctity of a peace offering <b>and</b> one-fifth <b>for</b> the redemption of second <b>tithe.</b> Evidently, the sanctity of a peace offering does take effect on second-tithe money.

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: <b>Do you maintain</b> that this <i>baraita</i> <b>is agreed</b> upon <b>by everyone?</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this? It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that second-tithe money is non-sacred property. Accordingly, the sanctity of a <b>peace</b> offering takes effect on the money. Rabbi Elazar holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>From where</b> is it derived with regard to <b>one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering, that he may bring</b> it <b>only from non-sacred</b> money? It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “And you shall sacrifice the Paschal offering to the Lord your God, of the flock and the herd”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:2). The verse is difficult: <b>Doesn’t the Paschal offering come only from lambs and goats? If so, why does the verse state: “The flock and the herd”?</b> It is <b>to juxtapose all</b> offerings <b>that come from the flock and from the herd to</b> the <b>Paschal offering,</b> teaching that <b>just as</b> the <b>Paschal offering</b> is <b>a matter of obligation and comes only from non-sacred</b> money, <b>so too any matter of obligation comes only from non-sacred</b> money.

### Part 11
<b>Therefore,</b> in the case of <b>one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering,</b> or: <b>It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a peace offering, since</b> these offerings <b>come</b> as <b>an obligation</b> due to his vow, <b>they may be brought only from non-sacred</b> money. <b>And libations, in any case, may be brought only from non-sacred</b> money, and not from second-tithe money, because second-tithe money must be used to purchase items eaten by people, while libations are poured out next to the altar.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the <i>halakha</i> that any matter of obligation must be brought from non-sacred property is derived from the <i>halakha</i> of the Paschal offering. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> concerning <b>the Paschal offering itself, from where do we</b> derive that it is brought only from non-sacred property? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: “Paschal offering” is stated</b> in the Torah <b>with regard to</b> the offering sacrificed in <b>Egypt</b> (see Exodus 12:3), <b>and “Paschal offering” is stated with regard to</b> the yearly obligation throughout the <b>generations</b> (see Exodus 12:25). Therefore, <b>just as the Paschal offering stated with regard to Egypt was brought only from non-sacred</b> property, as there was no second tithe in Egypt, <b>so too the Paschal offering stated with regard to</b> the obligation throughout the <b>generations may be brought only from non-sacred</b> property.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to him: But does one derive</b> the <b>possible from</b> the <b>impossible?</b> Does one derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations, when there exists the possibility of using second-tithe money, from the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering sacrificed in Egypt, when there was no second tithe? Rabbi Eliezer <b>said to him: Even though</b> it was <b>impossible</b> to bring the Paschal offering in Egypt from consecrated money, <b>it is a great proof, and we shall derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from it.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Akiva then presented a different logical derivation</b> to reject the proof of Rabbi Eliezer: One cannot derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal offering of the generations from that of the Paschal offering in Egypt, as <b>what</b> is notable <b>about the Paschal offering</b> sacrificed in <b>Egypt?</b> It is notable in <b>that</b> it <b>did not require</b> the <b>placement of blood</b> on the altar nor that the <b>sacrificial portions</b> be consumed <b>by the altar.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC