
### Part 1
<b>and</b> some of the money <b>remained</b> after he purchased the offering, <b>he brings,</b> i.e., purchases, <b>with</b> the remaining money <b>loaves</b> to accompany the thanks offering. If he separated money <b>for the loaves of the thanks offering and</b> some of the money <b>remained</b> after he purchased the loaves, <b>he may not bring a thanks offering with</b> the remaining money.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason? If we say</b> that it is <b>due to</b> the statement <b>of Rav Kahana,</b> that is difficult. <b>As Rav Kahana said: From where</b> is it derived that <b>the loaves of a thanks offering are</b> themselves <b>called a thanks offering?</b> It is derived from <b>that</b> which <b>is stated</b> in the verse: <b>“Then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanks offering loaves”</b> (Leviticus 7:12). The juxtaposition of the words “thanks offering” and “loaves” indicates that the loaves are themselves called a thanks offering. Therefore, one who separated money for a thanks offering may use that money for the loaves as well. The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>If that is so, the opposite</b> should <b>also</b> be the <i>halakha</i>, i.e., the thanks offering is called loaves, and it should therefore be permitted to use the money remaining from the loaves for the thanks offering. The Gemara rejects this: <b>The loaves are called a thanks offering,</b> but <b>the thanks offering is not called loaves.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>And Rava says:</b> If <b>one separated</b> an animal as <b>his thanks offering and it was lost, and he again separated another in its stead, and it</b> too <b>was lost, and he again separated another in its stead, and the first</b> two animals <b>were</b> then <b>found, and the three of them stand</b> fit to be sacrificed, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: If <b>he achieved atonement with the first</b> animal, <b>the second does not require loaves,</b> as it is the replacement for the first, and the first was sacrificed with its loaves. But <b>the third requires loaves,</b> because it is the replacement for the second, which does not require loaves.

### Part 4
If <b>he achieved atonement with the third,</b> then <b>the second does not require loaves,</b> because its replacement, i.e., the third, was sacrificed with loaves, but <b>the first requires loaves,</b> because its replacement, i.e., the second, will be sacrificed without loaves. If he achieved atonement <b>with the middle,</b> i.e., the second animal, <b>both of them,</b> i.e., the first and the third, <b>do not require loaves,</b> because the replacement for the first, i.e., the second, was sacrificed with loaves, and the third is the replacement for the second, which was sacrificed with loaves. <b>Abaye says: Even if he achieved atonement with</b> any <b>one of them,</b> the other <b>two do not require loaves,</b> as <b>they are all replacements for one another.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Zeira says: And so</b> is the <i>halakha</i> <b>for the matter of sin offerings:</b> If <b>one separated</b> an animal as <b>his sin offering and it was lost, and he separated another in its stead, and it</b> too <b>was lost, and he separated another in its stead, and the first</b> two animals <b>were</b> then <b>found, and the three of them stand</b> fit to be sacrificed, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: If <b>he achieved atonement with the first, the second is</b> left <b>to die,</b> as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a sin offering whose owner has already achieved atonement, and <b>the third is</b> placed in the field to <b>graze</b> until it develops a blemish and can be redeemed, since it is the replacement for a sin offering that was not sacrificed.

### Part 6
If <b>he achieved atonement with the third, the second is</b> left <b>to die,</b> because its replacement, i.e., the third, was already sacrificed, <b>and the first is</b> placed in the field to <b>graze,</b> because its replacement, i.e., the second, will not be sacrificed. If <b>he achieved atonement with the middle, both of them,</b> i.e., the first and the third, <b>are</b> left <b>to die,</b> because the second was sacrificed as a replacement for the first, and the third would have been the replacement of the second. <b>Abaye says: Even if he achieved atonement with</b> any <b>one of them,</b> the other <b>two are</b> left <b>to die,</b> as <b>they are all replacements for one another.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does Rabbi Zeira mean by: <b>And so</b> is the <i>halakha</i> for the matter of sin offerings? Why is it necessary for Rabbi Zeira to teach this seemingly identical <i>halakha</i> with regard to three sin offerings? The Gemara responds: It is necessary to teach that these <i>halakhot</i> apply with regard to sin offerings as well, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>there,</b> in the case of the thanks offerings, if one achieved atonement with the first animal then the third requires loaves, <b>since it can be said</b> that the owner <b>is one who increases thanks offerings; but here,</b> in the case of the sin offerings, <b>since it cannot be said</b> that the owner <b>is one who increases sin offerings,</b> as one cannot volunteer a sin offering, <b>I would say</b> that the same <i>halakhot</i> do <b>not</b> apply, and if one achieved atonement with the first sin offering, the third is left to die. Rabbi Zeira therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the third sin offering is considered the replacement for the second and is therefore left to graze.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches that the substitute of a thanks offering does not require loaves. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches:</b> In the case of an animal separated as <b>a thanks offering that was intermingled with its substitute,</b> and it is not known which is the thanks offering and which is the substitute, <b>and one of them died, the other has no remedy. What should we do?</b> If <b>we bring loaves with it,</b> this may be improper, because <b>perhaps it is a substitute,</b> which does not require loaves. If <b>we do not bring loaves with it,</b> this may be improper, because <b>perhaps it is the</b> actual <b>thanks offering,</b> which requires loaves.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this case? <b>If</b> it is a case where the owner <b>said:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring a thanks offering, in which case he is required to replace the thanks offering in the event of its loss, then why is there no remedy? Is it <b>not sufficient if he does not bring another animal and loaves, and says: If the one remaining</b> from the intermingled group <b>is the substitute,</b> then let <b>this</b> additional animal <b>be the thanks offering and these its loaves;</b> and <b>if the one remaining is the thanks offering,</b> then let it be the thanks offering and <b>these its loaves, and let this</b> additional animal <b>be its guarantee,</b> which does not require loaves?

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the statement of Rabbi Ḥiyya is <b>necessary</b> in a case in <b>which</b> one <b>said: This</b> animal <b>is</b> a thanks offering. Since he consecrated a specific animal as a thanks offering, he is not required to provide a guarantee in the event of its loss, and the above remedy is not applicable.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara raises a series of challenges with the statement of Rabbi Ḥiyya that if a thanks offering was intermingled with its substitute and one of them died, there is no remedy for the other. The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> for remembering the names of the Sages that raise these challenges: <b><i>Lemudim</i>,</b> i.e., Levi, who was known as <i>Lemedin</i> before Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi; <b><i>middat</i>,</b> i.e., Rav Yitzḥak bar Shmuel bar Marta; <b><i>ala</i>,</b> i.e., Ulla bar Abba; <b><i>shish</i>,</b> i.e., Rav Shisha, son of Rav Idi; <b><i>sheken</i>,</b> an acronym for Rav Ashi and Rav Kahana; <b><i>dedamah</i>,</b> i.e., Rav Dimi, son of Rav Huna of Dimhorya; <b><i>de’i</i>,</b> i.e., Ravina of Ikla. An additional mnemonic is provided for recalling the topics of these questions: <b><i>Ḥalash</i>,</b> a contraction of <i>ḥullin</i>, i.e., non-sacred items, and <i>shelamim</i>, peace offerings; <b>leftover; substitute; outside; Ḥizkiyya; separated a sin offering; for a guarantee.</b>

### Part 12
<b><i>Lemedin</i>,</b> i.e., Levi, <b>said before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>But</b> why is there no remedy in this case? <b>Let him bring loaves</b> for the thanks offering <b>and let him say: If this</b> animal <b>that is extant</b> from the intermingled pair <b>is the thanks offering,</b> then <b>these are its loaves,</b> and they will be consumed as the loaves of the thanks offering. And <b>if not,</b> i.e., if the extant animal is the substitute, which is sacrificed without loaves, then <b>let</b> these loaves <b>go out to</b> be consumed as <b>non-sacred</b> loaves. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him:</b> But the loaves of a thanks offering must be waved in the Temple courtyard, <b>and do we</b> intentionally <b>bring non-sacred</b> items <b>into the</b> Temple <b>courtyard?</b>

### Part 13
Levi challenges: <b>And let him bring</b> another <b>animal with loaves and let him say: If this</b> animal <b>that is extant is the substitute,</b> then let <b>this</b> additional animal be <b>the thanks offering and these its loaves. If this</b> animal <b>that is extant is the thanks offering,</b> then let <b>these</b> be <b>its loaves, and this</b> additional animal <b>should be a peace offering,</b> which does not require loaves. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him:</b> This cannot be done, <b>because he</b> thereby <b>reduces</b> the time period permitted <b>for consuming the peace offering,</b> which is generally two days and one night. A thanks offering may be consumed only on the day it is sacrificed and the following night.

### Part 14
<b>Levi said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>And let him bring</b> another <b>animal with loaves and let him say: If this</b> animal <b>that is extant is the substitute,</b> then let <b>this</b> be <b>the thanks offering and these its loaves. And if that</b> animal <b>that is extant is the thanks offering,</b> then let <b>these</b> be <b>its loaves and this will be the leftover of the thanks offering,</b> which does not require loaves. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: It seems to me that he has no brain in his skull.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC