
### Part 1
<b>But perhaps</b> the vow was to bring sixty-tenths of an ephah, in which case <b>the entire</b> meal offering <b>is</b> necessary to fulfill the <b>obligation.</b> Consequently, only one handful may be removed, and all the rest is considered the remainder. <b>And</b> there is a principle: <b>Whatever is partly</b> burned <b>in the fire</b> on the altar <b>is subject to</b> the prohibition of: <b>You may not make as an offering</b> (see Leviticus 2:11). This principle states that if part of an item, such as the blood of an animal offering or the handful of a meal offering, has been sacrificed, one who sacrifices any other part of it that is not designated for sacrifice has violated a prohibition. In this case, the second handful is considered part of the remainder of the meal offering, and burning it is prohibited.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shimon ben Pazi, said:</b> The priest does not burn the oil as an offering but <b>burns it for the sake of wood,</b> i.e., not as a sacrificial rite, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The verse states: “No meal offering that you shall bring unto the Lord shall be made with leaven; for you shall make no leaven, nor any honey, smoke from it as an offering made by fire unto the Lord. As an offering of first fruits you may bring them unto the Lord; but they shall not come up for a pleasing aroma on the altar” (Leviticus 2:11–12). This verse indicates that <b>you may not offer up</b> leaven and honey <b>as a pleasing aroma,</b> i.e., as an offering. <b>But you may offer up</b> leaven and honey and other substances <b>for the sake of wood,</b> not as an offering.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: But perhaps everyone agrees</b> that <b>it is permitted to mix</b> an offering that fulfills <b>an obligation</b> together <b>with a gift</b> offering, <b>and here</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis <b>disagree with regard to</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Eliezer</b> that it is permitted to burn on the altar as fuel even items that are prohibited from being burned as offerings. <b>As the Rabbis accept</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer,</b> and therefore they allow one to bring one meal offering of sixty-tenths of an ephah, since the handful removed from it may be burned, <b>and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>does not accept</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 4
Rav Ashi <b>said to him:</b> This cannot be the dispute, as <b>if it enters your mind</b> that <b>according to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>it is permitted to mix</b> an offering brought as <b>an obligation</b> together <b>with a gift</b> offering, <b>and he does not accept</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi would not require sixty separate vessels. Instead, <b>one could bring sixty-</b>tenths of an ephah <b>in one vessel, and one</b> additional tenth <b>in one</b> other <b>vessel,</b> from which the handful of the gift offering would be removed. <b>And</b> he could <b>touch them,</b> i.e., place them so they touch each other, so that they are considered as one, <b>and</b> the priest could then <b>remove a handful</b> from that tenth for the gift, and remove another handful from the vessel with sixty-tenths to fulfill the obligation.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said</b> that there is an alternative explanation of the dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: <b>Everyone agrees</b> that <b>it is permitted to mix</b> an offering brought as <b>an obligation</b> together <b>with a gift</b> offering, <b>and everyone accepts</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer. And here they disagree with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov and the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 6
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (88a): Each tenth of an ephah of flour requires one <i>log</i> of oil. Accordingly, <b>even</b> if one brings <b>a meal offering of sixty-tenths</b> of an ephah of flour, <b>one adds to it sixty <i>log</i></b> of oil. <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> Each meal offering, irrespective of its volume, <b>even a meal offering of sixty-tenths</b> of an ephah of flour, requires <b>only its</b> single <b><i>log</i></b> of oil, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the offering brought by a poor leper on the day of his purification: “And a tenth of an ephah of fine flour mixed with oil <b>for a meal offering, and a <i>log</i> of oil”</b> (Leviticus 14:21). The juxtaposition of “a meal offering” with “a <i>log</i> of oil” teaches a principle that pertains to all meal offerings, that each offering requires only one <i>log</i> of oil.

### Part 7
Rava explains: <b>The Rabbis</b> in the mishna <b>hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov and <b>who said:</b> A meal offering of sixty-tenths of an ephah requires <b>sixty <i>log</i></b> of oil. Therefore, in a case of uncertainty, it is possible to bring sixty-tenths of an ephah, <b>and each and every</b> measurement of <b>one-tenth takes</b> one <b><i>log</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, who said</b> that a meal offering of sixty-tenths of an ephah <b>has only its</b> one <b><i>log</i></b> of oil. <b>And</b> therefore, when one is uncertain about his vow and brings sixty-tenths, he cannot bring them with one <i>log</i> of oil, as <b>we do not know whether</b> the entire sixty-tenths <b>is one meal offering,</b> so <b>that one <i>log</i> suffices for it,</b> or <b>whether they are two meal offerings,</b> one that is obligatory and one that is a gift, <b>which require two <i>log</i></b> of oil. For this reason, there is no way of resolving the uncertainty except by bringing sixty separate meal offerings, with one <i>log</i> of oil for each.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> that there is alternative explanation of the disagreement between the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: <b>They disagree with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of one who is obligated to bring <b>a small</b> offering <b>and</b> instead <b>brings a large</b> offering. <b>The Rabbis hold</b> that if one is obligated to bring <b>a small</b> offering <b>and brings a large</b> one instead <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation, <b>and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that in such a case <b>he has not fulfilled</b> his obligation. Therefore, in the case of the uncertainty in the mishna, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that by bringing one meal offering of sixty-tenths of an ephah one does not fulfill his obligation if he vowed to bring a smaller offering.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t they</b> already <b>disagree about this</b> topic <b>once? As we learned</b> in a mishna (107b) that if one said: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a small</b> bull, <b>and he brought a large</b> bull instead, <b>he has fulfilled</b> his obligation, as the value of a small bull is included in the value of a large bull. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: He has not fulfilled</b> his obligation, as the offering that he brought did not correspond to his vow.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: It is <b>necessary</b> for the dispute to be mentioned with regard to both cases, <b>as had</b> their dispute <b>been stated</b> only <b>with regard to this</b> case of one who vows to bring a small meal offering and brings a large one instead, there would be room to reason that it is only <b>in this</b> case that <b>the Rabbis say</b> that he has fulfilled his obligation, <b>because</b> both <b>this</b> small meal offering <b>and that</b> large meal offering are identical with regard to the portion of the offering that is sacrificed on the altar; in both cases <b>it is a handful. But there,</b> in the case of one who vows to bring a small bull but brings a large one, <b>since the sacrificial portions are greater,</b> i.e., larger, there is room to <b>say</b> that the Rabbis <b>concede to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi that he has not fulfilled his obligation.

### Part 12
<b>And had</b> their dispute <b>been stated</b> only <b>in that</b> case of one who vows to bring a small bull and brings a big one, there would be room to reason that only <b>in that</b> case <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that the person has not fulfilled his obligation, because the sacrificial portions are larger. <b>But in this</b> case of bringing a large meal offering instead of a small one, there is room to <b>say</b> that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>concedes to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to teach both cases.

### Part 13
§ The Gemara gives <b>a mnemonic</b> for the <i>halakhot</i> discussed in the upcoming <i>mishnayot</i>: <b>Wood, gold, wine, burnt offering, thanks offering, bull.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One who says: <b>It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to donate pieces of <b>wood</b> as fuel for the altar, <b>must</b> donate <b>no fewer than two logs.</b> One who says: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>frankincense, must</b> bring <b>no less than a handful.</b>

### Part 15
The mishna states tangentially: <b>There are five</b> <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>handfuls. One who says:</b> It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring an offering of <b>frankincense, may not</b> bring <b>less than a handful. One who pledges</b> to bring <b>a meal offering must bring with it a handful of frankincense. One who</b> intentionally <b>offers up a handful</b> of a meal offering <b>outside</b> the Temple courtyard is <b>liable</b> to receive excision from the World-to-Come [<i>karet</i>]. The <b>two bowls</b> of frankincense that accompany the shewbread are <b>required</b> to have <b>two handfuls</b> of frankincense.

### Part 16
One who says: <b>It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to donate <b>gold</b> to the Temple treasury, <b>must</b> give <b>no less than a gold dinar.</b> One who says: It is incumbent upon me to donate <b>silver</b> to the Temple treasury, <b>must</b> give <b>no less than</b> the value of <b>a silver dinar.</b> One who says: It is incumbent upon me to donate <b>copper</b> to the Temple maintenance, <b>must</b> give <b>no less than</b> the value of <b>a silver <i>ma’a</i>.</b> One who says: <b>I specified</b> the amount of gold, silver, or copper, <b>but I do not know what I specified, must bring</b> the maximum amount of gold, silver, or copper, <b>until</b> it reaches an amount <b>where he says:</b> I am certain that <b>I did not intend to</b> donate <b>that</b> much.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to one who pledges to donate wood, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And when one brings a meal offering [<i>korban minḥa</i>]<b>”</b> (Leviticus 2:1). The superfluous word “<b><i>korban</i></b>” <b>teaches that one can voluntarily give wood</b> as an offering for the altar. <b>And how much</b> wood must one bring if he does not specify an amount? <b>Two logs. And</b> the support for the fact that wood can be brought as a voluntary offering is <b>as</b> the verse <b>states: “And we cast lots for the wood offering”</b> (Nehemiah 10:35). <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> This voluntary donation of <b>wood is an offering</b> like a meal offering, <b>and</b> therefore it <b>requires salt and requires bringing</b> to the corner of the altar, like a meal offering.

### Part 18
<b>Rava says: According to the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>wood</b> donated in this manner <b>requires</b> the <b>removal of a handful;</b> just as in the case of a meal offering, a portion of the wood must be removed and sacrificed separately. <b>And Rav Pappa says</b> that <b>according to the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, since it is an offering for the altar, the <b>wood</b> that is brought as an offering <b>needs</b> to be placed on other <b>wood</b> to burn, like any other offering that is burned on wood on the altar.

### Part 19
The mishna teaches: One who says: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>frankincense, may not</b> bring <b>less than a handful.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And he shall take up from it his handful, of the fine flour of the meal offering, and of its oil, and all the frankincense</b> which is upon the meal offering, and shall make the memorial part of it smoke upon the altar for an aroma pleasing to the Lord” (Leviticus 6:8). The Torah <b>juxtaposes</b> the <b>frankincense with the taking up</b> of a handful <b>of the meal offering.</b> This indicates that <b>just as</b> the <b>taking up from a meal offering</b> is referring to <b>a handful, so too,</b> the minimum size of <b>a frankincense</b> offering is <b>also a handful.</b>

### Part 20
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> which discusses vows to bring frankincense that one who says: <b>It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>to the altar,</b> and does not specify what he will bring, <b>must bring frankincense, as you have nothing that is</b> entirely <b>sacrificed on the altar other than frankincense.</b> One who says: <b>I specified</b> what I intended to bring to the altar, <b>but I do not know what I specified, must bring</b> one <b>of everything that is sacrificed on the altar.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: <b>And is there nothing else</b> that is entirely sacrificed on the altar other than frankincense? <b>But isn’t there a burnt offering,</b> which is entirely burned on the altar? The Gemara answers that <b>there is its hide,</b> which is given <b>to the priests</b> and not burned on the altar.

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there a bird burnt offering,</b> which is entirely burned on the altar, including its skin? The Gemara answers: <b>There are</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC