### Part 1
<b>states</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>that <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All the meal offerings where</b> one <b>increased the measure of their loaves or where</b> one <b>decreased the measure of their loaves</b> are nevertheless <b>fit, except for</b> the twelve loaves of <b>the shewbread and</b> the twelve loaves of <b>the High Priest’s griddle-cake</b> offering. <b>And some say: Even the</b> ten <b>loaves</b> of each variety <b>of the thanks offering and</b> the ten loaves that accompany the guilt offering of <b>naziriteship</b> are fit only when brought in their prescribed measures. Shmuel agrees with the first <i>tanna</i>, according to whom the loaves of the thanks offering and the loaves of naziriteship are fit even when not offered in the proper quantities.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Huna says:</b> With regard to an oven-<b>baked meal offering that</b> one <b>baked</b> as only <b>one loaf,</b> although he did not bring the mandated quantity, he has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. <b>What is the reason?</b> It is that the verse states with regard to the oven-baked meal offering: “And when you bring a meal offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened loaves of fine flour” (Leviticus 2:4). The term <b>“unleavened loaves [<i>matzot</i>]” is written</b> without the letter <i>vav</i>, which is generally used with regard to the plural form. Therefore, it may be read in the singular as <b>unleavened loaf [<i>matzat</i>],</b> which teaches that even one unleavened loaf is fit.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa objects to this</b> derivation: <b>The reason</b> Rav Huna gives is <b>that it is written</b> in the singular form of <b><i>matzat</i>. But</b> if it were <b>written: <i>Matzot</i>,</b> would this <b>not</b> be the <i>halakha</i>? <b>But</b> what about the verse <b>concerning the loaves of the thanks offering, where it is written “<i>matzot</i>”</b> with a <i>vav</i>, indicating the plural form, in the verse: “Then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened loaves mixed with oil” (Leviticus 7:12), <b>and</b> yet <b>Rav Tovi bar Kisna said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> In the case of <b>loaves of the thanks offering that were baked as four loaves,</b> such that each of the four varieties of loaves is baked as only one loaf, he has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> statement of Shmuel <b>disagrees</b> with the opinion of Rav Huna, according to whom four loaves are not fit for the thanks offering.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The <i>omer</i> offering,</b> i.e., the measure of barley brought as a communal offering on the sixteenth of Nisan, <b>would come</b> from <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour sifted <b>from three <i>se’a</i></b> of barley. <b>The two loaves</b> would come from <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah of flour sifted <b>from three <i>se’a</i></b> of wheat. <b>The shewbread</b> would come from <b>twenty-four tenths</b> of an ephah of flour sifted <b>from twenty-four <i>se’a</i></b> of wheat.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that according to the mishna, the relatively large amount of three <i>se’a</i> of barley is necessary to yield a single tenth of an ephah of flour for the <i>omer</i> offering? The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> it <b>comes from</b> the fresh <b>new</b> crop, which contains a large amount of refuse, <b>and</b> it <b>comes from barley,</b> which is coarser than wheat, <b>a choice tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>comes only from</b> a minimum of <b>three <i>se’a</i></b> of barley.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: Why does the mishna rule that <b>the two loaves</b> would come from <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah of flour sifted <b>from three <i>se’a</i></b> of wheat, whereas only a tenth of an ephah is used from the same amount of grain for the <i>omer</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the loaves <b>come from wheat,</b> which is of superior quality to barley, <b>although</b> they <b>come from</b> the <b>new</b> crop and require sifting, the grains are clean enough that <b>two-tenths</b> of an ephah <b>come from</b> the sifting of <b>three <i>se’a</i></b> of grain.

### Part 7
The mishna stated that <b>the shewbread</b> would come from <b>twenty-four tenths</b> of an ephah of flour sifted <b>from twenty-four <i>se’a</i></b> of wheat. <b>What is the reason?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> they <b>come from wheat, and</b> they <b>come from</b> the <b>old</b> crop, which contains relatively little refuse, the grains are so clean that <b>a choice tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>comes from one <i>se’a</i></b> of grain, and twenty-four tenths of an ephah come from twenty-four <i>se’a</i>.

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All the meal offerings where</b> one <b>increased the measure of their tenth</b> of an ephah of flour by collecting it with a vessel larger than a tenth of an ephah, <b>or where</b> one <b>decreased the measure of</b> their <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour by collecting it with a vessel smaller than a tenth of an ephah, <b>are disqualified.</b> If he <b>increased the measure of their <i>se’a</i></b> of grain <b>or decreased the measure of their <i>se’a</i></b> of grain, e.g., if he used two or four <i>se’a</i> instead of three, but sifted until he was left with the correct measure of a tenth of an ephah of flour, they are <b>fit</b> offerings. This is because the number of <i>se’a</i> mentioned in the mishna is necessary only for the optimal fulfillment of the mitzva, but is not indispensable.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The flour of <b>the <i>omer</i> was sifted with thirteen sifters,</b> each finer than its predecessor, and the flour that emerged from the final sifter was sacrificed. The flour of <b>the two loaves</b> was sifted <b>with twelve</b> sifters, <b>and</b> the flour of <b>the shewbread</b> was sifted <b>with eleven</b> sifters. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: They have no fixed</b> number of sifters; <b>rather,</b> it was <b>fine flour</b> that was <b>completely sifted</b> that <b>one would bring</b> for all of these offerings, <b>as it is stated: “And you shall take fine flour and bake it”</b> (Leviticus 24:5), indicating that one does not fulfill his obligation <b>until</b> the flour <b>will be completely sifted.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> When a fine sifter was used, the small, dust-like particles emerged and the fine flour was caught in the sifter, and when a coarse sifter was used, the fine flour emerged and the bran was caught in the sifter. With regard to the sifting of the flour, <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The sifting would begin <b>in</b> a sifter of <b>slight</b> holes, and the flour that remained would then be sifted <b>in</b> a sifter of <b>large</b> holes. The flour that emerged would again be sifted <b>in</b> a sifter with <b>slight</b> holes that were not quite as small as the first one with small holes, and again <b>in</b> a sifter of <b>large</b> holes that were not quite as large as the first one with large holes. All the sifting would proceed in this manner. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: There were thirteen sifters in the Temple, this</b> one <b>above,</b> i.e., preceding, <b>that</b> one, <b>and this</b> one <b>above that</b> one. The <b>highest</b> sifter would <b>collect bran,</b> parts of the kernel aside from the actual pure flour, and the <b>lowest</b> sifter would <b>collect fine flour.</b>

### Part 11
§ The mishna teaches that in contrast to the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>Rabbi Shimon says: They have no fixed</b> number of sifters; but the flour would be sifted as many times as was necessary, based on the verse: “And you shall take fine flour, and bake it.” In addition, <b>the Sages taught:</b> When the verse states with regard to the shewbread: “And you shall take <b>fine flour and bake it,”</b> this <b>teaches that fine flour is acquired</b> after it has been sifted for the baking of the shewbread.

### Part 12
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that even wheat</b> kernels may be purchased before they are ground and sifted? <b>The verse states: “And you shall take,”</b> indicating that the grain should be taken <b>in any case</b> and in any state. One <b>might</b> have thought that it is <b>so even for other meal offerings.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And you shall take fine flour and bake <b>it,”</b> indicating that the shewbread alone may be acquired as kernels <b>because</b> of <b>the sparing [<i>haḥissaḥon</i>].</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar says: What is</b> the meaning of: <b>Because</b> of <b>the sparing? Rabbi Elazar says: The Torah spared the money of the Jewish people.</b> Due to the large quantity of grain needed for the shewbread every week, purchasing sifted fine flour would be a substantial expense. The Gemara explains: <b>Where is the allusion</b> to this principle? It is found in a verse, <b>as it is written</b> that when the Jewish people were thirsty in the wilderness in the aftermath of Miriam’s death, God instructed Moses: “And speak to the rock before their eyes, so that it will give forth its water; and you shall bring forth to them water out of the rock; <b>so you shall give drink for the congregation and for their cattle”</b> (Numbers 20:8). Evidently, the miracle of extracting water from the rock was performed even for the purpose of providing water for the livestock.

### Part 14
end of chapter

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The flour for the loaves accompanying <b>the thanks offering would come</b> from a measure of <b>five Jerusalem <i>se’a</i> offering, which are</b> equivalent to <b>six wilderness</b> <i>se’a</i>. The <i>se’a</i> referred to in the Bible when the Jewish people were in the wilderness is smaller than the <i>se’a</i> used later in Jerusalem. This is equivalent to <b>two ephahs,</b> each <b>ephah</b> being <b>three</b> wilderness <b><i>se’a</i>.</b> These two ephahs are <b>twenty</b> measures of <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah. <b>Ten</b> of these tenths were used <b>to</b> make <b>leavened</b> loaves <b>and ten</b> of these tenths were used <b>to</b> make unleavened loaves, i.e., <b><i>matza</i>.</b>