
### Part 1
<b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi said: “They shall be” [<i>tihyena</i>] is written</b> with two instances of the letter <i>yod</i>. The superfluous <i>yod</i>, whose numerical value is ten, is interpreted to indicate that the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering must be prepared from ten tenths of flour. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>Say</b> that the superfluous <i>yod</i> indicates that the loaves must be prepared with <b>ten half-kav,</b> a smaller measure than ten tenths of an ephah? <b>Rava says:</b> One cannot say this, since <b>the verse</b> habitually <b>spoke of tenths</b> of an ephah and not other measures.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara continues its analysis of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>We have learned</b> that there are <b>ten</b> tenths of an ephah of flour <b>for the</b> loaves of <b>leavened bread</b> accompanying the thanks offering. <b>From where</b> is it derived that there are <b>ten</b> tenths of an ephah <b>for</b> the thirty loaves of <b><i>matza</i>? The verse states: “With cakes of leavened bread,”</b> after mentioning the three types of <i>matza</i> accompanying the thanks offering (Leviticus 7:12–13), indicating that one must <b>bring</b> the <b><i>matza</i></b> in a measure <b>corresponding to</b> the measure of the loaves of <b>leavened bread.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But can a matter that was derived by comparison</b> then <b>come back and teach</b> the matter <b>by comparison</b> with regard to consecrated matters? Since the <i>halakha</i> that the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering are prepared from ten tenths of an ephah is itself derived by comparison to the two loaves, can one then derive from it that the <i>matza</i> loaves of the thanks offering consist of ten tenths of an ephah? The Gemara responds: The <i>halakha</i> that the loaves of leavened bread consist of ten loaves made from ten tenths of an ephah is not derived solely by comparison to the two loaves; rather, <b>it is</b> derived <b>from itself,</b> as the <i>halakha</i> that there are ten loaves is stated in the verse concerning the thanks offering, <b>and</b> from <b>another matter, and any</b> <i>halakha</i> derived <b>from itself and</b> from <b>another matter is not</b> considered <b>a comparison.</b> Consequently, the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <i>matza</i> loaves may be derived from it.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that a <i>halakha</i> derived from itself and from another matter <b>does not constitute a comparison, but according to the one who says</b> that a <i>halakha</i> derived from itself and from another matter <b>does constitute a comparison, what is there to say?</b> The Gemara responds: According to that opinion, the <i>halakha</i> that each loaf is prepared from a tenth of an ephah is derived from that which the verse states with regard to the two loaves: <b>“You shall bring”</b> (Leviticus 23:17), which <b>is</b> a term of <b>amplification</b> that serves to teach that the loaves of leavened bread of the thanks offering consist of ten tenths of an ephah of flour. Since this <i>halakha</i> is derived not by comparison but by amplification from the two loaves, one can derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <i>matza</i> loaves by comparison to the loaves of leavened bread.

### Part 5
mishna The loaves that accompanied the ram of <b>the inauguration</b> of the Tabernacle <b>would come parallel to the</b> three types of <b><i>matza</i> that</b> accompany <b>the thanks offering: Loaves, wafers, and</b> loaves <b>poached</b> in water and made with oil (see Leviticus 8:26). The loaves of leavened bread that accompany the thanks offering were not brought with the ram of inauguration.

### Part 6
The loaves that accompany the offering that the nazirite brings upon completion of his period of <b>naziriteship would come</b> with only <b>two parts</b> of the three types of <i>matza</i> that accompany the thanks offering, namely, <b>loaves and wafers, but there is no</b> <i>matza</i> <b>poached</b> in water (see Numbers 6:15). <b>Consequently,</b> the loaves of the offering of a nazirite are from <b>ten <i>kav</i></b> of fine flour according to the <b>Jerusalem</b> measure, as taught in the previous mishna that each type of the loaves of <i>matza</i> comes from five <i>kav</i> of flour, <b>which</b> equal <b>six-and-two-thirds tenths</b> of an ephah according to the wilderness measure, as each type of the loaves of <i>matza</i> comes from three-and-one-third tenths of an ephah.

### Part 7
gemara The mishna teaches that the loaves that accompanied the ram of the inauguration of the Tabernacle consisted of the three types of <i>matza</i> brought with a thanks offering: Loaves, wafers, and loaves poached in water and made with oil. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Ḥisda said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥama bar Gurya said:</b> It is derived from <b>that</b> which <b>the verse states: “And out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before the Lord, he took one unleavened cake, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer”</b> (Leviticus 8:26). <b>Granted, “cakes”</b> are <b>cakes,</b> and <b>“wafer”</b> is <b>a wafer.</b> But <b>what is “oiled</b> bread” referring to? Is this <b>not</b> referring to <i>matza</i> <b>poached</b> in water and made with oil?

### Part 8
<b>Rav Avya objects to this:</b> One can <b>say</b> that “oiled bread” is referring to <b>a cake of oil. Rather,</b> derive it <b>as Rav Naḥman bar Rav Ḥisda taught in the name of Rabbi Tavla,</b> that the verse states: <b>“This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall bring to the Lord on the day when he is anointed:</b> The tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering perpetually, half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening. On a pan it shall be made with oil; when it is poached, you shall bring it in; in broken pieces shall you bring the meal offering for a pleasing aroma to the Lord. And the anointed priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons shall bring it” (Leviticus 6:13–15).

### Part 9
One can ask: <b>And what have we learned with regard to</b> Aaron’s <b>sons,</b> i.e., the ordinary priests, from the instructions for the High Priest <b>on the day that he is anointed? Rather,</b> the verse <b>juxtaposes</b> the meal offering brought by an ordinary priest during <b>his inauguration with</b> the meal offering brought by the High Priest when <b>he is anointed.</b> This juxtaposition teaches that <b>just as</b> the meal offering brought by the High Priest when <b>he is anointed is poached in water, so too</b> the meal offering brought by an ordinary priest during <b>his inauguration is poached in water.</b> Similarly, the loaves brought with the ram of the inauguration of the Tabernacle included loaves poached in water.

### Part 10
§ Concerning the matter of the High Priest’s meal offering on the day of his inaugural service in the Temple, <b>Rav Ḥisda says: A High Priest who approaches the</b> Temple <b>service</b> on the day that he is anointed is <b>required</b> to bring two meal offerings consisting of <b>two tenths of an ephah, one for</b> the fact that <b>he is anointed</b> as the High Priest and must bring the daily meal offering of the High Priest, <b>and one for his inauguration. Mar bar Rav Ashi says:</b> He requires <b>three</b> tenths of an ephah.

### Part 11
<b>And they do not disagree. This</b> one, Rav Ḥisda, is referring to a High Priest <b>who</b> already <b>performed</b> the Temple <b>service as an ordinary priest.</b> Accordingly, he has already brought a meal offering for his inauguration as an ordinary priest. He therefore brings only two tenths of flour, one for his inauguration as High Priest and one for the daily meal offering of the High Priest. And <b>that</b> one, Mar bar Rav Ashi, is referring to a High Priest <b>who has not</b> yet <b>performed</b> the Temple <b>service as an ordinary priest.</b> He must therefore bring three tenths, one for his inauguration as an ordinary priest, one for his inauguration as High Priest, and one for the daily meal offering of the High Priest.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: The loaves that accompany the offering that the nazirite brings upon completion of his period of <b>naziriteship would come</b> with only <b>two parts, parallel to the</b> types of <b><i>matza</i> that</b> come <b>with the thanks offering,</b> i.e., loaves and wafers, but not <i>matza</i> poached in water.

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to the loaves brought with a thanks offering: “If he sacrifices it for a thanks offering, then he shall sacrifice with the thanks offering unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour poached. With cakes of leavened bread he shall present his offering with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanks” (Leviticus 7:12–13). <b>“His peace offerings”</b> serves <b>to include the nazirite’s peace offering in</b> the <i>halakhot</i> that its accompanying meal offerings must consist of <b>ten Jerusalem <i>kav</i> and one-quarter</b> of a <i>log</i> <b>of oil,</b> just like the measurements required for the cakes and wafers of the thanks offering.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that the verse indicates that the meal offering of the nazirite’s peace offering is equivalent to the loaves of the thanks offering <b>concerning all that is stated with regard to the matter</b> of the thanks offering, and that one brings three types of <i>matza</i> consisting of fifteen Jerusalem <i>kav</i> and half a <i>log</i> of oil. Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> with regard to the nazirite’s peace offering: “And a basket of <b>unleavened bread,</b> loaves of fine flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil” (Numbers 6:15), to indicate that the nazirite’s meal offering consists only of <i>matza</i> loaves and <i>matza</i> wafers, and not <i>matza</i> poached in water.

### Part 15
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is the</b> biblical <b>derivation</b> by which “<i>matza</i>” indicates that loaves poached in water were not brought? <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> The verse indicates that the nazirite brings <i>matza</i> specifically from <b>an item of which it was stated: “<i>Matzot</i>.”</b> This serves <b>to exclude</b> loaves <b>poached in water, of which it is not stated: <i>Matzot</i>.</b> In addition, <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: “Unleavened bread”</b> is <b>a generalization; “loaves</b> of fine flour mingled with oil, <b>and</b> unleavened <b>wafers</b> spread with oil” <b>is a detail.</b> When the Torah states <b>a generalization and a detail, the generalization includes only what is in the detail.</b> Therefore, <b>loaves and wafers are</b> included in the nazirite’s meal offering, while <b>other items are not.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC