
### Part 1
If one said: It is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering from non-sacred</b> money <b>and its loaves from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money, <b>he must bring</b> the thanks offering <b>and its loaves from non-sacred</b> money. If one said: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money <b>and its loaves from non-sacred</b> money, <b>he may bring</b> it in that manner. Likewise, if one said: It is incumbent upon me to bring a thanks offering <b>and its loaves from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money, <b>he may bring</b> it in that manner. <b>And he may not bring</b> the loaves <b>from second-tithe wheat; rather,</b> he purchases the flour <b>with second-tithe money.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the various ways in which one can take a vow to bring a thanks offering and its loaves, <b>Rav Huna says: One who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>loaves of a thanks offering, must bring a thanks offering and its loaves,</b> even though he did not expressly take upon himself the obligation to bring the thanks offering itself. <b>What is the reason? This man knows that loaves are not brought without a thanks offering, and</b> by stating the vow in <b>this</b> manner, he was effectively <b>saying:</b> It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering and its loaves. And</b> the reason he <b>stated</b> his vow in <b>this</b> manner, namely, by saying: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>loaves of a thanks offering,</b> was that <b>he was citing the end of the matter,</b> as the sacrifice of a thanks offering is completed with the bringing of the loaves.

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty with the statement of Rav Huna from that which <b>we learned</b> in the mishna: If one said: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money <b>and its loaves from non-sacred</b> money, <b>he may bring</b> it <b>as he vowed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of Rav Huna that one who takes a vow to bring the loaves of a thanks offering intends to bring the thanks offering as well, <b>why</b> does the mishna state that he may bring the thanks offering from second-tithe money? <b>Since he said: Its loaves from non-sacred</b> money, <b>he should bring</b> a thanks offering <b>and its loaves from non-sacred</b> money.

### Part 4
The Gemara responds: <b>It is different there,</b> in the case of the mishna, <b>as since he said</b> initially: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money, and then said: And its loaves from non-sacred money, <b>he is considered as one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>loaves to exempt the thanks offering of so-and-so.</b> His vow to bring the loaves is not considered a new vow, but rather as a vow to bring loaves for the specific offering he vowed to bring.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> then with regard to <b>the first clause</b> of the mishna, <b>which teaches</b> that if one says: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering from non-sacred</b> money <b>and its loaves from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money, then <b>he must bring</b> the thanks offering <b>and its loaves from non-sacred</b> money, <b>here too</b> let it be said that <b>he is considered as one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering to exempt the loaves of so-and-so,</b> and he therefore should bring a thanks offering from second tithe. His initial vow to bring a thanks offering from non-sacred money should not include the bringing of the loaves.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? Granted,</b> in a case where one says: It is incumbent upon me to bring a thanks offering from second-tithe money and its loaves from non-sacred money, it can be said that he intends that the loaves should be brought to complete the vow of one who is obligated to bring a thanks offering, because <b>loaves come to exempt the thanks offering.</b> But in a case where one says: It is incumbent upon me to bring a thanks offering from non-sacred money and its loaves from second-tithe money, it cannot be said that the thanks offering is meant to complete the vow of one who is obligated to bring the loaves of a thanks offering, as <b>does a thanks offering come to exempt the loaves?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara continues to discuss the statement of Rav Huna that one who says: It is incumbent upon me to bring loaves of a thanks offering, must bring a thanks offering and its loaves. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a <i>baraita</i> that contradicts the opinion of Rav Huna: In the case of <b>one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering without loaves, or</b> an animal <b>offering without libations,</b> the court <b>coerces him, and he brings a thanks offering with its loaves,</b> or <b>an offering with its libations.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that he is coerced to bring a thanks offering with its loaves is <b>that he said</b> that it is incumbent upon himself to bring a thanks offering. <b>But</b> if <b>he did not say</b> that it is incumbent upon himself to bring <b>a thanks offering,</b> but instead said that it is incumbent upon himself to bring the loaves of a thanks offering, he would <b>not</b> be coerced to bring a thanks offering with the loaves, in contradiction to the opinion of Rav Huna.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this: Actually, <b>the same is true even if he did not say</b> that it is incumbent upon himself to bring <b>a thanks offering,</b> but said only: It is incumbent upon me to bring the loaves. <b>And</b> this is the reason that the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> mentions specifically the case of one who renders himself obligated to bring a thanks offering without loaves: <b>Since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach</b> the case of one who renders himself obligated to bring an animal <b>offering without libations,</b> concerning <b>which</b> he could <b>not teach</b> a case where one renders himself obligated to bring <b>libations without an offering,</b> because, unlike the loaves of a thanks offering, libations are in fact brought on their own and one can take a vow to bring them on their own, <b>he</b> therefore <b>also taught</b> the case of one who renders himself obligated to bring <b>a thanks offering.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara addresses the actual statement of the <i>baraita</i> and asks: <b>Why</b> is he coerced to bring a thanks offering and its loaves? Isn’t <b>this</b> an instance of <b>a vow with its</b> inherent <b>opening?</b> That is, the vow should be dissolved entirely on the grounds that the one who took the vow may claim that he thought it was possible to bring a thanks offering without loaves, and now that he has been made aware that he cannot, he regrets taking the vow.

### Part 11
<b>Ḥizkiyya said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>baraita</i>? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, who say:</b> In the case of one who stated a declaration comprising two contradictory statements, <b>attend</b> to only <b>the first statement. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nazir</i> 9a): If one says: <b>I am hereby a nazirite from dried figs and from</b> pressed <b>figs,</b> which is a contradictory statement, as figs are not prohibited to a nazirite, <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> He is a full-fledged <b>nazirite,</b> as one attends only to the first statement, i.e., I am hereby a nazirite, and the second part is discounted. <b>And Beit Hillel say:</b> The second part of his statement is not discounted, and therefore <b>he is not a nazirite,</b> as he did not accept naziriteship upon himself.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel,</b> and the ruling of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>with regard to one who says: Had I known that one does not vow</b> in <b>this</b> manner, i.e., to bring a thanks offering without loaves or an animal offering without libations, <b>I would not have vowed</b> in <b>this</b> manner <b>but</b> in <b>that</b> manner, i.e., I would have vowed to bring a thanks offering with its loaves. There is therefore no opening for a dissolution. <b>And what</b> does the <i>baraita</i> mean when it states that the court <b>coerces</b> him? Why would he require coercion if he says that he would have willingly taken the proper vow? The <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where,</b> despite the fact that he would have taken the proper vow initially, <b>he</b> now <b>wants to retract his</b> vow altogether.

### Part 13
The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> in support of the response of Ḥizkiyya: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear:</b> In a case involving <b>one who says: It</b> is incumbent <b>upon me</b> to bring <b>a thanks offering without loaves, or:</b> It is incumbent upon me to bring an animal <b>offering without libations, and</b> the Sages <b>said to him: Bring a thanks offering with its loaves, or:</b> Bring an animal <b>offering with its libations, and he says: Had I known that such</b> is the requirement <b>I would not have vowed</b> at all; the <i>halakha</i> is that the court <b>coerces him, and says to him: “Observe and hear”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:28).

### Part 14
The Gemara continues: <b>Granted,</b> this <b>works out well according to Ḥizkiyya,</b> who says that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai that one attends only to the first statement, since this <i>baraita</i> can also be explained in accordance with the opinion of Beit Shammai. <b>But according to Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> who says that the <i>baraita</i> discusses a case where the person who took the vow says: Had I known that one does not vow in this manner I would have vowed to bring a thanks offering with its loaves, this <i>baraita</i> presents <b>a difficulty,</b> as although the individual claims that he would not have taken any vow, he must still bring a thanks offering and its loaves. The Gemara responds: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> could have <b>said to you: This</b> latter <i>baraita</i> <b>is certainly</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> but the previous <i>baraita</i> may still be explained in accordance with the opinion of Beit Hillel.

### Part 15
The Gemara turns to analyze the <i>baraita</i> itself: <b>What</b> is the relevance of the phrase in the verse that says: <b>“Observe and hear,”</b> to one who vows to bring a thanks offering without its loaves? <b>Abaye says: “Observe”</b> means: <b>Bring a thanks offering; “and hear”</b> means: <b>Bring its loaves. Rava says: “Observe”</b> means: <b>Bring a thanks offering and its loaves; “and hear”</b> means <b>that you should not act</b> in <b>this</b> manner <b>regularly.</b>

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches that if one states: It is incumbent upon me to bring <b>a thanks offering and its loaves from</b> second-<b>tithe</b> money, <b>he shall bring</b> it in that manner. The Gemara asks: Why does the mishna teach: <b>He shall bring,</b> which suggests that he must bring the thanks offering and loaves from second-tithe money? Is it <b>not sufficient</b> to fulfill his vow even <b>if he does not bring</b> it from second-tithe money but from non-sacred money? In fact, it is preferable that he bring the offering from non-sacred money. <b>Rav Naḥman and Rav Ḥisda say:</b> The mishna does not mean that he must bring it specifically from second-tithe money; rather, if he <b>wants, he brings</b> it from second-tithe money, and if he <b>does not want, he does not</b> need to <b>bring</b> it from second-tithe money.

### Part 17
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And he may not bring</b> the loaves <b>from second-tithe wheat; rather,</b> he purchases the flour <b>with second-tithe money.</b> With regard to this, <b>Rav Naḥman and Rav Ḥisda both say:</b> The mishna <b>taught only</b> that the loaves may not be brought <b>from second-tithe wheat</b> itself, <b>but he may bring</b> the loaves <b>from wheat purchased with second-tithe money.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Yirmeya was sitting before Rabbi Zeira, and he was sitting and saying:</b> The mishna <b>taught only</b> that the loaves may not be brought <b>from second-tithe wheat</b> itself, <b>but he may bring</b> the loaves <b>from wheat purchased from second-tithe money.</b> Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: My teacher,</b> do <b>you say so? I say</b> that <b>he may not bring</b> the loaves <b>even from wheat purchased from second-tithe money. And I will say my reasoning and I will say your reasoning. I will say your reasoning</b> first: <b>From where do you derive</b> that the loaves of <b>a thanks offering</b> may be brought from wheat purchased with second-tithe money? You derive it from the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a peace offering.</b> A thanks offering is a type of peace offering, as the verse states: “And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanks” (Leviticus 7:15), and a peace offering may be brought from second-tithe money.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC