
### Part 1
Rav Sheshet notes: The entire process of the replacement of the shewbread is taught in the mishna, <b>and yet</b> the statement: A priest <b>raises the Table</b> above the ground so that the bowls of frankincense can be properly removed from them, <b>is not taught.</b> One can therefore conclude from the mishna that just as the bowls of frankincense are removed from a vessel that is resting upon the ground, i.e., the Table, so too, one may remove a handful of a meal offering from a vessel that is resting upon the ground.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Didn’t you</b> already <b>say there,</b> with regard to the mishna that discusses improper intentions expressed during the service of a meal offering (12a), that the <i>tanna</i> <b>cited</b> only <b>the order of</b> sacrificial <b>rites? Here too,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>cited</b> only <b>the order of</b> sacrificial <b>rites.</b> Therefore, one cannot prove from here that there is no requirement to raise the Table.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Are</b> these <i>mishnayot</i> <b>comparable? There,</b> on 12a, the <i>tanna</i> <b>did not delve into the number of priests</b> involved in the service of a meal offering. <b>Here,</b> on 99b, the <i>tanna</i> <b>does</b> in fact <b>delve into the number of priests</b> involved in the service of the shewbread. Therefore, <b>if it is so,</b> i.e., if the Table must be raised before the bowls of frankincense are removed, <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach</b> that another priest <b>raises</b> the Table. <b>Rather, conclude from</b> the mishna that <b>one may remove a handful</b> of a meal offering <b>from a vessel that</b> is resting <b>upon</b> the <b>ground.</b> The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from</b> here that this is so.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rava said:</b> It is <b>obvious to me</b> that a priest may <b>remove a handful from a vessel that</b> is resting <b>upon</b> the <b>ground, as we find</b> such an instance <b>in</b> the case of <b>the removal of</b> the <b>bowls</b> of frankincense from the Table of the shewbread, since the Table is resting upon the ground of the Sanctuary when they are removed. Similarly, <b>one can sanctify a meal offering in a vessel that</b> is resting <b>upon</b> the <b>ground, as we find</b> such an instance <b>in</b> the case of <b>the arrangement of</b> the <b>bowls</b> of frankincense upon the Table of the shewbread.

### Part 5
<b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to the <b>sanctification of a handful</b> by placing it in a vessel that is resting upon the ground, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Do <b>we derive</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the sanctification of <b>a meal offering,</b> in which case one can sanctify a handful in this manner, just as he can do so with a meal offering? <b>Or</b> do <b>we derive it from</b> the collection of the <b>blood</b> of an offering, in which case one cannot do so, just as the blood of an offering may not be collected in a vessel that is resting upon the ground? Rava <b>then resolves</b> the dilemma: <b>We derive it from</b> the collection of the <b>blood.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And did Rava</b> really <b>say this,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the sanctification of a handful is derived from the collection of the blood? <b>But it was stated:</b> With regard to a full measure of <b>a handful that</b> a priest <b>divided</b> and placed <b>in two vessels, Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>it is not sanctified, and Rava says</b> that it is <b>sanctified. And if it is so</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of the handful is derived from the collection of the blood, then <b>let</b> Rava <b>derive from blood</b> that the handful is not sanctified in this manner, just as the blood is not sanctified when divided into two. The Gemara responds: <b>Rava retracted that</b> statement and ruled that a handful is not sanctified when divided and placed into two vessels.

### Part 7
The Gemara further discusses the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the collection of the blood. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>blood, from where do we</b> derive <b>that it is not sanctified in halves,</b> i.e., when collected in two vessels? It is derived from <b>that</b> which <b>Rav Taḥlifa ben Shaul teaches</b> with regard to the water of purification: If the priest <b>sanctified</b> the water in two vessels in such a manner that he sanctified <b>less than the amount of sprinkling in this vessel,</b> i.e., there was not enough water into which he could dip a bundle of hyssop and sprinkle the water with it, <b>and</b> he sanctified <b>less than the amount of sprinkling in that vessel,</b> then <b>he has not sanctified</b> the water. Even if he subsequently combines the contents of both vessels into a single vessel, the water is not sanctified.

### Part 8
The Gemara continues: <b>And a dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>With regard to</b> the collection of <b>blood</b> of a sin offering for the purpose of sprinkling it upon the altar, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Is</b> the ruling with regard to the water of purification <b>a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai, in which case the <i>halakha</i> with regard to blood may not be derived from it, as <b>we do not derive</b> other cases <b>from a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai?

### Part 9
The Gemara explains the other side of the dilemma: <b>Or perhaps, there,</b> in the case of the water of purification, <b>what is the reason</b> that it is not sanctified? It is possible that the reason is <b>that it is written</b> in a verse that is referring to the water initially placed in the vessel: <b>“And dip it in the water”</b> (Numbers 19:18). If this verse is the source of the <i>halakha</i> that the hyssop may be dipped in the water of purification only when there was initially enough water in the vessel for sprinkling, then <b>here too,</b> in the case of the blood of a sin offering, <b>isn’t it written: “And</b> the priest <b>shall dip</b> his finger <b>in the blood”</b> (Leviticus 4:6)?

### Part 10
The Gemara continues: <b>And it was stated</b> with regard to this dilemma: <b>Rabbi Zerika says</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Even in</b> the case of the <b>blood, one has not sanctified</b> it if he collected less than a full measure of blood in a single vessel. <b>Rava said</b> that <b>this is also taught in</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to</b> the bull of <b>the anointed priest.</b> The verse states: “And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood” (Leviticus 4:6). From the term <b>“And</b> the priest <b>shall dip”</b> it is derived that there must be enough blood inside the vessel in which to dip his finger, <b>and</b> there should <b>not</b> be so little blood that he must resort to <b>wiping</b> his finger along the walls of the vessel.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Additionally, from the term <b>“in the blood”</b> it is derived <b>that there should initially be in</b> the vessel containing <b>the blood a measure</b> fit for <b>dipping</b> his finger. Furthermore, it is derived from the term <b>“of the blood”</b> that he must sprinkle <b>from the blood of the matter,</b> as will be explained.

### Part 12
<b>And it was necessary</b> for the Merciful One <b>to write: “And</b> the priest <b>shall dip,” and it was necessary</b> for the Merciful One <b>to write: “In the blood,”</b> despite the fact that both terms are referring to the amount of blood that must be in the vessel. <b>Because if the Merciful One had written</b> only: <b>“And</b> the priest <b>shall dip,” I would say</b> that it is enough if the vessel contains enough blood for even one sprinkling, <b>even though</b> the priest <b>did not initially collect a measure</b> fit for all of the <b>sprinklings, that is,</b> enough with which to <b>sprinkle seven times.</b> Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “In the blood.”</b>

### Part 13
<b>And if the Merciful One had written</b> only: <b>“In the blood,” I would say</b> that if there was initially a full measure collected in the vessel then the sprinkling is valid <b>even</b> if now the priest must resort to <b>wiping</b> his finger. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “And</b> the priest <b>shall dip,”</b> indicating that the priest must be able to dip his finger into the blood and not have to wipe it on the walls of the vessel.

### Part 14
The Gemara returns to the last statement of the <i>baraita</i>, that the priest must sprinkle <b>from the blood of the matter.</b> This statement serves <b>to exclude what? Rava said:</b> It serves <b>to exclude</b> the <b>remainder</b> of blood <b>on</b> his <b>finger</b> from the previous sprinkling, i.e., the priest must dip his finger into the blood before each sprinkling; he may not sprinkle with the blood that remains on his finger from the previous sprinkling. The Gemara notes: This <b>supports</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar, who says</b> that the <b>remainder</b> of blood <b>that</b> remained <b>on</b> the priest’s <b>finger is unfit</b> for sprinkling.

### Part 15
<b>Ravin bar Rav Adda said to Rava: Your students say</b> that <b>Rav Amram says</b> that <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where a priest <b>was sprinkling</b> from the blood of a sin offering <b>and</b> the blood of the <b>sprinkling sprayed from his hand</b> onto a garment, the <i>halakha</i> is as follows: <b>If</b> the blood sprayed onto the garment <b>before he sprinkled,</b> the garment <b>requires laundering,</b> as is the <i>halakha</i> when the blood of a sin offering that is fit for sprinkling fell on a garment. But if the blood sprayed onto the garment <b>after he</b> had already <b>sprinkled,</b> it <b>does not require laundering.</b>

### Part 16
Ravin bar Rav Adda asks: <b>What, is it not</b> correct to say that this means if the blood sprayed onto the garment <b>before he completed</b> all of <b>his sprinkling,</b> then the garment requires laundering, <b>and</b> if the blood sprayed onto the garment <b>after he completed his sprinkling,</b> then the garment does not require laundering? If so, one can <b>conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>that</b> the <b>remainder</b> of blood <b>that</b> remained <b>on</b> his <b>finger</b> between each sprinkling is <b>fit</b> for sprinkling, as otherwise, it would not result in a requirement to launder a garment upon which it sprayed.

### Part 17
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is saying that if the blood sprayed from his hand onto the garment <b>before</b> any particular <b>sprinkling left his hand,</b> the garment <b>requires laundering. But</b> if the blood was sprayed <b>after a sprinkling left his hand,</b> in which case the blood <b>sprayed from that which remained</b> on his finger following that sprinkling, then the garment <b>does not require laundering,</b> as the blood left on his finger was already rendered unfit for sprinkling.

### Part 18
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava from a mishna discussing the red heifer (<i>Para</i> 3:9): When the priest has <b>completed sprinkling</b> the blood of the red heifer toward the entrance to the Sanctuary, <b>he wipes his hand</b> from the blood <b>on the body of the heifer.</b> Abaye explains his objection: The mishna states that when the priest <b>completed</b> all the sprinklings, then <b>yes,</b> he wipes his hand. It may be inferred that if he <b>did not complete</b> the sprinklings, he does <b>not</b> wipe his hand, even though blood remains on his finger from each preceding sprinkling. This proves that the blood that remains on his finger is fit for sprinkling.

### Part 19
Rava <b>said to</b> Abaye: The mishna means that when the priest <b>completed</b> all of the sprinklings, <b>he wipes his hand.</b> If he has <b>not</b> yet <b>completed</b> all of them, then he does not wipe his hand but he must <b>wipe his finger</b> to remove the blood after each sprinkling, as that blood is no longer fit for subsequent sprinklings.

### Part 20
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Granted,</b> after <b>he completed</b> all the sprinklings <b>he wipes his hand on the body of the heifer, as it is written: “And the heifer shall be burned in his sight;</b> her skin, and her flesh, and her blood” (Numbers 19:5), which indicates that the blood of the red heifer must be burned together with its flesh. <b>But</b> if when the priest had <b>not</b> yet <b>completed</b> the sprinklings <b>he wipes his finger,</b> then <b>with what</b> does he <b>wipe? Because if you say</b> that he wipes his finger <b>on the body of the heifer,</b> the mishna <b>should have taught:</b> He <b>wipes his hand and his finger on the body of the heifer.</b> Rather, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the mishna <b>does not teach this,</b> that he wipes his finger on the body of the heifer, one can <b>conclude from</b> this mishna <b>that</b> his finger <b>does not require wiping</b> between sprinklings.

### Part 21
<b>Abaye said:</b> He wipes his finger <b>on the edge of</b> the <b>bowl</b> containing the blood, <b>as it is written: “Atoning bowls [<i>keforei</i>] of gold”</b> (Ezra 1:10), which is referring to the bowls containing the blood. The root <i>kafar</i> can also mean to wipe.

### Part 22
§ The Gemara returns to the issue of the sanctification of blood collected in two vessels: <b>And did Rabbi Elazar</b> really <b>say this,</b> that blood is sanctified only when a full measure is initially collected in a single vessel? <b>But it was stated</b> with regard to the <b>High Priest’s griddle-cake</b> offering: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>it is not sanctified in halves,</b> i.e., if half of a tenth of an ephah was placed in one vessel, and a second half in another vessel, neither is sanctified. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Since it is sacrificed in halves,</b> as half of the meal offering is sacrificed in the morning and half in the afternoon, it may be <b>sanctified in halves.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC