
### Part 1
<b>the illumination of</b> the <b>eastern</b> horizon <b>permits</b> the new crop.

### Part 2
The Gemara notes: <b>And this</b> statement <b>of Reish Lakish was not stated explicitly; rather, it was stated by inference,</b> i.e., it is evident from a different statement of Reish Lakish that this is his opinion. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (68b): <b>One may not bring a meal offering, the first fruits, or the meal offering</b> brought with the libations accompanying <b>an animal</b> offering, from the new crop, <b>prior to</b> the sacrifice of <b>the <i>omer</i>.</b> The Gemara interrupts its citation of the mishna to add that the reason is <b>that we require</b> that an offering be <b>“from the well-watered pastures of Israel,”</b> i.e., it must be brought from that which is permitted to the Jewish people, and the new crop has not yet been permitted to them. The mishna concludes: <b>And if he brought</b> these offerings from the new crop they are <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 3
The mishna continues: After the <i>omer</i> but <b>prior to the two loaves one may not bring</b> those offerings from the new crop. The Gemara explains that this is <b>because</b> the two loaves <b>are called first fruits,</b> and therefore they should precede all other offerings from the new crop. The mishna adds: <b>But if he brought</b> those offerings from the new crop, they are <b>fit.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And Rav Yitzḥak says</b> that <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that a meal offering that was brought from the new crop before the <i>omer</i> meal offering is disqualified <b>only</b> if it was brought <b>on the fourteenth or on the fifteenth</b> of Nisan. <b>But</b> if it was <b>on the sixteenth,</b> then even <b>if he brought</b> it prior to the <i>omer</i> meal offering, it is <b>valid.</b> He continues: <b>And</b> this statement poses <b>a difficulty for me:</b> Why should meal offerings be valid when sacrificed on the sixteenth if they were sacrificed before the <i>omer</i> meal offering? <b>Let them be</b> considered <b>like</b> offerings <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived. The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently,</b> Reish Lakish <b>holds</b> that <b>the illumination of the eastern</b> horizon <b>permits</b> the new crop.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara previously cited the opinion of Rav that an <i>omer</i> meal offering from which a handful was removed not for its own sake is disqualified. The Gemara also cited the opinion of Reish Lakish that this meal offering is valid but another <i>omer</i> meal offering is necessary to permit the new crop for consumption. <b>And Rava says:</b> With regard to <b>an <i>omer</i> meal offering</b> from <b>which</b> the priest <b>removed a handful not for its own sake,</b> it is <b>valid and its remainder is consumed, and it does not require another <i>omer</i> meal offering to permit it</b> for consumption. The reason is <b>that</b> improper <b>intent is effective [<i>mo’elet</i>]</b> to disqualify an offering <b>only</b> when it is expressed <b>by one who is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service, and with regard to an item that is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service, and in a place that is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service.</b>

### Part 6
Rava elaborates: The condition that improper intent disqualifies only when expressed <b>by one who is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> the intent of <b>a blemished priest,</b> who is disqualified from performing the Temple service. The condition that it disqualifies only when expressed <b>with regard to an item that is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service</b> serves <b>to exclude the <i>omer</i> meal offering, which</b> is generally <b>unfit</b> for the Temple service, <b>as it is a novelty,</b> in that it is brought from barley whereas most meal offerings are brought from wheat. <b>And</b> finally, the condition that it disqualifies only when expressed <b>in a place that is fit for the</b> Temple <b>service</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> sacrificial rites that were performed with improper intent while <b>the altar was damaged.</b> At such a time improper intent does not disqualify an offering, and therefore if the altar is repaired on the same day, the offering may be sacrificed upon the altar.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara discusses the prohibition against sacrificing an item that is prohibited to the Jewish people. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: It is derived from a passage in the Torah that discusses burnt offerings: “You shall bring your offering from the cattle, even from the herd or from the flock” (Leviticus 1:2), that certain animals are prohibited for sacrifice upon the altar (see <i>Temura</i> 28a). <b>When it states later,</b> in the next verse: “If his offering is a burnt offering <b>of the herd”</b> (Leviticus 1:3), this is difficult, <b>as</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state</b> this, as it was already written earlier. <b>Rather,</b> this serves <b>to exclude an animal with a wound that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>]</b> from being brought as an offering.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> questions the need for this derivation: <b>But could this not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference? And if a blemished</b> animal, <b>which is permitted to an ordinary person [<i>lehedyot</i>]</b> for consumption, is nevertheless <b>prohibited</b> as an offering <b>for the Most High</b> (see Leviticus 22:19), then certainly with regard to <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, which is forbidden to an ordinary person</b> for consumption (see Exodus 22:30), <b>is it not logical that it is prohibited for the Most High?</b> The <i>baraita</i> responds: <b>Fat [<i>ḥelev</i>] and blood prove</b> that this <i>a fortiori</i> inference is not valid, <b>as they are forbidden to an ordinary person and</b> yet <b>they are permitted for the Most High.</b>

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> rejects this suggestion: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about fat and blood?</b> They are notable <b>in that they come from</b> an item that is <b>generally permitted,</b> i.e., the animal from which they come is itself permitted for consumption. Will <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to a <i>tereifa</i>, which is entirely forbidden</b> for eating, <b>and</b> therefore <b>should not be permitted for the Most High?</b>

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> responds: The <b>pinching</b> of bird offerings <b>will prove</b> that one cannot derive by means of an <i>a fortiori</i> inference that a <i>tereifa</i> is disqualified. <b>As</b> a bird killed by the pinching of its nape is also <b>entirely forbidden, and</b> yet although it is <b>forbidden</b> for consumption <b>to an ordinary person,</b> as it is rendered a carcass, it is nevertheless <b>permitted for the Most High,</b> as bird offerings are killed by the pinching of their napes. The verse is therefore necessary to disqualify a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> rejects this suggestion as well: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about pinching?</b> It is notable <b>in that its sanctity prohibits it,</b> i.e., only <b>at the time</b> when <b>it</b> becomes <b>sanctified for the altar</b> does <b>it</b> become <b>prohibited</b> for consumption <b>to an ordinary person, which is</b> at the time of <b>its pinching. But before this</b> time it is <b>not</b> yet <b>prohibited to an ordinary person</b> for consumption. This <b>is not the case with regard to a <i>tereifa</i>, as its sanctity does not prohibit it</b> for consumption, since it is always prohibited to eat it. Accordingly, by logical inference alone one can arrive at the conclusion that a <i>tereifa</i> should not be permitted for the Most High.

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> concludes with a statement that will soon be explained: <b>And if you have responded,</b> i.e., if you succeeded in rejecting the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, then <b>when</b> the verse <b>states later: “Of the herd”</b> (Leviticus 1:3), <b>as</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state</b> this phrase, it serves <b>to exclude a <i>tereifa</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> response is alluded to by the statement: <b>If you have responded?</b> The conclusion of the <i>baraita</i> had indicated that the <i>a fortiori</i> inference must be accepted. The Gemara cites several suggestions, for which it provides the following <b>mnemonic: <i>Rekiaḥ</i>, <i>Mar</i>, <i>Adda</i>, <i>Leshisheih</i>.</b> These terms allude to the names of some of the Sages mentioned in the following discussion: Rav; Rabbi Akiva; Rav Aḥa; Mar, son of Ravina; Rav Adda; and Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi.

### Part 14
<b>Rav said</b> that this is the response: The <i>halakha</i> that a <i>tereifa</i> is unfit for sacrifice must be derived from a verse <b>because it may be said</b> that <b>the <i>omer</i> meal offering proves</b> that the <i>halakha</i> concerning a <i>tereifa</i> cannot be derived by the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>as</b> the <i>omer</i> is <b>prohibited</b> for consumption <b>to an ordinary person,</b> since it comes from the new crop, <b>and</b> yet it is <b>permitted</b> as an offering <b>for the Most High.</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about the <i>omer</i> meal offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>renders</b> the <b>new</b> crop <b>permitted</b> for consumption, whereas a <i>tereifa</i> does not render anything permitted.

### Part 15
The Gemara responds: Although the <i>omer</i> meal offering generally renders the new crop permitted, the <i>omer</i> brought <b>during a Sabbatical Year</b> does not render the crop permitted, as it is prohibited to plant during the Sabbatical Year, and consequently there is no new crop for the <i>omer</i> offering to permit. The Gemara counters this suggestion: The <i>omer</i> meal offering brought during <b>a Sabbatical Year also</b> renders something permitted, <b>as it permits produce that grew without being purposely planted [<i>sefiḥin</i>] during the Sabbatical Year.</b> The Gemara responds: Nevertheless, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says</b> that <b><i>sefiḥin</i> are prohibited during the Sabbatical Year,</b> the <i>omer</i> meal offering brought during a Sabbatical Year does not render the new crop permitted for consumption, and yet it is permitted for the Most High. A verse is therefore necessary to derive that a <i>tereifa</i> may not be sacrificed.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Abba said to Rav Ashi: According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva as well, let us refute</b> the statement of Rav, as <b>what</b> is notable <b>about the <i>omer</i> meal offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>permits</b> the <b>new</b> crop for consumption <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, where the prohibitions of the Sabbatical Year do not apply.

### Part 17
<b>And even according to the one who says</b> that the consumption of produce from the <b>new</b> crop grown <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael is <b>not</b> prohibited <b>by Torah law,</b> Rav’s statement can be refuted in another manner: What is notable about the <i>omer</i> meal offering? It is notable <b>in that</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>comes to permit a prohibition</b> that applies to a substance <b>that</b> was previously <b>within it,</b> i.e., the burning upon the altar of a handful from the <i>omer</i> meal offering renders the remainder of the meal offering permitted to the priests, whereas a <i>tereifa</i> is entirely forbidden.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Aḥa of Difti said to Ravina:</b> This is not a refutation, as, <b>if that is so,</b> then with regard to <b>a <i>tereifa</i> as well, you should sacrifice</b> it <b>and you will</b> thereby <b>permit a prohibition</b> that applies to a substance <b>that</b> was previously <b>within it,</b> and its meat will become permitted to the priests for consumption. Therefore, a verse is needed to exclude a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>Rather,</b> one can <b>refute</b> the statement of Rav <b>like this: What</b> is notable <b>about the <i>omer</i> meal offering?</b> It is notable <b>in that its mitzva is in this</b> manner, i.e., the Torah requires the <i>omer</i> meal offering to be brought from the new crop in order to permit the new crop for consumption. By contrast, there is no mitzva to sacrifice specifically a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 19
<b>Reish Lakish said</b> that this is the response alluded to at the end of the <i>baraita</i>: The <i>halakha</i> that a <i>tereifa</i> is unfit for sacrifice must be derived from a verse <b>because it can be said</b> that <b>the one who prepares the incense proves</b> that the <i>halakha</i> concerning a <i>tereifa</i> may not be derived by the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>as</b> this is <b>prohibited to an ordinary person, and</b> is nevertheless <b>permitted for the Most High.</b> The Gemara questions the terminology of Reish Lakish: But <b>the one who prepares</b> the incense <b>is a person.</b> How can it be said that a person is prohibited to an ordinary person?

### Part 20
<b>Rather,</b> Reish Lakish meant that <b>the preparation of the incense proves</b> it, <b>as</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to prepare the incense mixture for use <b>by an ordinary person</b> (see Exodus 30:37), <b>and</b> yet it is <b>permitted</b> to do so <b>for the Most High.</b> The Gemara refutes this claim: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about preparation of the incense?</b> It is notable <b>in that its mitzva is in this</b> manner. By contrast, there is no mitzva to sacrifice specifically a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 21
<b>Mar, son of Ravina, said</b> that this is the response of the <i>baraita</i>: The <i>halakha</i> that a <i>tereifa</i> is unfit for sacrifice must be derived from a verse <b>because it can be said</b> that <b>Shabbat proves</b> that the <i>halakha</i> concerning a <i>tereifa</i> cannot be derived by the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>as it is prohibited for an ordinary person</b> to perform labor on Shabbat, <b>and</b> yet the labor involved in the Temple service is <b>permitted</b> on Shabbat <b>for the Most High.</b> Without the verse, one might similarly conclude that a <i>tereifa</i> is permitted for the Most High despite the fact that it is prohibited for consumption.

### Part 22
The Gemara rejects this: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about Shabbat?</b> It is notable <b>in that the general prohibition</b> against labor on Shabbat <b>was permitted with regard to an ordinary person in</b> the case of <b>circumcision,</b> as the mitzva of circumcision must be performed in its proper time, even on Shabbat, despite the fact that the act of circumcision is generally prohibited on Shabbat.

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>circumcision is</b> considered <b>a requirement of an ordinary person,</b> whose performance was exempted from the general prohibition against labor on Shabbat for one’s private needs? <b>Circumcision is a mitzva. Rather,</b> the statement of Mar, son of Ravina, can be refuted like this: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about Shabbat?</b> It is notable <b>in that its mitzva is in this</b> manner, i.e., the Torah requires that offerings be brought on Shabbat. By contrast, there is no mitzva to sacrifice specifically a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 24
<b>Rav Adda bar Abba said</b> that this is the response mentioned in the <i>baraita</i>: The <i>halakha</i> that a <i>tereifa</i> is unfit for sacrifice must be derived from a verse <b>because it can be said</b> that the prohibition against <b>diverse kinds proves</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of a <i>tereifa</i> cannot be derived from the <i>a fortiori</i> inference, <b>as it is prohibited for an ordinary person</b> to wear garments sewn from a mixture of diverse kinds (Deuteronomy 22:11), <b>and</b> yet such garments are <b>permitted for the Most High,</b> as the belt of the priestly vestments was fashioned from a mixture of diverse kinds.

### Part 25
The Gemara rejects this: <b>What</b> is notable <b>about</b> the prohibition against <b>diverse kinds?</b> It is notable <b>in that</b> the <b>general prohibition</b> against wearing a garment sewn from diverse kinds <b>was permitted in</b> the case of <b>an ordinary person with regard to ritual fringes,</b> as a string of sky-blue wool must be placed on a four-cornered garment even if that garment is made from linen. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>ritual fringes</b> are considered <b>a requirement of an ordinary person,</b> whose performance was exempted from the general prohibition concerning diverse kinds with regard to one’s private needs? Placing ritual fringes on a garment <b>is a mitzva. Rather,</b> the claim of Rav Adda bar Abba can be refuted like this:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC