
### Part 1
The mishna elaborates: There are <b>ten</b> tenths <b>for the</b> loaves of <b>leavened bread, a tenth</b> of an ephah <b>per loaf. And</b> there are <b>ten</b> tenths <b>for the</b> loaves of <b><i>matza</i>. And among</b> the loaves of <b><i>matza</i></b> there are <b>three types: Loaves, wafers, and</b> those <b>poached in water,</b> ten loaves of each type. <b>Consequently,</b> there are <b>three-and-one-third tenths</b> of an ephah <b>for each and every type, three loaves per tenth</b> of an ephah.

### Part 2
<b>And in the Jerusalem measure there were thirty <i>kav</i>, fifteen</b> <i>kav</i> <b>for</b> the loaves of <b>leavened bread and fifteen for</b> the loaves of <b><i>matza</i>.</b> The mishna elaborates: There are <b>fifteen</b> <i>kav</i> <b>for</b> the loaves of <b>leavened bread, one and one-half <i>kav</i> per loaf.</b> And there are <b>fifteen</b> <i>kav</i> <b>for</b> the loaves of <b><i>matza</i>. And among</b> the loaves of <b><i>matza</i></b> there are <b>three types: Loaves, wafers, and</b> those <b>poached in water. Consequently,</b> there are <b>five <i>kav</i> for each and every type, two loaves per <i>kav</i>.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: The flour for the loaves accompanying <b>the thanks offering would come</b> from a measure of <b>five Jerusalem <i>se’a</i>,</b> which are equivalent to six wilderness <i>se’a</i>. The <i>se’a</i> referred to in the Bible when the Jewish people were in the wilderness is smaller than the <i>se’a</i> used later in Jerusalem. This is equivalent to two ephahs, each ephah being three wilderness <i>se’a</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters,</b> i.e., that there are three <i>se’a</i> in an ephah, derived? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> They are derived from a verse, <b>as the verse states: “The ephah and the <i>bat</i> shall be of one measure”</b> (Ezekiel 45:11). Therefore, <b>just as the <i>bat</i>,</b> a measure for liquids, is <b>three <i>se’a</i>, so too the ephah,</b> a measure for dry goods, <b>is three <i>se’a</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> as for <b>the <i>bat</i> itself, from where do we</b> derive its measure? <b>If we say</b> that we derive it <b>from</b> that <b>which is written</b> in the same verse: <b>“That the <i>bat</i> may contain the tenth-part of a <i>ḥomer</i>,”</b> and since one <i>ḥomer</i> consists of thirty <i>se’a</i>, one <i>bat</i> is equivalent to three <i>se’a</i>, there is a difficulty: With regard to <b>an ephah as well, isn’t it written</b> in the same verse: <b>“And the ephah the tenth-part of a <i>ḥomer</i>”?</b> Why, then, must the measure of an ephah be derived from that of a <i>bat</i>? <b>Rather, I do not know how much</b> the measure of <b>a <i>ḥomer</i></b> is; consequently, when the verse states that the ephah is one-tenth of one <i>ḥomer</i>, this does not demonstrate the measure of the ephah. <b>Here too, I do not know how much</b> the measure of the <i>bat</i> is.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> derive the volume of the ephah <b>from here,</b> from a subsequent verse, where it is written with regard to separating <i>teruma</i>: <b>“And the set portion of oil, the <i>bat</i> of oil, shall be the tithe of the <i>bat</i> out of the <i>kor</i>, which is ten <i>bat</i>, even a <i>ḥomer</i>; for ten <i>bat</i> are a <i>ḥomer</i>”</b> (Ezekiel 45:14). The verse states that there are ten <i>bat</i> in one <i>kor</i> and ten <i>bat</i> in one <i>ḥomer</i>. Since it is known that one <i>kor</i> is equivalent to thirty <i>se’a</i>, the verse indicates that there are also thirty <i>se’a</i> in one <i>ḥomer</i>. It can therefore be derived from the verse that there are three <i>se’a</i> in one <i>bat</i>, and consequently, three <i>se’a</i> in one ephah.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that the Sages increased the size of the measures so that five Jerusalem measures are equal to six wilderness measures. With regard to the practice of augmenting measures, <b>Shmuel says:</b> If the residents of a certain place want to change the standard of their measures and augment them by a certain fraction, <b>they may not increase the measures</b> by <b>more than one-sixth, and</b> they may <b>not</b> increase the value of <b>a coin</b> by <b>more than one-sixth</b> of its previous value. <b>And one who profits</b> from his sales <b>may not profit</b> by <b>more than one-sixth.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara analyzes these statements. When Shmuel said: They may not increase the measures by more than one-sixth, <b>what is the reason</b> for this? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>because</b> doing so causes market <b>prices to rise,</b> the same concern should apply to raising the prices by <b>one-sixth,</b> and therefore that should <b>also not</b> be allowed.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> one might say that the prohibition is <b>due to</b> concern for <b>exploitation;</b> and they may increase the measures only by up to one-sixth so <b>that there will not be nullification of the transaction,</b> as the transaction is nullified only when the disparity is more than one-sixth of the value of the item. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But doesn’t Rava say:</b> With regard to <b>any item that</b> is otherwise subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation, and it is sold <b>by measure, or by weight, or by number, even</b> if the disparity was <b>less than the measure of exploitation</b> in the transaction, the transaction is <b>reversed?</b> A disparity of one-sixth between the value of an item and its price constitutes exploitation only in cases where there is room for error in assessing the value of an item. In a case where the details of the item are easily quantifiable, any deviation from the designated quantity results in a nullification of the transaction. The statement of Shmuel concerns sales involving measures.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> the prohibition is for the benefit of <b>the merchant, so that there will not be a loss</b> suffered <b>by</b> a merchant who might not realize that a new standard was issued, and might sell in accordance with the old standard. Since a merchant usually enjoys a profit of one-sixth of the value of an item, if the standard is not increased by more than this amount he will not suffer a loss, as at worst he will forfeit his profit margin. The Gemara notes: This explanation is also difficult, since even if the aim is to ensure <b>that there will not be a loss</b> for the merchant, <b>does he not need</b> to earn <b>a profit?</b> There is a well-known adage in this regard: If you <b>buy and sell</b> without earning any profit, <b>will</b> you <b>be called a merchant?</b> A merchant must profit from his sales; therefore, if this decree was instituted for the protection of merchants, the Sages should have ensured that they earn a profit.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rav Ḥisda said:</b> The prohibition is not based on logical reasoning. Instead, <b>Shmuel found a verse and interpreted it homiletically: “And the shekel shall be twenty <i>gera</i>; twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, ten, and five shekels, shall be your <i>maneh</i>”</b> (Ezekiel 45:12). According to this verse, the sum of all of these numbers, sixty shekels, is equivalent to a <i>maneh</i>. This is problematic: How can <b>a <i>maneh</i></b> consist of sixty shekels? Since each biblical shekel is equivalent to four dinars, if a <i>maneh</i> is equal to sixty shekels, a <i>maneh</i> <b>is two hundred and forty</b> dinars. But a <i>maneh</i> is actually equal to twenty-five shekels, which are one hundred dinars.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> one can <b>learn from</b> the verse <b>three</b> matters: <b>Learn from it</b> that the <b>sacred <i>maneh</i> was doubled,</b> so that it equaled two hundred, not one hundred, dinars. <b>And</b> furthermore, as Ezekiel stated that the <i>maneh</i> will be sixty shekels, not fifty, <b>learn from it</b> that a community may <b>increase measures, but they may not increase</b> them by <b>more than one-sixth. And learn from it</b> that <b>the one-sixth</b> is calculated <b>from the outside,</b> i.e., it is one-sixth of the final sum, which is one-fifth of the previous sum.

### Part 12
<b>Ravina said: The mishna is also precisely</b> formulated so as to reflect the fact that the one-sixth increase is calculated from the outside, <b>as it teaches:</b> The flour for the loaves accompanying <b>the thanks offering would come</b> from a measure of <b>five Jerusalem <i>se’a</i></b> of flour, <b>which are</b> equivalent to <b>six wilderness</b> <i>se’a</i>. One can infer that the <i>se’a</i> could be increased by only one-sixth from the outside. The Gemara affirms: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC