
### Part 1
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring not to the replacement for an obligatory thanks offering, but <b>to the replacement for a voluntary thanks offering.</b> This too is difficult, because <b>whether</b> the initial thanks offering was found <b>before</b> the owner achieved <b>atonement</b> with the replacement <b>or after</b> he achieved <b>atonement,</b> both offerings <b>require loaves,</b> as the owner <b>is</b> considered one who <b>increases thanks offerings.</b> That is, since he was not required to bring a replacement for the offering, if he brings another offering it is considered an additional voluntary offering, and a voluntary thanks offering requires loaves.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring <b>to the offspring of a voluntary thanks offering.</b> This too is difficult, because <b>whether</b> the offspring was sacrificed <b>before</b> the owner achieved <b>atonement</b> with its mother <b>or after</b> he achieved <b>atonement,</b> offspring <b>do not require loaves,</b> as <b>this is</b> considered <b>a leftover of the thanks offering,</b> which does not require loaves. <b>Rather,</b> perhaps Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring <b>to the offspring of an obligatory thanks offering.</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan teaches that if the offspring was sacrificed <b>before</b> the owner achieved <b>atonement, it requires loaves,</b> but if it was sacrificed <b>after</b> he achieved <b>atonement, it does not require loaves.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: According to this explanation, <b>what is</b> Rav Ḥanina <b>teaching us</b> by sending this letter? He teaches us <b>that Rabbi Yoḥanan holds: A person achieves atonement with the enhancement of consecrated</b> property, even though it is not the initial consecrated property. If one sacrifices the offspring of an obligatory thanks-offering before the thanks-offering itself, he achieves atonement with the offspring, even though it is an enhancement of the consecrated thanks-offering. Accordingly, if he offers it before its mother, it requires loaves. The Gemara notes: <b>Abaye also discusses</b> the letter sent by Rav Ḥanina <b>in this way</b> and reaches conclusions similar to those of Rav Amram.

### Part 4
With regard to the conclusions of Rav Amram and Abaye, it <b>was also stated: Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If one achieves atonement with <b>the replacement for a voluntary thanks offering, whether</b> the thanks offering was found <b>before</b> he achieved <b>atonement or after</b> he achieved <b>atonement,</b> the replacement <b>requires loaves,</b> as the owner <b>is</b> considered one who <b>increases thanks offerings. The offspring of a voluntary thanks offering, whether</b> it was sacrificed <b>before</b> he achieved <b>atonement or after</b> he achieved <b>atonement, does not require loaves,</b> as offspring <b>is</b> considered <b>a leftover of the thanks offering. And</b> with regard to <b>the offspring of an obligatory thanks offering,</b> if it was sacrificed <b>before</b> he achieved <b>atonement, it requires loaves,</b> but if it was sacrificed <b>after</b> he achieved <b>atonement, it does not require loaves.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara cites additional <i>halakhot</i> with regard to the loaves of a thanks offering that was lost and another animal was taken as its replacement: <b>Shmuel says:</b> In <b>any</b> situation <b>in which a sin offering</b> would be placed in isolation for it <b>to die,</b> if that same situation occurs <b>with a thanks offering, it does not require loaves.</b> And in <b>any</b> situation <b>in which a sin offering</b> would be placed in the field to <b>graze</b> until it develops a blemish, if that same situation occurs <b>with a thanks offering, it requires loaves.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Amram raises an objection</b> from the <i>baraita</i> cited on 79b: <b>What is it</b> that the verse teaches when it <b>states: He sacrifices for a thanks offering? From where</b> is it derived that <b>one who separated</b> an animal as <b>his thanks offering and it was lost and he separated another in its stead, and the first animal was</b> then <b>found, and</b> now <b>they both stand</b> fit to be sacrificed, <b>from where</b> is it derived <b>that he may sacrifice whichever</b> one <b>of them he wishes, and its loaves</b> are brought along <b>with it? The verse states: He sacrifices for a thanks offering.</b> One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that the second</b> animal also <b>requires loaves</b> to be brought with it. <b>The verse states: “He sacrifices it,”</b> indicating that only <b>one</b> thanks offering requires loaves, <b>but not two.</b>

### Part 7
Rav Amram continues: <b>Whereas with regard to a sin offering in a case like this,</b> the Rabbis hold that the animal <b>is</b> placed in the field to <b>graze, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Temura</i> 22b): If <b>one separated his sin offering and it was lost, and he separated another</b> animal <b>in its stead, and the first</b> sin offering <b>was found, and both</b> animals <b>stand</b> fit for sacrifice, then he <b>achieves atonement with one of them and the second</b> animal <b>shall</b> be left to <b>die;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: A sin offering</b> is left to <b>die only</b> if it <b>was found after its owner achieved atonement.</b> It may be inferred from the opinion of the Rabbis <b>that</b> if it is found <b>before the owner achieved atonement,</b> it is placed in the field to <b>graze.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: <b>Shmuel holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said:</b> An animal separated as a sin offering that was <b>lost at the time of the separation</b> of its replacement, even if it was found before the replacement was sacrificed, is left to <b>die.</b> The principle stated by Shmuel is therefore correct, since in every situation in which a sin offering is left to die, a thanks offering does not require loaves.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that even in such a case the second sin offering is left to die, <b>how can you find</b> a case where the sin offering is placed in the field to <b>graze according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi? The Gemara responds: It can be found in a case <b>like that of Rabbi Oshaya, as Rabbi Oshaya says:</b> If <b>one separated two sin offerings,</b> one to achieve atonement for his sin and the other <b>as a guarantee</b> in case the first one is lost, <b>he may achieve atonement with whichever of them he wishes, and the second shall</b> be placed in the field to <b>graze.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: <b>But in a case like this</b> involving <b>a thanks offering,</b> the animal <b>does not require loaves.</b> Therefore, if Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that in such a case the sin offering is placed in the field to graze, then Shmuel cannot hold in accordance with his opinion, since according to Shmuel, in circumstances where a sin offering would be left to graze, a thanks offering in the same circumstances would require loaves. <b>Rather, Shmuel holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who said:</b> There are <b>five sin offerings</b> that are left to <b>die;</b> one is a sin offering that was lost and found before its replacement was sacrificed, and another is the case where a sin offering was separated as a guarantee.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> it cannot be that Shmuel holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, since <b>Rabbi Shimon does not hold</b> that there are <b>any</b> circumstances in which a sin offering is placed in the field to <b>graze.</b> Accordingly, if Shmuel holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon, how can he say: And in any situation in which a sin offering would be placed in the field to graze until it develops a blemish, if that same situation occurs with a thanks offering, it requires loaves?

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: In fact, <b>Shmuel also stated</b> only <b>one</b> principle: In <b>any</b> situation <b>in which a sin offering</b> is placed in isolation for it <b>to die,</b> if that same situation occurs <b>with a thanks offering, it does not require loaves.</b> He did not state the second principle. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Shmuel <b>teaching us?</b> The Gemara responds: Shmuel teaches us his statement <b>to exclude</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan, who said: A person achieves atonement with the enhancement of consecrated</b> property. According to Rabbi Yoḥanan, the offspring of an obligatory thanks offering requires loaves if it is sacrificed before its mother. Shmuel <b>teaches us that</b> one does <b>not</b> achieve atonement with the enhancement of consecrated property, and the offspring of a thanks offering does not require loaves, which corresponds to the fact that the offspring of a sin offering is left to die.

### Part 13
§ With regard to the loaves of a thanks offering, <b>Rabbi Abba says:</b> If one volunteered to bring a thanks offering, and said: <b>This</b> animal <b>is a thanks offering and this</b> flour <b>is</b> designated for <b>its loaves,</b> then if <b>the loaves were lost, he brings other loaves.</b> If <b>the thanks offering was lost, he does not bring another thanks offering,</b> and the loaves are not sacrificed. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The loaves are</b> brought <b>on account of the thanks offering;</b> therefore, if there is no thanks offering, there are no loaves. <b>But the thanks offering is not</b> brought <b>on account of the loaves;</b> consequently, if the loaves were lost, the thanks offering is still sacrificed, and one brings different loaves.

### Part 14
§ <b>And</b> with regard to the distinctions between a thanks offering and its accompanying loaves, <b>Rava says:</b> In the case of one who <b>separated money for his thanks offering</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC