
### Part 1
The <i>teruma</i> wine should be allowed to <b>descend and become impure</b> on its own, ruining the non-sacred wine in the lower press, <b>but one</b> should <b>not render it impure through</b> his direct <b>action</b> by catching it in an impure vessel, even though catching it would prevent the wine that is <i>teruma</i> from mixing with his impure, non-sacred wine. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua says:</b> Since the wine that is <i>teruma</i> will become impure in any event, <b>one</b> may <b>even render it impure through</b> his direct <b>action</b> in order to save his non-sacred wine. This indicates that according to Rabbi Yehoshua it is permitted to sin with regard to one matter, i.e., the wine that is <i>teruma</i>, in order to gain with regard to another matter, i.e., the non-sacred wine.

### Part 2
The Gemara responds: It <b>is different there,</b> in the case of the wine, <b>because</b> the wine that is <i>teruma</i> <b>is going to</b> become <b>impure</b> in any event. Consequently, his action is not considered a sin, and this is not a case of sinning with regard to one matter in order to gain in another.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara continues its discussion of the sheep of <i>Shavuot</i>. <b>When Rav Yitzḥak came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia he reported traditions that he learned in Eretz Yisrael, and <b>he taught</b> a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a case of the two <b>sheep</b> of <b><i>Shavuot</i> where one slaughtered them not in accordance with their mitzva,</b> e.g., he slaughtered them for the sake of a different offering, they are <b>disqualified; and</b> they should be left overnight until <b>their form decays</b> and they attain the status of leftover sacrificial meat, <b>and</b> then <b>they are brought out to the place</b> designated <b>for burning.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rav Naḥman said</b> to Rav Yitzḥak: The <b>Master,</b> i.e., Rav Yitzḥak, <b>who compares</b> the sheep of <i>Shavuot</i> <b>to a sin offering</b> because they are juxtaposed in a verse (see Leviticus 23:19), <b>teaches:</b> The sheep are <b>disqualified,</b> like a sin offering that was slaughtered not for its own sake. By contrast, the <b><i>tanna</i> of the school of Levi, who derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an obligatory peace offering,</b> e.g., the two sheep of <i>Shavuot</i>, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a voluntary peace offering, teaches</b> that the two sheep remain <b>valid</b> offerings, just as a voluntary peace offering remains valid even if it is slaughtered for the sake of a different offering.

### Part 5
<b>As Levi teaches: And</b> with regard to the <b>other peace offerings of a nazirite that one slaughtered not in accordance with their mitzva,</b> they are <b>valid</b> offerings like voluntary peace offerings, <b>but they do not satisfy the obligation of the owner</b> to bring the required nazirite peace offerings. <b>And</b> these offerings <b>are eaten for</b> only <b>one day and one night,</b> in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> concerning the peace offerings of nazirite, and not for two days and one night like voluntary peace offerings. They <b>require neither bread nor</b> the <b>foreleg,</b> unlike the required peace offering of a nazirite.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rav Yitzḥak from that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where one is obligated to sacrifice as <b>a guilt offering</b> an animal <b>in its</b> first <b>year,</b> which the Torah calls a lamb, <b>and</b> instead he <b>brought</b> an animal <b>in its second</b> year, which is considered a ram; or if he is obligated to sacrifice as a guilt offering an animal <b>in its second</b> year <b>and he brought</b> an animal <b>in its</b> first <b>year;</b> the offerings are <b>disqualified.</b> They are to be left overnight until <b>their form decays, and are brought out to the place</b> designated for <b>burning.</b>

### Part 7
<b>But</b> in the case of <b>the burnt offering of a nazirite,</b> i.e., the lamb that is sacrificed when he completes his naziriteship; <b>or the burnt offering of a woman after childbirth,</b> i.e., the lamb she sacrifices on the forty-first day after giving birth to a son or on the eighty-first day after giving birth to a daughter; <b>or the burnt offering of a leper,</b> i.e., the lamb that is sacrificed after he is purified; in all of these cases if the animals <b>were in their second year</b> instead, <b>and one slaughtered them,</b> the offerings are <b>valid.</b>

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>The principle of the matter</b> is: <b>Any</b> animal <b>that is valid as a voluntary burnt offering is</b> also <b>valid as an obligatory burnt offering, and any</b> animal <b>that is disqualified as a sin offering is</b> also <b>disqualified as a guilt offering, except for</b> an offering that was sacrificed <b>not for its own sake,</b> which is disqualified in the case of a sin offering but not a guilt offering. This demonstrates that the <i>halakhot</i> of obligatory burnt offerings are derived from those of voluntary burnt offerings, despite the fact that the burnt offering of a nazirite is juxtaposed to the sin offering of a nazirite (see Numbers 6:14) and the burnt offering of a leper is juxtaposed to the sin offering of a leper (see Leviticus 14:19). Similarly, the <i>halakha</i> pertaining to the sheep of <i>Shavuot</i>, which are obligatory peace offerings, should be derived from the <i>halakha</i> pertaining to voluntary peace offerings, and not from the <i>halakha</i> pertaining to a sin offering as Rav Yitzḥak holds.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>This <i>tanna</i>,</b> who taught this <i>baraita</i>, <b>is</b> the <b><i>tanna</i> of the school of Levi</b> cited earlier, who holds that if one slaughters a sheep of <i>Shavuot</i> not for its own sake, it is nevertheless valid.

### Part 10
The Gemara discusses the opinion of Rav Naḥman, who maintains that the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Levi holds that a sheep of <i>Shavuot</i> slaughtered not for its own sake is valid because he derives its <i>halakha</i> from that of a voluntary peace offering. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> what Levi teaches to the contrary, <b>as Levi teaches: The guilt offering of a nazirite,</b> i.e., the lamb he brings on the eighth day after becoming impure through contact with a corpse, <b>and the guilt offering of a leper,</b> i.e., the lamb he brings at the completion of his purification, <b>that one slaughtered not for their sake are valid, but they did not satisfy the obligation of the owner.</b>

### Part 11
If <b>one slaughtered them</b> when the <b>time had not yet</b> arrived <b>for</b> their <b>owners</b> to sacrifice these offerings, <b>or they were in their second year</b> instead of their first year <b>and one slaughtered them,</b> they are <b>disqualified.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara comments: <b>But if it is so</b> that Levi derives the <i>halakhot</i> of an obligatory offering from those of a voluntary one, <b>let him derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the guilt offering <b>from</b> that of the <b>peace offering,</b> in which case the guilt offerings should be valid even if they were in their second year. The Gemara answers: Levi <b>derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning an obligatory <b>peace offering from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning a voluntary <b>peace offering,</b> but <b>he does not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a guilt offering from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a peace offering.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara further challenges the statement of Rav Naḥman: <b>But if</b> Levi <b>derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> of an obligatory <b>peace offering from</b> that of a voluntary <b>peace offering, let him</b> similarly <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of one <b>guilt offering from</b> that of another <b>guilt offering.</b> He should derive that <b>the guilt offering of a nazirite and the guilt offering of a leper</b> are valid even if the animal is in its second year <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a guilt offering for robbery and a guilt offering for misuse</b> of consecrated property, which are supposed to be a ram in its second year. <b>Or,</b> if one brought a lamb in its first year as <b>a guilt offering for robbery or a guilt offering for misuse</b> of consecrated property, Levi should derive that it is valid <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning the <b>guilt offering of a nazirite and the guilt offering of a leper,</b> which are lambs in their first year.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi said: One can derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an item that is</b> prepared <b>not in its valid manner,</b> e.g., the sheep of <i>Shavuot</i> that were slaughtered not for their own sake, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to another <b>item that is</b> prepared <b>not in its valid manner,</b> e.g., a voluntary peace offering slaughtered not for its own sake. <b>But one cannot derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an item that is</b> prepared <b>not in its valid manner,</b> e.g., the guilt offering of a nazirite or a leper that is sacrificed when it is in its second year, <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an item that is</b> prepared <b>in its valid manner,</b> e.g., a guilt offering for robbery or for misuse of consecrated property that is sacrificed when it is in its second year.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> can one <b>not</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> with regard to disqualified offerings from the <i>halakha</i> with regard to fit offerings? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to</b> an item that <b>left</b> the Temple courtyard and was thereby disqualified <b>that if</b> it nevertheless <b>ascended</b> upon the altar <b>it shall not descend?</b> It is derived from the fact <b>that</b> an item that <b>left is valid</b> for sacrifice <b>on</b> a private <b>altar.</b> Here, the <i>baraita</i> derives the <i>halakha</i> with regard to an disqualified offering from the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a fit offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC