
### Part 1
and yet Rabbi Yosei said that the remainder <b>is rendered <i>piggul</i>;</b> then <b>here, where he has intent</b> to partake of the right thigh the next day, which is part <b>of</b> the <b>offering itself,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> that both thighs should become <i>piggul</i>?

### Part 2
<b>Rather, Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Rabbi Yosei holds that intent of <i>piggul</i> with regard to one thigh renders the other thigh <i>piggul</i> as well, as they are of one body. Similarly, with regard to two loaves, Rabbi Yosei is of the opinion that if one intends to consume an amount equal to an olive-bulk from both loaves, both loaves are rendered <i>piggul</i>. And as for his statement that intent of <i>piggul</i> with regard to one loaf does not render the other loaf <i>piggul</i>, <b>this is the reasoning of Rabbi Yosei: The verse renders</b> the two loaves <b>one body, and the verse</b> also <b>renders them two bodies.</b> The verse renders them <b>one body</b> in the sense <b>that they preclude one another,</b> i.e., neither loaf is valid without the other. The verse also renders them <b>two bodies, as the Merciful One states: This</b> loaf <b>is prepared alone and that is prepared alone,</b> i.e., the kneading and arrangement of each loaf must be performed separately.

### Part 3
Therefore, if the priest <b>mixed them</b> together by intending to consume an olive-bulk from both of them, then <b>they are mixed</b> and they are both <i>piggul</i>, <b>as the verse renders them one body.</b> But if <b>he separated them</b> by having intent with regard to only one loaf, in that case <b>they are separated</b> and only that loaf is <i>piggul</i>, <b>as the verse renders them two bodies.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raises a dilemma:</b> If one <b>had intent of <i>piggul</i> with regard to</b> one type of loaf from the <b>loaves of a thanks offering, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning the remaining types of loaves, i.e., are they rendered <i>piggul</i> as well? Similarly, if one had intent of <i>piggul</i> <b>with regard to</b> either the loaves or the wafers of <b>baked meal offerings, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the remaining type? <b>Rav Taḥlifa from the West,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, <b>taught him</b> a <i>baraita</i> that states: <b>And likewise you say with regard to the bread of a thanks offering, and likewise you say with regard to a baked meal offering,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is a matter of dispute between Rabbi Yosei and the Rabbis.

### Part 5
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>at the time of</b> the <b>slaughter</b> of an offering one <b>had intent to consume half an olive-bulk</b> of its meat the next day, <b>and at the time of</b> the <b>sprinkling</b> of the blood <b>he had intent to consume half</b> of another <b>olive-bulk</b> of meat the next day, the offering is <b><i>piggul</i>, as</b> intentions that occur during the <b>slaughter and sprinkling combine</b> to render an offering <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 6
There is a dispute between <i>amora’im</i> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Some say</b> that in the case of intentions that occur specifically during the <b>slaughter and sprinkling, as both of them are permitting factors</b> of the offering, <b>yes,</b> the intentions combine. But intentions that occur during the <b>collection</b> of the blood in a service vessel <b>and</b> the <b>conveying</b> of the blood to the altar do <b>not</b> combine, as neither rite is a permitting factor. <b>And some say</b> that if intentions during <b>those</b> rites <b>that are distant</b> from one another, i.e., the slaughter and sprinkling, combine, <b>all the more so</b> intentions during <b>these</b> rites <b>that are close</b> to one another, i.e., collection and conveying, certainly combine.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so,</b> i.e., that intentions during the slaughter and sprinkling combine? <b>But Levi teaches</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Intentions that occur during the <b>four</b> sacrificial <b>rites do not combine to</b> render an offering <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> and those rites are: <b>Slaughter and sprinkling, collection and conveying. Rava said:</b> It is <b>not difficult; this</b> statement of Levi is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, whereas <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 8
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the two loaves and two lambs sacrificed on <i>Shavuot</i>: With regard to <b>one who slaughters</b> one of <b>the lambs</b> brought as peace offerings on <i>Shavuot</i> with the intent <b>to consume half an olive-bulk from this loaf</b> the next day, <b>and similarly,</b> he slaughtered <b>the other</b> lamb with the intent <b>to consume half an olive-bulk from that</b> second <b>loaf</b> the next day, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: I say that this</b> offering is <b>valid.</b> Clearly, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi holds that intentions that occur during the performance of two permitting factors do not combine to render an offering <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rava: You can <b>say that you have heard that Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi holds that intentions do not combine to render an offering <i>piggul</i> when each intention is concerning <b>half a permitting factor and half</b> a measure of <b>consumption,</b> i.e., one lamb and half an olive-bulk. But in a case where one had intentions during the performance of <b>an entire permitting factor,</b> i.e., during the slaughter and sprinkling, <b>and</b> concerning <b>half</b> a measure of <b>consumption, did you hear him</b> say that such intentions do not combine?

### Part 10
<b>Rava bar Rav Ḥanan said to Abaye: But if Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>is of</b> the opinion that intentions during the performance of <b>an entire permitting factor and</b> concerning <b>half</b> a measure of <b>consumption</b> combine to render an offering <i>piggul</i>, why does he rule that when one slaughters each lamb with the intent to consume half an olive-bulk from one loaf the next day the offering is entirely valid? <b>Let him decree</b> that intentions during <b>half a permitting factor and</b> concerning <b>half</b> a measure of <b>consumption</b> disqualify an offering, <b>due to</b> the fact that intentions during <b>an entire permitting factor and</b> concerning <b>half</b> a measure of <b>consumption</b> render the offering <i>piggul</i>, <b>as</b> one finds in similar instances that <b>Rabbi Yosei decreed and the Rabbis decreed</b> in this manner.

### Part 11
Rava bar Rav Ḥanan elaborates: <b>Rabbi Yosei decreed</b> in such a case, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (13a): With regard to one who removes a handful from the meal offering with the intent to burn its handful on the next day, everyone agrees that the meal offering is <i>piggul</i>. But if his intent was <b>to burn its frankincense</b> on <b>the next day, Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The meal offering is <b>unfit, but</b> partaking of it <b>does not include</b> liability to receive <b><i>karet</i>. And the Rabbis say:</b> It is a case of <b><i>piggul</i> and one is liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> partaking of the meal offering. Since one is not liable to receive <i>karet</i>, Rabbi Yosei evidently disqualifies the meal offering as a rabbinic decree due to concern over a case where his intention was to burn the handful the next day.

### Part 12
<b>And the Rabbis decreed as well, as we learned</b> in a mishna (16a): If one had <b>intent of <i>piggul</i> during</b> the burning of <b>the handful but not during</b> the burning of <b>the frankincense,</b> or if he had such intent <b>during</b> the burning of <b>the frankincense but not during</b> the burning of <b>the handful, Rabbi Meir says:</b> The meal offering is <b><i>piggul</i> and one is liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> its consumption, <b>and the Rabbis say: There is no</b> liability to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> its consumption <b>unless he has intent of <i>piggul</i> during</b> the burning of <b>the entire permitting factor,</b> i.e., both the handful and the frankincense. Since the Rabbis state that there is no liability to receive <i>karet</i>, but they do not rule that the offering is valid, evidently they maintain that the offering is disqualified by rabbinic law, due to concern over a case of <i>piggul</i> intent during the burning of the entire permitting factor.

### Part 13
Abaye <b>said to</b> Rava bar Rav Ḥanan: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? Granted there, Rabbi Yosei decreed</b> that the offering is disqualified in a case of intent involving <b>the handful of frankincense due to</b> the concern of intent involving <b>the handful of the meal offering,</b> as the two cases are similar.

### Part 14
Similarly, <b>the Rabbis decreed</b> that the offering is disqualified in a case of intent involving the <b>handful due to</b> a similar case of intent concerning <b>the handful of the meal offering of a sinner.</b> There is no frankincense in the case of a meal offering of a sinner, and consequently the priest’s intent with regard to the handful alone renders the offering <i>piggul</i>, as it is the sole permitting factor. <b>And</b> the Rabbis also decreed in a case of intent with regard to the <b>frankincense due to</b> a similar case of intent concerning the <b>frankincense that comes in</b> the <b>bowls</b> that accompany the shewbread. Here there is no handful, and consequently intent with regard to the frankincense alone renders the shewbread <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 15
In the case of the two <b>lambs</b> that accompany the two loaves brought on <i>Shavuot</i> <b>as well</b> (16a), the Rabbis rule that if one slaughters one of the lambs with the intent to consume both loaves the next day the offering is disqualified, but one is not liable to receive <i>karet</i> for partaking of it. This is a rabbinic decree in a case of intent during the slaughter of one <b>lamb due to the other lamb,</b> as were one to slaughter both lambs with intent of <i>piggul</i>, the loaves would be rendered <i>piggul</i>, since his intent occurred during the slaughter of the entire permitting factor.

### Part 16
Similarly, when one burns a single <b>bowl</b> of frankincense from those that accompany the shewbread with the intent to consume both arrangements of shewbread the next day, the Rabbis disqualify the shewbread by rabbinic decree <b>due to the other bowl,</b> i.e., due to the concern over <i>piggul</i> intent during the burning of both bowls, as this intent involves the burning of the entire permitting factor.

### Part 17
Abaye concludes: <b>But here,</b> in the case of the <i>baraita</i> where one slaughtered each of the two lambs with the intent to consume half an olive-bulk from a different loaf, <b>is there</b> another instance <b>in general</b> where intent during the performance of a rite concerning <b>half a permitting factor and</b> with regard to <b>half</b> a measure <b>of consumption</b> renders an offering <i>piggul</i>, <b>that</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>will arise and decree</b> that the lambs in this instance are disqualified?

### Part 18
The Gemara notes: <b>So too, it is reasonable that the reasoning of the Rabbis is due to that</b> explanation, i.e., they disqualified the offerings in the aforementioned cases due to the fact that in similar instances the offering is <i>piggul</i>. This is evident from the fact <b>that</b> it <b>is taught</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna (16a): <b>The Rabbis concede to Rabbi Meir in</b> the case of <b>the meal offering of a sinner and the meal offering of jealousy that if one had intent of <i>piggul</i> during</b> the burning of <b>the handful,</b> the meal offering is <b><i>piggul</i> and one is liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> its consumption, <b>as the handful is the</b> sole <b>permitting factor.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara explains this proof: <b>Why do I</b> need the mishna <b>to teach</b> this last statement <b>at all?</b> Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that these meal offerings are <i>piggul</i>, as <b>is there another permitting factor</b> aside from the handful? <b>Rather, is it not</b> correct to say that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>teaches us, that the reason that</b> the Rabbis disqualified a standard meal offering when only the <b>handful</b> was removed with the intent of <i>piggul</i> is <b>because there is</b> the case of <b>the handful of the meal offering of a sinner, which is similar to it</b> and is rendered <i>piggul</i> due to intent involving the handful alone?

### Part 20
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one of the</b> two <b>loaves</b> of <i>Shavuot</i> <b>or one of the</b> two <b>arrangements</b> of the shewbread <b>became ritually impure, Rabbi Yehuda says: Both must be taken to the place of burning</b> like any other disqualified offering, <b>as no communal offering is divided.</b> That is, it is either fit in its entirety or unfit in its entirety. <b>And the Rabbis say: The impure one</b> remains <b>in its</b> state of <b>impurity and the pure one shall be eaten.</b>

### Part 21
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The <b>dispute</b> between Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis applies only to a case where one loaf became ritually impure <b>before</b> the <b>sprinkling</b> of the blood of the lambs, as this is the act that renders the loaves permitted for consumption. Accordingly, they disagree whether the sprinkling is effective in permitting the remaining pure loaf for consumption. <b>But</b> in a case where one loaf was rendered impure <b>after the sprinkling,</b> meaning that both loaves were initially permitted for consumption, <b>everyone agrees</b> that <b>the impure one</b> remains <b>in its</b> state of <b>impurity and the pure one shall be eaten.</b>

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in the case where the loaves become impure <b>before</b> the <b>sprinkling</b> of the blood, <b>with regard to what</b> principle <b>do they disagree? Rav Pappa said: They disagree with regard to</b> the <b>frontplate</b> of the High Priest, i.e., whether it <b>effects acceptance</b> only for the impurity of items sacrificed on the altar, or even <b>for</b> the impurity of items that would normally be <b>consumed</b> by the priests.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC