
### Part 1
area <b>is made for the purpose of</b> reaching the <b>garden,</b> not for entering the house, and therefore even with regard to the entrance between the gatehouse and small room, one is exempt from placing a <i>mezuza</i> at the entrance of the small room.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates that <b>Abaye and Rava would act in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef,</b> i.e., they would not place a <i>mezuza</i> on the two entrances of a gatehouse, neither to the garden nor to the small room, in accordance with the ruling of the Rabbis. <b>And Rav Ashi would act in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Rav and Shmuel, stringently,</b> i.e., following the ruling of Rabbi Yosei that both entrances require a <i>mezuza</i>. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the explanation of <b>Rav and Shmuel, stringently.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>It was stated:</b> With regard to <b>an aperture that opens from</b> the ceiling of <b>a house</b> occupied by one person <b>to a loft</b> occupied by another, with a walled staircase leading from the lower floor to the loft, <b>Rav Huna says: If</b> the staircase <b>has one entrance,</b> i.e., one doorway, either from the house or from the upper story, one is <b>obligated to</b> affix <b>one <i>mezuza</i>; if it has two entrances,</b> both from below and above, one is <b>obligated to</b> affix <b>two <i>mezuzot</i>. Rav Pappa says:</b> One can <b>learn from that</b> statement <b>of Rav Huna</b> that with regard to <b>this</b> type of <b>room that has four gates,</b> one is <b>obligated to</b> affix <b>four <i>mezuzot</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to teach that <b>even though one is accustomed to</b> using <b>one</b> particular gate, nevertheless, all four require a <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 4
<b>Ameimar said:</b> With regard to <b>this entrance which</b> is located <b>at the corner</b> of a house, one is <b>obligated to</b> affix <b>a <i>mezuza</i>. Rav Ashi said to Ameimar: But it does not have doorposts.</b> Ameimar <b>said to him: These [<i>adei</i>] are its doorposts,</b> i.e., the end of the walls serve as its doorposts.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa happened</b> to come <b>to the house of Mar Shmuel,</b> where <b>he saw a certain entrance that had only one doorpost to the left</b> of the entrance, <b>and</b> yet Mar Shmuel <b>had affixed a <i>mezuza</i> to</b> that doorpost. Rav Pappa <b>said to him: In accordance with whose</b> opinion did you do this? Did you act <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who deems one obligated to affix a <i>mezuza</i> to an entrance that has only one doorpost? But one can <b>say that Rabbi Meir says</b> that one must do so only in a case where the doorpost is <b>to</b> the <b>right</b> of the entrance. <b>Does he say</b> that it requires a <i>mezuza</i> if the entrance is <b>to</b> the <b>left?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the source for <b>this</b> requirement that the <i>mezuza</i> be affixed to the right side? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When the verse states: “And you shall write them upon the doorposts of <b>your house [<i>beitekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:9), the word <i>beitekha</i> is interpreted as <b><i>biatekha</i>,</b> your entry, i.e., the <i>mezuza</i> must be affixed to the side by which you enter, which is <b>from the right. Do you say</b> it is <b>from the right, or</b> is it <b>only from the left?</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: Your house [<i>beitekha</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> biblical <b>derivation</b> here? <b>Rabba says:</b> The <i>mezuza</i> is affixed in <b>the way that you enter</b> the house, which is <b>from the right, as when a person lifts his foot</b> to begin walking, <b>he lifts his right</b> foot first. Therefore, the <i>mezuza</i> is affixed to the right side of the doorway.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Shmuel bar Aḥa said before Rav Pappa in the name of Rava bar Ulla</b> that the requirement that the <i>mezuza</i> be affixed to the right of the entrance is derived <b>from here: “And Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one comes into the House of the Lord; and the priests that kept the threshold put in there all the money that was brought into the House of the Lord”</b> (II Kings 12:10). This indicates that an object designed for those entering a house is placed to the right of the one entering.

### Part 8
The Gemara further inquires: <b>What</b> is this statement of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> referred to by Rav Pappa, that he deems one obligated to place a <i>mezuza</i> on an entrance that has only one doorpost? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a house that has only one doorpost, Rabbi Meir deems</b> one <b>obligated to</b> affix <b>a <i>mezuza</i>, and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt</b> from affixing a <i>mezuza</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the Rabbis? It is written:</b> “And you shall write them upon the <b>doorposts</b> of your house” (Deuteronomy 6:9), in the plural, which indicates that there must be two doorposts.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Meir,</b> that one doorpost suffices to obligate one to affix a <i>mezuza</i>? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When it states <b>“doorposts”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:9), <b>I</b> would <b>derive the minimum</b> number <b>of doorposts,</b> which is <b>two. When it says “doorposts” in the second passage</b> (Deuteronomy 11:20), this also serves to teach a <i>halakha</i>, <b>as</b> otherwise there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state</b> this. This <b>is</b> one <b>amplification following</b> another <b>amplification, and</b> the principle is that <b>an amplification following an amplification is</b> stated <b>only</b> in order <b>to restrict</b> its extent. In this manner <b>the verse restricted</b> the minimum number <b>to one doorpost.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> This proof <b>is not necessary.</b> Rather, <b>when</b> the verse <b>states:</b> “And strike <b>the lintel and the two doorposts”</b> (Exodus 12:22), one can claim that there is a superfluous word in this verse, <b>as</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state “two,”</b> since the minimum of doorposts is two. <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states “two”? This established a paradigm</b> that <b>anywhere where it is stated “doorposts,”</b> it means <b>only one</b> doorpost, <b>unless the verse specifies</b> that it is referring to <b>two</b> doorposts.

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And you shall write them</b> upon the doorposts of your house, and upon your gates” (Deuteronomy 6:9). One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>one writes</b> a <i>mezuza</i> <b>on the stones</b> of the entrance. To counter this, an expression of <b>writing is stated here,</b> with regard to a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and</b> an expression of <b>writing is stated there. Just as there</b> the mitzva of writing means <b>on a book,</b> i.e., parchment, <b>so too,</b> a <i>mezuza</i> must be written <b>on a book.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> suggests: <b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go [<i>kalekh</i>] this way,</b> i.e., one can suggest a different interpretation: An expression of <b>writing is stated here,</b> with regard to a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and writing is stated there,</b> with regard to the mitzva of writing the words of the Torah on stones upon the entry to Eretz Yisrael (Deuteronomy 27:3). <b>Just as there,</b> the words are written <b>on the stones</b> themselves, <b>so too here,</b> the <i>mezuza</i> should be written <b>on the stones.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Let us see to which it is similar,</b> i.e., which comparison appears more apt. <b>We derive writing that is performed in</b> all <b>generations,</b> i.e., that of a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>from</b> another <b>writing that is performed in</b> all <b>generations, but we do not derive writing that is performed in</b> all <b>generations from writing that is not performed in</b> all <b>generations. And</b> furthermore, a <i>mezuza</i> must be written with ink, <b>as it is stated below: “And Baruch said to them: He dictated all these words to me, and I wrote them with ink in the scroll”</b> (Jeremiah 36:18).

### Part 14
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: The Merciful One states: “Upon the doorposts,”</b> which indicates that a <i>mezuza</i> should be written on the doorposts themselves, <b>and</b> yet <b>you say: Let us derive</b> a verbal analogy between <b>“writing”</b> and <b>“writing,”</b> to teach that one writes it on parchment. Why isn’t the verse interpreted in accordance with its straightforward meaning? Rav Ashi said to him: <b>The verse states: “And you shall write them [<i>ukhtavtam</i>],”</b> which means that it should first be <b>complete writing [<i>ketiva tamma</i>],</b> i.e., the full passages written down, <b>and</b> only <b>then</b> should one place them <b>“upon the doorposts”</b> of the house.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And since it is written:</b> “And you shall write them,” from which it is derived that the <i>mezuza</i> should be written first and then placed on the doorpost, <b>why do I</b> need <b>this verbal analogy</b> between “writing” and “writing”? The Gemara explains that <b>were it not</b> for the <b>verbal analogy, I would say</b> that one <b>should write</b> the passages of a <i>mezuza</i> <b>on a stone, and</b> afterward <b>affix</b> the stone <b>to the doorpost.</b> To counter this, the verbal analogy <b>teaches us</b> that a <i>mezuza</i> must be written on a scroll.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>the four passages that are in the phylacteries,</b> i.e., the two passages that are written in the <i>mezuza</i> and two additional passages (Exodus 13:1–9, 11–16), the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others, and</b> the absence of <b>even one letter prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with</b> the rest of <b>them.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that the inclusion of every letter is necessary?

### Part 17
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It is <b>necessary</b> to state this ruling <b>only</b> to teach <b>that</b> even the absence of <b>the thorn,</b> i.e., a small stroke, <b>of</b> a letter <b><i>yod</i></b> prevents fulfillment of the mitzva. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> isn’t <b>this also obvious,</b> since the letter is not formed properly? <b>Rather, it is necessary only according to another</b> statement <b>that Rav Yehuda</b> says. <b>As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Any letter that is not encircled with</b> blank <b>parchment on</b> all <b>four of its sides,</b> as its ink connects to the letter above it, below it, preceding it, or succeeding it, is <b>unfit.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC