
### Part 1
this teaches that the <i>halakha</i> of the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest <b>is like</b> that of <b>the meal offering</b> that is a component <b>of the daily offerings.</b> The daily offerings override Shabbat, as the verse says: “This is the burnt offering of every Shabbat, beside the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering thereof” (Numbers 28:10). Therefore, preparing the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest likewise overrides Shabbat.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said</b> that the basis for it overriding Shabbat is the fact that the verse states: <b>“On a griddle”</b> (Leviticus 6:14), which <b>teaches that</b> the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest <b>requires a vessel.</b> Therefore, <b>if he had baked it the previous day</b> rather than on Shabbat, it would be <b>disqualified by</b> being <b>left overnight,</b> since the loaves had already been consecrated in a service vessel. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava: “On a griddle” teaches that</b> the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest <b>requires a vessel.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: The continuation of the verse states: “It shall be made <b>with the oil.”</b> The fact that the verse makes reference to “the oil” rather than just oil indicates that one is supposed <b>to add</b> extra <b>oil to it,</b> but <b>I do not know how much</b> oil to add.

### Part 4
Therefore <b>I</b> must <b>deduce</b> as follows: <b>It is stated here,</b> concerning the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest: <b>“Oil,” and it is stated there, with regard to the meal offering</b> brought with the <b>libations</b> that accompany animal offerings: “A tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a <i>hin</i> of beaten <b>oil”</b> (Exodus 29:40). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the meal offering brought with the libations, the amount of oil required is <b>three <i>log</i> per tenth</b> of an ephah of flour; <b>so too here,</b> in the case of the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, one brings <b>three <i>log</i></b> of oil <b>per tenth</b> of an ephah of flour.

### Part 5
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way: It is stated here,</b> concerning the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest: <b>“Oil,” and it is stated with regard to</b> the <b>voluntary meal offering:</b> “And when anyone brings a meal offering to the Lord, his offering shall be of fine flour; and he shall pour <b>oil</b> upon it” (Leviticus 2:1). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the voluntary meal offering, one brings <b>one <i>log</i></b> of oil for each tenth of an ephah of flour (see 88a); <b>so too here,</b> one brings <b>one <i>log</i></b> of oil for each tenth of an ephah of flour.

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> analyzes these two possibilities: <b>Let us see to which</b> case <b>it is</b> more <b>similar,</b> i.e., which is a better comparison to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest. Perhaps <b>we</b> should <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which has characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>tav</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>tet</i>, from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a meal offering brought with libations, which also has the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>tav</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>tet</i>.</b> These characteristics are that they are <b>frequent [<i>tadir</i>],</b> as these offerings are sacrificed twice daily; they are <b>brought [<i>ba’ah</i>] as an obligation;</b> they <b>override Shabbat;</b> and they <b>override impurity [<i>tuma</i>].</b>

### Part 7
<b>And we should not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which has the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>tav</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>tet</i>, from</b> the voluntary meal offering, which <b>does not</b> have the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>tav</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>tet</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way: We</b> should <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which has the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>yod</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>lamed</i>, from</b> the voluntary meal offering, which also has the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>yod</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>lamed</i>,</b> which stand for the following <i>halakhot</i>: Each of these offerings may be brought by <b>an individual [<i>yaḥid</i>];</b> each is <b>brought for [<i>biglal</i>] its own sake,</b> rather than accompanying another offering; they are not accompanied by <b>wine [<i>yayin</i>]</b> for a libation; and they require <b>frankincense [<i>levona</i>].</b>

### Part 9
<b>And we should not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which has the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>yod</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>lamed</i>, from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the meal offering brought with libations, <b>which does not</b> have the characteristics represented by the letters <b><i>yod</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>yod</i>, <i>lamed</i>.</b> Consequently, the comparisons in both directions are equally compelling.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues its determination of how much oil is brought with the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says:</b> “This is the offering of Aaron…the tenth part of an ephah of <b>fine flour for a meal offering perpetually [<i>tamid</i>],</b> half of it in the morning, and half of it in the evening” (Leviticus 6:13). The fact that the verse makes reference to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest as <i>tamid</i> teaches that <b>it is in</b> the same category as <b>the meal offering</b> component <b>of the daily offerings [<i>temidin</i>]. Just as the meal offering</b> component <b>of the daily offerings</b> requires <b>three <i>log</i></b> of oil <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour, <b>so too this</b> griddle-cake offering of the High Priest requires <b>three <i>log</i></b> of oil <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The verse <b>adds</b> to the amount of <b>oil</b> that is required <b>here,</b> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, <b>and</b> it similarly <b>adds</b> to the amount of <b>oil</b> that is required <b>there,</b> in the case of the <b>meal offering</b> that accompanies the sacrifice of <b>sheep. Just as there,</b> in the case of the meal offering that accompanies the sacrifice of sheep, <b>three <i>log</i></b> of oil are required <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour, <b>so too here,</b> in the case of the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, <b>three <i>log</i></b> of oil are required <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour.

### Part 12
<b>Or</b> perhaps, <b>go this way:</b> The verse <b>adds</b> to the amount of <b>oil</b> that is required <b>here,</b> and it similarly <b>adds</b> to the amount of <b>oil</b> that is required in the case of <b>the meal offering</b> that accompanies the sacrifice of <b>bulls and rams. Just as there,</b> in the case of the meal offering that accompanies the sacrifice of bulls and rams, <b>two <i>log</i></b> of oil are required <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour, <b>so too here,</b> in the case of the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, <b>two <i>log</i></b> of oil are required <b>for</b> each <b>tenth</b> of an ephah of flour.

### Part 13
With regard to these two possibilities, <b>let us see to which</b> case <b>it is</b> more <b>similar,</b> i.e., which is a better comparison to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest. Perhaps <b>we</b> should <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which is <b>a meal offering that comes</b> in the amount of <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour, <b>from</b> the meal offering that accompanies the sacrifice of sheep, which is also <b>a meal offering that comes</b> in the amount of <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour. <b>And we should not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a meal offering that comes</b> in the amount of <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of flour <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> in the case of <b>a meal offering that comes</b> in the amount of <b>two or three tenths</b> of an ephah of flour, such as the meal offerings that accompany the sacrifice of bulls and rams.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks a question with regard to the beginning of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>itself</b> is <b>difficult,</b> as it contains an internal contradiction. First <b>you said</b> that the expression <b>“with the oil”</b> stated in the verse concerning the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest serves <b>to add</b> extra <b>oil,</b> which indicates that more than the basic amount of one <i>log</i> of oil is required. <b>And then it teaches: It is stated here,</b> concerning the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest: <b>“Oil,” and it is stated with regard to</b> the <b>voluntary meal offering</b> that it must be brought with <b>“oil.”</b> The <i>baraita</i> suggests that just as one <i>log</i> of oil is brought with the voluntary meal offering, so too one <i>log</i> is brought with the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest.

### Part 15
In answer to this question, <b>Abaye said: Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> that the term <b>“with the oil”</b> with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest serves <b>to add</b> extra oil? <b>It is Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that three <i>log</i> of oil are required, as derived from the meal offering that accompanies the sacrifice of sheep. <b>And</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>If it were not stated.</b> If the verse had not indicated by the term “with the oil” that extra oil is required, it would have been possible to derive from the voluntary meal offering that only one <i>log</i> is required. <b>And who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>responds</b> to Rabbi Shimon’s <b>derivation</b> and suggests that in fact the amount of oil can be derived from the case of the voluntary meal offering? It is <b>Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be understood differently: The <b>entire</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka,</b> who derives that three <i>log</i> of oil are required in the griddle-cake offering based upon the amount required in the meal offering component of the daily offerings.

### Part 17
<b>And</b> with regard to the possibility of deriving that only one <i>log</i> is required, as in the voluntary meal offering, <b>this</b> is what <b>he is saying:</b> The term <b>“with the oil”</b> stated with regard to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest comes <b>to add</b> more <b>oil to it</b> than the single <i>log</i> required for the voluntary meal offering. <b>As, if</b> the purpose of that term were merely <b>to establish</b> the basic fact that the offering must include <b>oil,</b> a verse is <b>not needed</b> to teach that. <b>Since it is written with</b> respect to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest: <b>“On a griddle [<i>maḥavat</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 6:14), it is <b>comparable to a pan [<i>maḥavat</i>] meal offering,</b> which requires oil.

### Part 18
<b>Or</b> perhaps the purpose of the verse is <b>to establish only</b> that the offering must include <b>oil,</b> and it is necessary to teach that <b>because if the Merciful One had not stated: “With the oil,” I would say: Let it be like</b> the <b>meal offering of a sinner,</b> which does not include oil.

### Part 19
Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, <b>then said: Let it even be</b> that the purpose of the verse is <b>to establish only</b> that <b>it</b> requires <b>oil,</b> and even so one can <b>arrive</b> at the conclusion that three <i>log</i> are required due to the <b>derivation</b> based upon the verbal analogy from the meal offering brought with the libations that accompany animal offerings. <b>But</b> although Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, attempts to <b>employ</b> this <b>derivation he is unsuccessful,</b> as there is a counter-indication from another verbal analogy to the voluntary meal offering. Therefore, Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, <b>needed</b> to derive the <i>halakha</i> from the <b>verse: “Fine flour for a meal offering perpetually [<i>tamid</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 6:13), <b>as Rabbi Yishmael,</b> son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, <b>concluded his statement</b> in the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 20
<b>Rabba said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be understood differently: The <b>entire</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, and</b> Rabbi Shimon <b>is speaking</b> utilizing the style of: <b>If it were not stated.</b>

### Part 21
<b>And this</b> is what Rabbi Shimon <b>is saying:</b> The term <b>“with the oil”</b> serves <b>to add</b> extra <b>oil to it. As, if</b> the purpose of that term were merely <b>to establish</b> that the offering must include <b>oil,</b> a verse is <b>not needed</b> to teach that. <b>Since it is written with</b> respect to the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest: <b>“On a griddle [<i>maḥavat</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 6:14), it is <b>comparable to a pan [<i>maḥavat</i>]</b> meal offering, which requires oil. <b>And</b> even <b>if</b> the verse <b>had not stated: “With the oil,” I have</b> a manner of <b>derivation</b> for the fact that more than one <i>log</i> of oil is required, based upon a verbal analogy.

### Part 22
<b>But</b> although Rabbi Shimon attempts to <b>employ</b> this <b>derivation he is unsuccessful,</b> as there is a counter-indication from another verbal analogy, <b>and</b> therefore the term <b>“with the oil” is needed</b> to teach that more than one <i>log</i> of oil is required. Nevertheless, this teaches only that more oil than usual is required, but the specific amount still must be clarified. Rabbi Shimon <b>then said: Let</b> the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest <b>be like the meal offering</b> that accompanies the sacrifice of <b>bulls and rams,</b> which require two <i>log</i> of oil per ephah of flour.

### Part 23
Rabbi Shimon <b>then said: We</b> should <b>derive</b> the <i>halakha</i>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC