
### Part 1
had the <b>leg of</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i> in</b> the term: <b>“The nation [<i>ha’am</i>]”</b> (Exodus 13:3), written in his phylacteries, <b>severed by a perforation. He came before</b> his son-in-law <b>Rabbi Abba</b> to clarify the <i>halakha</i>. Rabbi Abba <b>said to him: If there remains in</b> the leg that is attached to the roof of the letter <b>the equivalent of the measure of a small letter,</b> i.e., the letter <i>yod</i>, it is <b>fit. But if not,</b> it is <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara relates: <b>Rami bar Tamrei, who</b> was <b>the father-in-law of Rami bar Dikkulei,</b> had the <b>leg of</b> the letter <b><i>vav</i> in</b> the term: <b>“And</b> the Lord <b>slew [<i>vayaharog</i>]</b> all the firstborn” (Exodus 13:15), written in his phylacteries, <b>severed by a perforation. He came before Rabbi Zeira</b> to clarify the <i>halakha</i>. Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: Go bring a child who is neither wise nor stupid,</b> but of average intelligence; <b>if he reads</b> the term as <b>“And</b> the Lord <b>slew [<i>vayaharog</i>]”</b> then it is <b>fit,</b> as despite the perforation the letter is still seen as a <i>vav</i>. But <b>if not,</b> then it is as though the term <b>were: Will be slain [<i>yehareg</i>],</b> written without the letter <i>vav</i>, <b>and</b> it is <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: When Moses ascended on High, he found the Holy One, Blessed be He, sitting and tying crowns on the letters</b> of the Torah. Moses <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, who is preventing You</b> from giving the Torah without these additions? God <b>said to him: There is a man who is destined to be</b> born <b>after several generations, and Akiva ben Yosef</b> is <b>his name; he is destined to derive from each and every thorn</b> of these crowns <b>mounds</b> upon <b>mounds of <i>halakhot</i>.</b> It is for his sake that the crowns must be added to the letters of the Torah.

### Part 4
Moses <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, show him to me.</b> God <b>said to him: Return behind you.</b> Moses <b>went and sat at the end of the eighth row</b> in Rabbi Akiva’s study hall <b>and did not understand what they were saying.</b> Moses’ <b>strength waned,</b> as he thought his Torah knowledge was deficient. <b>When</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>arrived at</b> the discussion of <b>one matter, his students said to him: My teacher, from where do you</b> derive this? Rabbi Akiva <b>said to them:</b> It is <b>a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted <b>to Moses from Sinai.</b> When Moses heard this, <b>his mind was put at ease,</b> as this too was part of the Torah that he was to receive.

### Part 5
Moses <b>returned and came before the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> and <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, You have a man</b> as great <b>as this and</b> yet <b>You</b> still choose to <b>give the Torah through me.</b> Why? God <b>said to him: Be silent; this intention arose before Me.</b> Moses <b>said before</b> God: <b>Master of the Universe, You have shown me</b> Rabbi Akiva’s <b>Torah,</b> now <b>show me his reward.</b> God <b>said to him: Return</b> to where you were. Moses <b>went back</b> and <b>saw that they were weighing</b> Rabbi Akiva’s <b>flesh in a butcher shop [<i>bemakkulin</i>],</b> as Rabbi Akiva was tortured to death by the Romans. Moses <b>said before Him: Master of the Universe, this is Torah and this is its reward?</b> God <b>said to him: Be silent; this intention arose before Me.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara continues its discussion of the crowns on letters of the Torah: <b>Rava says: Seven letters require three crowns [<i>ziyyunin</i>], and they are</b> the letters <b><i>shin</i>, <i>ayin</i>, <i>tet</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>zayin</i>; <i>gimmel</i></b> and <b><i>tzadi</i>. Rav Ashi says: I have seen that the exacting scribes of the study hall of Rav would put a hump-like stroke on the roof of</b> the letter <b><i>ḥet</i> and they would suspend the</b> left <b>leg of</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i>,</b> i.e., they would ensure that it is not joined to the roof of the letter.

### Part 7
Rava explains: <b>They would put a hump-like stroke on the roof of</b> the letter <b><i>ḥet</i> as if to</b> thereby <b>say:</b> The Holy One, Blessed be <b>He, lives [<i>ḥai</i>] in the heights of the universe. And they would suspend the</b> left <b>leg of</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i>, as Rabbi Yehuda Nesia asked Rabbi Ami: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Trust in the Lord forever, for in the Lord [<i>beYah</i>] is God, an everlasting [<i>olamim</i>] Rock”</b> (Isaiah 26:4)? Rabbi Ami <b>said to him: Anyone who puts their trust in the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> will have Him as <b>his refuge in this world and in the World-to-Come.</b> This is alluded to in the word “<i>olamim</i>,” which can also mean: Worlds.

### Part 8
Rabbi Yehuda Nesia <b>said to</b> Rabbi Ami: I was not asking about the literal meaning of the verse; <b>this is</b> what poses <b>a difficulty for me: What is different</b> about that <b>which is written:</b> “For <b>in the Lord [<i>beYah</i>],” and it is not written:</b> For <b>the Lord [<i>Yah</i>]?</b>

### Part 9
Rav Ashi responded: It is <b>as Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Elai taught:</b> The verse “For in the Lord [<i>beYah</i>] is God, an everlasting Rock [<i>Tzur olamim</i>]” is understood as follows: The term “<i>Tzur olamim</i>” can also mean Creator of worlds. <b>These</b> letters <i>yod</i> and <i>heh</i> that constitute the word <i>yah</i> are referring to the <b>two worlds that the Holy One, Blessed be He, created; one with [<i>be</i>]</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i> and one with [<i>be</i>]</b> the letter <b><i>yod</i>. And I do not know whether the World-to-Come</b> was created <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>yod</i> and this world</b> was created <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i>,</b> or <b>whether this world</b> was created <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>yod</i> and the World-to-Come</b> was created <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<b>When</b> the verse <b>states: “These are the generations of the heaven and of the earth when they were created [<i>behibare’am</i>]”</b> (Genesis 2:4), <b>do not read</b> it as <b><i>behibare’am</i>,</b> meaning: When they were created; <b>rather,</b> read it as <b><i>beheh bera’am</i>,</b> meaning: He created them with the letter <i>heh</i>. This verse demonstrates that the heaven and the earth, i.e., this world, were created with the letter <i>heh</i>, and therefore the World-to-Come must have been created with the letter <i>yod</i>.

### Part 11
<b>And for what</b> reason <b>was this world created</b> specifically <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i>?</b> It is <b>because</b> the letter <i>heh</i>, <b>which</b> is open on its bottom, has <b>a similar</b> appearance <b>to a portico,</b> which is open on one side. And it alludes to this world, <b>where anyone who wishes to leave may leave,</b> i.e., every person has the ability to choose to do evil. <b>And what is the reason</b> that the left <b>leg of</b> the letter <i>heh</i> <b>is suspended,</b> i.e., is not joined to the roof of the letter? It is <b>because if one repents, he is brought</b> back <b>in</b> through the opening at the top.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>let him enter through that</b> same way that he left? The Gemara answers: That would <b>not be effective,</b> since one requires assistance from Heaven in order to repent, <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Reish Lakish. As Reish Lakish says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “If it concerns the scorners, He scorns them, but to the humble He gives grace”</b> (Proverbs 3:34)? Concerning one who <b>comes</b> in order <b>to become pure, he is assisted</b> from Heaven, as it is written: “But to the humble He gives grace.” Concerning one who <b>comes to become impure, he is provided with an opening</b> to do so. The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that the letter <i>heh</i> <b>has a crown</b> on its roof? The Gemara answers: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, says: If</b> a sinner <b>returns,</b> repenting for his sin, <b>I tie</b> a crown <b>for him</b> from above.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>For what</b> reason <b>was the World-to-Come created</b> specifically <b>with</b> the letter <b><i>yod</i>,</b> the smallest letter in the Hebrew alphabet? The Gemara answers: It is <b>because the righteous of</b> the world <b>are</b> so <b>few. And for what</b> reason is the left side of <b>the top of</b> the letter <i>yod</i> <b>bent</b> downward? It is <b>because the righteous who are in</b> the World-to-Come <b>hang their heads</b> in shame, <b>since the actions of one are not similar to those of another.</b> In the World-to-Come some of the righteous will be shown to be of greater stature than others.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rav Yosef says: Rav states these two matters with regard to scrolls, and</b> in each case a statement <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that constitutes <b>a refutation of his</b> ruling. <b>One</b> is <b>that which Rav says: A Torah scroll that contains two errors on each and every column may be corrected,</b> but if there are <b>three</b> errors on each and every column then it <b>shall be interred.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And</b> a statement <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that constitutes <b>a refutation of his</b> ruling: A Torah scroll that contains <b>three</b> errors on every column <b>may be corrected,</b> but if there are <b>four</b> errors on every column then it <b>shall be interred.</b> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>If</b> the Torah scroll <b>contains one complete column</b> with no errors, <b>it saves the entire</b> Torah scroll, and it is permitted to correct the scroll rather than interring it. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Shmuel bar Marta says in the name of Rav: And this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>when the majority of the scroll is written properly</b> and is not full of errors.

### Part 16
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: If that column contained three errors, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: Since</b> the column itself <b>may be corrected,</b> it <b>enables the correction</b> of the entire scroll. The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> that a Torah scroll may not be fixed if it is full of errors, <b>this statement</b> applies when letters <b>are missing</b> and must be added in the space between the lines. <b>But</b> if there were <b>extraneous</b> letters, <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with it,</b> since they can easily be erased. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that a scroll with letters <b>missing</b> may <b>not</b> be corrected? <b>Rav Kahana said: Because it would look speckled</b> if one adds all of the missing letters in the spaces between the lines.

### Part 17
The Gemara relates: <b>Agra, the father-in-law of Rabbi Abba, had</b> many <b>extraneous</b> letters <b>in his scroll. He came before Rabbi Abba</b> to clarify the <i>halakha</i>. Rabbi Abba <b>said to him: We said</b> that one may not correct the scroll <b>only in</b> a case where the letters are <b>missing.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC