
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>All the meal offerings require rubbing three hundred</b> times <b>and striking five hundred</b> times with one’s fist or palm. <b>Rubbing and striking</b> are performed <b>on the wheat</b> kernels to remove their husks prior to grinding them into flour. <b>And Rabbi Yosei says:</b> They are performed <b>on the dough</b> to ensure a smooth product. <b>All of the meal offerings come</b> as <b>ten</b> loaves or <b>ten</b> wafers from each one tenth of an ephah of flour, <b>except for the shewbread and the griddle-cake</b> offering <b>of the High Priest, which come</b> as <b>twelve</b> loaves or wafers; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Meir says: They all come</b> as <b>twelve</b> loaves <b>except for</b> the four types of <b>loaves</b> that accompany <b>the thanks offering and</b> the two types of loaves that accompany the peace offering of <b>naziriteship, which come</b> as <b>ten each.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the rubbing and striking are done in the following manner: He <b>rubs once</b> and <b>strikes twice.</b> Then he <b>rubs twice</b> and <b>strikes three</b> times. This sequence is repeated one hundred times, so that he rubs three hundred times and strikes five hundred times. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya raises a dilemma</b> with regard to the rubbing: Is the rubbing of the hand <b>back and forth</b> over the surface of the item considered <b>one</b> rubbing, <b>or</b> is <b>perhaps</b> rubbing <b>back and forth</b> considered <b>two</b> distinct rubbings? <b>What</b> is the correct count? The Gemara states: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rubbing and striking</b> are performed <b>on the wheat</b> kernels, while <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> They are performed <b>on the dough.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Does Rabbi Yosei mean that these actions are performed <b>on the dough and not on the wheat</b> kernels? <b>Or perhaps</b> he means that they are performed not only on the kernels but <b>also on the dough.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rubbing and striking</b> are performed <b>on the wheat</b> kernels. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Rubbing and striking</b> are performed <b>on the dough.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>all of the meal offerings come</b> as ten loaves or wafers, except for the shewbread and the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest, which come as <b>twelve</b> loaves or wafers. The Gemara examines the sources for these exceptions: With regard to <b>the shewbread, it is written explicitly of it:</b> “And you shall take fine flour and bake twelve cakes of it” (Leviticus 24:5).

### Part 5
That the <b>griddle-cake</b> offering <b>of the High Priest</b> is also offered as twelve units is <b>derived from</b> a verbal analogy of the word “obligation,” written in the context of the verse discussing the <b>shewbread.</b> With regard to the griddle-cake offering, the verse states: “And the anointed priest…shall offer it; it is an <b>obligation</b> forever” (Leviticus 6:15), and the verse states with regard to the twelve loaves of the shewbread: “And it shall be for Aaron and his sons…a perpetual <b>obligation”</b> (Leviticus 24:9).

### Part 6
§ The Gemara asks: According to Rabbi Yehuda, who states in the mishna with regard to <b>all the meal offerings that they come</b> as <b>ten</b> loaves or <b>ten</b> wafers, <b>from where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers that he <b>derives</b> it <b>from the loaves of the thanks offering. Just as there,</b> there are <b>ten</b> loaves, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to all other meal offerings, there are <b>ten</b> loaves. The Gemara challenges: <b>But let him derive it from the shewbread: Just as there,</b> there are <b>twelve</b> loaves, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to all other meal offerings, there must be <b>twelve.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: It <b>stands to reason</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>should derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the other meal offerings <b>from the loaves of the thanks offering, as</b> the other meal offerings resemble the loaves of the thanks offering and differ from the shewbread in several respects: They are offered by <b>an individual</b> and not by the public; they are brought by <b>one who donates</b> and not as obligatory offerings; <b>oil</b> is used in their preparation; they are <b>disqualified</b> when left overnight, whereas, by contrast, the rite of the shewbread demands that it be left on the Table for eight days; they are <b>not</b> brought <b>on the Sabbath,</b> unlike the shewbread, whose rite is performed on the Sabbath; <b>and</b> they are <b>not</b> brought <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> unlike the shewbread, which is brought even in a state of impurity.

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: <b>On the contrary,</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>should derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the other meal offerings <b>from the shewbread, as</b> they resemble the shewbread in several respects: They are <b>consecrated</b> property of the most sacred order, whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are of lesser sanctity; <b>and</b> they are brought with <b>frankincense,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are not; they are brought only as <b>unleavened bread,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering include some leavened bread; <b>and</b> each is brought as an offering by <b>itself,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are brought together with an animal sacrifice.

### Part 9
The Gemara explains: <b>These</b> analogies between other meal offerings and the loaves of the thanks offering <b>are</b> more <b>numerous</b> than the analogies between other meal offerings and the shewbread. Therefore, the <i>halakha</i> of other meal offerings is derived from the loaves of the thanks offering.

### Part 10
The Gemara posited previously that according to Rabbi Yehuda, a verbal analogy teaches that, like the shewbread, the griddle-cake offering of the High Priest is brought as twelve units. The Gemara asks: <b>And if we hold</b> that <b>a matter learned through a verbal analogy may subsequently teach as a paradigm, let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the other meal offerings <b>from the griddle-cake</b> offering <b>of the High Priest: Just as there,</b> the meal <b>offering</b> comprises <b>twelve</b> units, <b>so too here,</b> other meal offerings should consist of <b>twelve</b> units.

### Part 11
The Gemara responds: It <b>stands to reason</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>should derive</b> their <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the loaves of the thanks offering, as</b> the other meal offerings resemble the loaves of the thanks offering and differ from the griddle-cake offering in several respects: They are brought by <b>an ordinary</b> person and not by the High Priest; they are brought by <b>one who donates</b> and not as obligatory offerings; and they are only brought whole, while the High Priest’s griddle-cake offering is brought in <b>halves,</b> half in the morning and half in the afternoon.

### Part 12
In addition, they are disqualified <b>as <i>piggul</i>,</b> i.e., when they are sacrificed with the intent to be consumed after their appointed time, unlike the griddle-cake offering, which is not eaten at all; they are <b>not</b> brought <b>on the Sabbath,</b> unlike the griddle-cake offering; <b>and</b> they are <b>not</b> brought <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> whereas the griddle-cake offering is brought by the High Priest even while impure.

### Part 13
The Gemara challenges: <b>On the contrary,</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>should have derived</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the other meal offerings <b>from the High Priest’s griddle-cake</b> offering, <b>as</b> the other meal offerings resemble the griddle-cake offering in several respects: They both contain <b>a tenth</b> of an ephah of fine flour, whereas the loaves of the thanks offering contain several tenths of an ephah; they are consecrated when placed in a service <b>vessel,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are consecrated when the thanks offering is slaughtered; they are <b>consecrated</b> property of the most sacred order, whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are of lesser sanctity; <b>and</b> they are brought with <b>frankincense,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are not.

### Part 14
In addition, they are brought only of <b>unleavened bread,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering include some leavened bread; <b>and</b> each is brought as an offering <b>itself,</b> whereas the loaves of the thanks offering are brought together with an animal sacrifice; part of their rite is <b>bringing</b> them <b>near</b> the southwest corner of the altar, unlike the loaves of the thanks offering; <b>and</b> parts or all of them are placed on <b>the fires of the altar,</b> unlike the loaves of the thanks offering. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> indeed, <b>these</b> similarities between other meal offerings and the griddle-cake offering <b>are</b> more <b>numerous</b> than the similarities between other meal offerings and the loaves of the thanks offering. Therefore, it seems more appropriate to derive the number of loaves from the griddle-cake offering.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, Rabbi Yehuda <b>prefers</b> to learn the <i>halakha</i> of the other meal offerings, which are brought by <b>an ordinary</b> person, <b>from</b> the loaves of the thanks offering, which are brought by <b>an ordinary</b> person.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Meir says: They all come</b> as <b>twelve</b> loaves. The Gemara explains: <b>What does</b> he <b>hold? If he holds that a matter learned through a verbal analogy</b> is <b>subsequently</b> used to <b>teach as a paradigm,</b> he <b>derives</b> the number of loaves in other meal offerings <b>from the High Priest’s griddle-cake</b> offering, which was itself derived from a verbal analogy, <b>as these</b> similarities between other meal offerings and the griddle-cake offering enumerated above <b>are</b> more <b>numerous.</b>

### Part 17
And <b>if he holds that a matter learned through a verbal analogy is not subsequently</b> used to <b>teach as a paradigm,</b> then he <b>derives</b> the number of loaves in other meal offerings <b>from</b> the twelve loaves of <b>the shewbread.</b> This is because Rabbi Meir <b>prefers</b> to derive the status of the other meal offerings, which are <b>consecrated</b> property of the highest order, <b>from</b> the shewbread, which is also <b>consecrated</b> property of the highest order, in contrast to the loaves of the thanks offering, which are of lesser sanctity.

### Part 18
§ The mishna teaches that Rabbi Meir says: They all come as twelve loaves <b>except for</b> the <b>loaves</b> of the <b>thanks offering and</b> the loaves that accompany the guilt offering of <b>naziriteship, which come</b> as <b>ten each.</b> The Gemara explains the exceptions: With regard to <b>the loaves of the thanks offering, it is written explicitly of them</b> that these loaves are brought in units of ten, based on a verbal analogy: With regard to the thanks offering, the verse states: “And of it he shall present one out of each offering for a gift [<i>teruma</i>] to the Lord” (Leviticus 7:14), and with regard to <i>teruma</i> of the tithe it is stated: “You shall set apart of it a gift [<i>teruma</i>] for the Lord, a tithe of the tithe” (Numbers 18:26). Just as the <i>teruma</i> of the tithe consists of one portion of ten, so too, the loaves of the thanks offering are brought in units of ten (see 77b).

### Part 19
That ten loaves accompany the guilt offering of <b>naziriteship</b> is derived from a verse, <b>as the Master says:</b> The verse describing the thanks offering states: “With cakes of leavened bread he shall present his offering with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving” (Leviticus 7:13). The term <b>“his peace offerings”</b> serves <b>to include</b> the loaves of the <b>peace offering of the nazirite.</b> Just as each of the four varieties of loaves accompanying the thanks offering are brought in units of ten loaves, so too, the peace offering of the nazirite comprises ten loaves.

### Part 20
§ The loaves of the thanks offering consist of ten of each of the following four types: Leavened loaves, unleavened wafers, standard unleavened loaves, and unleavened loaves made from flour mixed with water and oil. With regard to these loaves, <b>Rav Tovi bar Kisna says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> In the case of <b>loaves of</b> the <b>thanks offering that one baked as</b> only <b>four loaves,</b> one of each of the four types, where each loaf is the size of ten loaves, he has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> do <b>we</b> not <b>require forty</b> loaves? The Gemara answers: Forty loaves are brought in order <b>to</b> fulfill the <b>mitzva</b> in the optimal fashion, but he has nevertheless fulfilled his obligation with four loaves, one of each type.

### Part 21
The Gemara challenges this: <b>But</b> an individual who brings the loaves as an offering <b>is required to separate <i>teruma</i> from them</b> by designating one loaf of each type to be given to the priests, which cannot be done where only one loaf of each type exists. <b>And if you would say that he</b> may <b>separate</b> a tenth-sized piece <b>from each and every</b> loaf, that is difficult: Doesn’t <b>the Merciful One state:</b> “And of it he shall present <b>one</b> out of each offering for a gift [<i>teruma</i>] to the Lord,” which teaches <b>that he may not take sliced</b> bread, but rather a whole loaf? The Gemara answers: This is a case <b>where he separated it while kneading,</b> so that it is not considered separating a slice.

### Part 22
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Shmuel from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All the meal offerings where</b> one <b>increased the measure of their loaves or where</b> one <b>decreased the measure of their loaves</b> are nevertheless <b>fit, except for the</b> twelve loaves of <b>shewbread, and the</b> twelve loaves of the <b>High Priest’s griddle-cake</b> offering, <b>and</b> the ten <b>loaves</b> of each variety for the <b>thanks offering and</b> the ten loaves that accompany the guilt offering of <b>naziriteship.</b> Evidently, no fewer than forty loaves are fit for the thanks offering, in contradiction to the statement of Shmuel. The Gemara answers: <b>He</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC