
### Part 1
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan from another <i>baraita</i>: <b>There was</b> a mold <b>in the oven for</b> the shewbread that was <b>similar to a barrel</b> made of reeds, as it was perforated to enable the bread to bake well, <b>and</b> in its shape <b>it resembled a type of rectangular tablet [<i>tavla</i>].</b> This indicates that the shewbread was rectangular. The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> that <b>the opening,</b> i.e., the upper section of the mold, <b>resembled a type of rectangular tablet,</b> and that the mold tapered down to a point.

### Part 2
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with the one who said</b> the shewbread was <b>like a rocking boat, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There were four gold panels there,</b> on the Table, which <b>split up at their upper ends</b> so that <b>they were like forked</b> reed branches. The panels were forked <b>because the bread, which resembled a type of rocking boat, was supported by them.</b>

### Part 3
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: During the era of the Tabernacle, was <b>the shewbread disqualified during the journeys</b> of the Jewish people in the wilderness, <b>or was it not disqualified during the journeys?</b> When the Jewish people would travel from one place to another in the wilderness, the Tabernacle would be dismantled and the Table would be carried with the loaves upon it. The dilemma is about whether or not the loaves were disqualified, since they left the boundaries of the Sanctuary. This matter is the subject of a dispute between <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi. One says</b> the loaves were thereby <b>disqualified, and one says</b> they were <b>not disqualified.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara explains their respective reasons: <b>The one who says</b> the shewbread was <b>disqualified</b> derives his opinion from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the journeys: “Then the Tent of Meeting shall journey with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps; <b>as they encamp, so shall they journey,</b> every man in his place, by their banners” (Numbers 2:17). The verse juxtaposes the encampments with the journeys, indicating that <b>just as when</b> the Tabernacle is <b>encamped</b> the shewbread is <b>disqualified when</b> it <b>leaves</b> the Tabernacle courtyard, <b>so too, when</b> the Tabernacle <b>journeys</b> the shewbread is <b>disqualified when</b> it <b>leaves</b> the courtyard.

### Part 5
<b>The one who says</b> the shewbread was <b>not disqualified</b> during the journeys derives his opinion from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the journeys: “And upon the Table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue…<b>and the continual bread shall remain upon it”</b> (Numbers 4:7). The verse refers to the shewbread as “the continual bread” even during the journeys, indicating that as long as the loaves are on the Table they retain their sacred status.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But also</b> according to <b>the other</b> <i>amora</i>, who maintains the shewbread was not disqualified during the journeys, <b>isn’t it written: “As they encamp, so shall they journey,”</b> indicating that the shewbread is disqualified when it leaves the Tabernacle during the journeys? The Gemara replies that according to this opinion, the juxtaposition of the encampments with the journeys is interpreted <b>in the other direction: Just as when</b> the Tabernacle is <b>encamped, if</b> the shewbread <b>does not leave its place</b> and remains on the Table it is <b>not disqualified, so too, when</b> the Tabernacle <b>journeys, if it does not leave its place</b> on the Table it is <b>not disqualified.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But also</b> according to <b>the other</b> <i>amora</i>, who maintains the shewbread was disqualified during the journeys, <b>isn’t it written: “And the continual bread shall remain upon it,”</b> indicating that the shewbread retains its sanctity as long as it is on the Table? <b>Rather, when Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> that the explanation of the dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi is different. With regard to a case <b>where</b> the shewbread <b>is arranged</b> on the Table, <b>everyone agrees</b> the shewbread is not disqualified during the journey. <b>Rather, when they disagree</b> it is in a case <b>where</b> the shewbread <b>is removed</b> from the Table before the journey.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains their respective reasons: <b>The one who says</b> the shewbread <b>is disqualified</b> derives his opinion from a verse, <b>as it is written:</b> “Then the Tent of Meeting shall journey with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps; <b>as they encamp, so shall they journey,</b> every man in his place, by their banners” (Numbers 2:17). The verse juxtaposes the encampments with the journeys, indicating that <b>just as when</b> the Tabernacle is <b>encamped</b> the shewbread is <b>disqualified when</b> it <b>leaves</b> the Tabernacle courtyard, <b>so too, when</b> the Tabernacle <b>journeys</b> the shewbread is <b>disqualified when</b> it <b>leaves</b> the courtyard.

### Part 9
<b>According to the one who says</b> the shewbread <b>is not disqualified</b> during the journeys, this is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “Then the Tent of Meeting shall journey,”</b> indicating that <b>even though it has journeyed it is</b> still considered <b>the Tent of Meeting,</b> and therefore the shewbread is not disqualified.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But also</b> according to <b>the other</b> <i>amora</i>, who maintains the shewbread was not disqualified during the journeys, <b>isn’t it written: “As they encamp, so shall they journey,”</b> indicating that the shewbread is disqualified when it leaves the Tabernacle during the journeys? The Gemara replies that according to this opinion, the juxtaposition of the encampments with the journeys is interpreted <b>in the other direction: Just as when</b> the Tabernacle is <b>encamped, if</b> one <b>does not take</b> the shewbread <b>out</b> of the courtyard <b>it is not disqualified, so too, when</b> the Tabernacle <b>journeys, if</b> one <b>does not take</b> the shewbread <b>out</b> of the courtyard <b>it is not disqualified.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But also</b> according to <b>the other</b> <i>amora</i>, who maintains the shewbread was disqualified during the journeys, <b>isn’t it written: “Then the Tent of Meeting shall journey,”</b> indicating that the Tent of Meeting retains its sanctity during the journeys and therefore the shewbread should not be disqualified? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse is not referring to the sanctity of the Tent of Meeting during the journeys. Rather, <b>it comes to</b> teach the position of the Tent of Meeting between the <b>banners</b> of the different tribes during the journeys.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the other</b> <i>amora</i>, from where does he derive the position of the Tent of Meeting during the journeys? The Gemara replies: He <b>derives</b> this <b>from</b> the continuation of the verse: <b>“With the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps”</b> (Numbers 2:17).

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i> to the opinion that the shewbread was not disqualified during the journeys: <b>At the time of the dismantling</b> of the Tabernacle in order to commence the <b>journeys,</b> when the curtains surrounding the Tabernacle courtyard are removed, the <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>is disqualified</b> from being consumed, <b>as</b> it is considered to have <b>left</b> the Tabernacle courtyard. <b>And <i>zavim</i> and lepers are sent out of the partitions of their</b> camps; the <i>zavim</i> are sent out of the Levite camp, while lepers are sent out of the Israelite camp. <b>What, is it not</b> referring <b>even</b> to <b>the shewbread,</b> indicating that it is disqualified during the journeys? The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> means that most sacrificial food is disqualified, <b>except for the shewbread.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara challenges: <b>Whichever</b> way <b>you</b> look at it, this explanation is difficult. <b>If</b> the phrase: “Then the <b>Tent of Meeting</b> shall journey,” <b>is</b> meant <b>exactly,</b> i.e., literally, and it still has the status of the Tent of Meeting even during the journeys, then <b>even</b> other <b>sacrificial</b> food should not be disqualified during the journeys. <b>If</b> “then the <b>Tent of Meeting</b> shall journey,” <b>is not</b> meant <b>exactly,</b> and it does not have the status of the Tent of Meeting during the journeys, then <b>even the shewbread</b> should be disqualified.

### Part 15
<b>Rather, when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said</b> that there is actually no dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi. This <b>Master,</b> who stated that the shewbread is not disqualified during the journeys, <b>stated</b> his ruling <b>with regard to</b> loaves <b>that are arranged</b> on the Table; <b>and</b> that <b>Master,</b> who stated that the shewbread is disqualified during the journeys, <b>stated</b> his ruling <b>with regard to</b> loaves <b>that were removed</b> from the Table. <b>And</b> the two <i>amora’im</i> <b>do not disagree,</b> as each was referring to a different case.

### Part 16
§ The aforementioned <i>baraita</i> states that when the Tabernacle was dismantled the sacrificial food was disqualified, as it was considered to have left the Tabernacle courtyard. <b>Abaye said:</b> One may <b>conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that <b>there</b> could <b>be</b> a case where the <b>dismantling</b> of the Tabernacle in order to commence the <b>journeys</b> would take place <b>at night.</b> This is a necessary conclusion, <b>as if it</b> should <b>enter your mind</b> to say that <b>there</b> could <b>not be</b> a case where the <b>dismantling</b> of the Tabernacle in order to commence the <b>journeys</b> would take place <b>at night, when would</b> the curtains surrounding the Tabernacle <b>be removed?</b> If they were removed right away <b>in the morning, why</b> was the sacrificial food disqualified <b>specifically due to</b> the fact that it <b>left</b> the Tabernacle courtyard? <b>I may derive that it was disqualified</b> because of the fact that it was <b>left overnight.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara challenges: It is <b>obvious</b> that the Tabernacle could be dismantled at night, as it <b>is written:</b> “And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; <b>that they might go by day and by night”</b> (Exodus 13:21). The Gemara answers that Abaye’s observation is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that <b>this statement,</b> that they would travel at night, applies only in a case <b>where</b> the Jewish people <b>dismantled</b> their camp and began to journey <b>by day,</b> in which case they would continue to travel at night. <b>But</b> in a case <b>where they did not dismantle</b> their camp <b>by day they could not dismantle</b> the camp and leave <b>at night.</b> Abaye therefore <b>teaches us</b> that they could set out even at night.

### Part 18
§ The aforementioned <i>baraita</i> teaches that even when the Tabernacle was dismantled, <i>zavim</i> and lepers were sent outside the camp, as the sanctity of both the Levite camp and the Israelite camp remained intact even while the Tabernacle was dismantled. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from another <i>baraita</i>: Once <b>the curtain</b> surrounding the Tabernacle courtyard <b>was rolled up, the <i>zavim</i> and</b> the <b>lepers were permitted to enter into that</b> area where the Tabernacle had stood. This indicates that the camps did not retain their sacred status once the Tabernacle was dismantled. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> This is <b>not difficult; this</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> and <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC