
### Part 1
<b>the</b> apparent <b>dereliction of</b> the study of <b>Torah is its foundation,</b> e.g., if one breaks off his studies in order to participate in a funeral or a wedding procession. This is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written:</b> “And the Lord said to Moses: Hew for yourself two tablets of stone like the first, and I will write upon the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, <b>which [<i>asher</i>] you broke”</b> (Exodus 34:1). The word “<i>asher</i>” is an allusion to the fact that that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: Your strength is true [<i>yishar koḥakha</i>]</b> in <b>that you broke</b> the tablets, as the breaking of the first tablets led to the foundation of the Torah through the giving of the second tablets.

### Part 2
<b>And Reish Lakish says:</b> With regard to <b>a Torah scholar who sinned, he is not disgraced in public, as it is stated: “Therefore, you shall stumble in the day, and the prophet also shall stumble with you in the night”</b> (Hosea 4:5). One can derive from the verse that if a prophet or any other Torah scholar stumbles and sins, one <b>should conceal</b> his offense <b>like the night</b> and not punish him in public.

### Part 3
<b>And Reish Lakish says: Anyone who causes himself to forget</b> even <b>one matter from his studies violates a prohibition, as it is stated</b> with regard to the receiving of the Torah on Mount Sinai: “Only <b>observe for yourself, and guard your soul diligently, lest you forget the matters</b> that your eyes saw, and lest they depart from your heart all the days of your life, but you should make them known to your children and to your children’s children” (Deuteronomy 4:9). <b>And</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the principle that <b>Rabbi Avin</b> says that <b>Rabbi Ile’a says, as Rabbi Avin says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ile’a says: Wherever it is stated: Observe,</b> or: <b>Lest, or: Do not, it is nothing other than a prohibition.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Ravina says:</b> One who forgets his studies violates two prohibitions, as the verse uses both the term <b>“observe” and</b> the term <b>“lest,”</b> and <b>these are two prohibitions. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says:</b> He violates <b>three prohibitions, as it is stated:</b> “Only <b>observe for yourself, and guard your soul diligently, lest you forget the matters</b> that your eyes saw.” The term “Guard your soul” is derived from the same root as “observe” and is considered an additional prohibition.

### Part 5
The Gemara qualifies this statement: One <b>might</b> have thought this applies <b>even</b> to one who forgot his Torah knowledge <b>due to</b> circumstances <b>beyond his control.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And lest they depart from your heart.”</b> This indicates that <b>the verse is speaking of one who</b> willingly <b>causes them to depart from his heart. Rabbi Dostai, son of Rabbi Yannai, says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that this applies <b>even</b> if <b>his studies were</b> too <b>hard for him</b> to remember. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Only,”</b> which excludes one who is unable to recall his studies.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar both say:</b> The <b>Torah was given in forty</b> days, when Moses ascended to Mount Sinai to receive it, <b>and</b> similarly the <b>soul</b> of man <b>is formed in forty</b> days, as the formation of the fetus in the womb takes forty days from the time of conception. This teaches that <b>anyone who preserves his Torah</b> studies, <b>his soul is</b> likewise <b>preserved, and anyone who does not preserve his Torah</b> studies, <b>his soul is not preserved</b> either.

### Part 7
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> This can be illustrated by <b>a parable,</b> as it is comparable <b>to a person who delivered a sparrow to his slave</b> for safekeeping, and <b>said</b> to him: <b>Are you under the impression that if you lose it I will take from you an <i>issar</i>,</b> a small coin, <b>which is the value</b> of the bird? It is not so; <b>I will take your soul from you</b> as punishment, meaning I will kill you. Similarly, one who fails to preserve the Torah entrusted to him will be severely punished.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>There were two tables in the Entrance Hall, on the inside</b> of the Entrance Hall, next <b>to the entrance to the Temple,</b> i.e., next to the entrance to the Sanctuary. <b>One</b> was <b>of marble and one</b> was <b>of gold. On</b> the table <b>of marble,</b> the priests <b>place the</b> new <b>shewbread</b> that has been baked, <b>before its entrance</b> into the Sanctuary, so that the loaves may cool a little from the heat of the oven and not spoil. <b>And</b> when the old shewbread is removed from the shewbread Table it is placed <b>on</b> the table <b>of gold upon its exit</b> from the Sanctuary, where it remains until the frankincense is burned on the altar.

### Part 9
The reason the shewbread is placed on a gold table when it is removed, rather than on a marble or silver table, is <b>that one elevates</b> to a higher level <b>in</b> matters of <b>sanctity and one does not downgrade.</b> Since it is set on the gold shewbread Table all week, it cannot be downgraded to a marble or silver table upon its removal. <b>And</b> there was <b>one</b> Table <b>of gold within</b> the Sanctuary, <b>upon which the shewbread</b> is <b>always</b> found.

### Part 10
The mishna describes the manner in which it is ensured that the shewbread is constantly on the Table: <b>And four priests enter, two</b> with the <b>two arrangements</b> of the new shewbread <b>in their hands and two</b> with the <b>two bowls</b> of frankincense <b>in their hands. And four</b> priests <b>precede</b> them, entering the Sanctuary <b>before them, two to take</b> the <b>two arrangements</b> of the old shewbread from the Table, <b>and two to take</b> the <b>two bowls</b> of frankincense.

### Part 11
<b>Those bringing</b> the new shewbread <b>into</b> the Sanctuary <b>stand in the north and their faces are to the south, and those removing</b> the old shewbread <b>stand in the south and their faces are to the north. These</b> priests <b>draw</b> the old shewbread from the Table <b>and those</b> priests <b>place</b> the new shewbread on the Table, <b>and for</b> each <b>handbreadth of this</b> old shewbread that is removed from the Table a <b>handbreadth of that</b> new shewbread is placed upon the Table, so that the Table is never without loaves upon it, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And you shall set upon the Table shewbread <b>before Me always”</b> (Exodus 25:30).

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Yosei says: Even</b> if <b>these</b> priests were to <b>remove</b> the shewbread from the Table entirely, <b>and</b> only afterward <b>those</b> priests were to <b>place</b> the new shewbread upon the Table, this <b>too would</b> fulfill the requirement that the shewbread <b>always</b> be on the Table. It is unnecessary to ensure the uninterrupted presence of the shewbread upon the Table, as long as it does not remain a single night without shewbread upon it.

### Part 13
The mishna describes the manner in which the shewbread is distributed: The priests who carried the old shewbread loaves <b>came out</b> of the Sanctuary <b>and placed them on the table of gold that was in the Entrance Hall.</b> The priests then <b>burned</b> on the altar <b>the</b> frankincense that was in the <b>bowls. And the loaves were</b> subsequently <b>distributed to the priests.</b> This occurred on Shabbat, the day that the priestly watch that served in the Temple during the preceding week was replaced by the priestly watch that would serve during the following week. The shewbread was distributed to the priests of both watches.

### Part 14
If <b>Yom Kippur occurs on Shabbat, the loaves are distributed at night,</b> at the conclusion of the fast, since they may not be eaten during the day. If Yom Kippur <b>occurs on Friday,</b> i.e., when the holy day begins on Thursday evening, <b>the goat</b> sin offering <b>of Yom Kippur is eaten</b> by the priests <b>at night,</b> i.e., on Friday night, as it may be eaten only on the day that it is sacrificed or during the following night, until midnight. <b>And</b> since there is no possibility of cooking the meat, as one may not cook on Yom Kippur or Shabbat, <b>the Babylonians,</b> i.e., priests who had emigrated from Babylonia, <b>eat it when it is raw, due to</b> the fact <b>that they are broad-minded</b> with regard to their food, i.e., they are not particular and will eat meat even when it is not cooked.

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that according to Rabbi Yosei, even if the priest first removes the old shewbread entirely, and only then places the new shewbread upon the Table, this fulfills the requirement that the shewbread always be on the Table. Moreover, <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: Even</b> if the priest <b>removed the old</b> shewbread on the <b>morning</b> of Shabbat, <b>and arranged the new</b> shewbread toward <b>evening,</b> there is <b>nothing</b> wrong <b>with that. Rather, how do I realize</b> the meaning of the verse: “And you shall set upon the Table shewbread <b>before Me always”</b> (Exodus 25:30)? This means <b>that</b> the <b>Table should not be left overnight without bread</b> upon it.

### Part 16
The <i>baraita</i> teaches that according to Rabbi Yosei, even if the old shewbread remained on the Table for a short while in the morning, and the new shewbread was placed on the Table toward evening, and even though it did not reside constantly on the Table, this fulfills the requirement that the shewbread should always be on the Table. <b>Rabbi Ami says: From Rabbi Yosei’s statement we may learn</b> that <b>even</b> if <b>a person learned only one chapter</b> of the Mishna in <b>the morning and one chapter</b> of the Mishna in <b>the evening, he has</b> thereby <b>fulfilled the mitzva of: “This Torah scroll shall not depart from your mouth,</b> and you shall contemplate in it day and night, that you may take heed to do according to all that is written in it, for then you shall make your ways prosperous, and then you shall have good success” (Joshua 1:8).

### Part 17
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Even</b> if <b>a person recited only the recitation of <i>Shema</i></b> in <b>the morning and</b> in <b>the evening,</b> he has <b>fulfilled</b> the mitzva of: “This Torah scroll <b>shall not depart</b> from your mouth.” <b>And it is prohibited to state this matter in the presence of ignoramuses [<i>amei ha’aretz</i>],</b> as they are likely to get the impression that there is no need to study Torah beyond this. <b>And Rava says:</b> On the contrary, it is <b>a mitzva to state</b> this matter <b>in the presence of ignoramuses,</b> as they will realize that if merely reciting the <i>Shema</i> leads to such a great reward, all the more so how great is the reward of those who study Torah all day and night.

### Part 18
<b>Ben Dama, son of Rabbi Yishmael’s sister, asked Rabbi Yishmael:</b> In the case of one <b>such as I, who has learned the entire Torah, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to studying Greek wisdom?</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>recited this verse about him: “This Torah scroll shall not depart from your mouth, and you shall contemplate in it day and night.” Go and search</b> for <b>an hour that is neither</b> part <b>of the day nor</b> part <b>of the night, and learn Greek wisdom in it.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> this statement of Rabbi Yishmael’s <b>disagrees</b> with the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani, as Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: This verse is neither an obligation nor a mitzva, but a blessing.</b> Rabbi Yonatan explains: <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, saw Joshua</b> and observed <b>that</b> the <b>words of Torah were very precious to him, as it is stated:</b> “And the Lord spoke to Moses face-to-face…<b>and his servant Joshua, son of Nun, a young man, did not depart from the Tent”</b> (Exodus 33:11). <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said to</b> Joshua: <b>Joshua, are</b> the <b>words of Torah so precious to you?</b> I bless you that <b>“this Torah scroll shall not depart from your mouth.”</b>

### Part 20
<b>The <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael</b> teaches: The <b>words of Torah should not be</b> considered as <b>an obligation upon you,</b> i.e., one should not treat Torah study as a burden, <b>but</b> at the same time <b>you are not permitted to exempt yourself from them.</b>

### Part 21
<b>Ḥizkiyya said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written:</b> “He delivers the afflicted due to His affliction, and opens their ear by tribulation; <b>and also He has allured you out of a narrow opening to a broad place without confines below it,</b> and that which is set on your table is full of fatness” (Job 36:15–16)? <b>Come and see that the attribute of flesh and blood is unlike the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He. The attribute of flesh and blood</b> is that <b>a person allures another from</b> the <b>paths of life to</b> the <b>paths of death, but the Holy One, Blessed be He, allures the person from</b> the <b>paths of death to</b> the <b>paths of life, as it is stated: “And also He has allured you out of a narrow opening,”</b> i.e., <b>from Gehenna, the opening of which is narrow</b> so <b>that its smoke is collected</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC