
### Part 1
<b>But with regard to</b> the requirement to use grain grown in <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>they do not disagree that</b> if <b>the <i>omer</i> and the two loaves</b> come <b>from Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>indeed,</b> they are valid, but if they come <b>from outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, they are <b>not</b> valid.

### Part 2
<b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this? <b>It is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this</b> following <b><i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says</b> that <b>the <i>omer</i></b> may <b>come from outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael. <b>How do I realize</b> the meaning of the verse that introduces the obligation to bring the <i>omer</i>: <b>“When you come into the land</b> which I give to you” (Leviticus 23:10)? This verse appears to indicate that the bringing of the <i>omer</i> is restricted to Eretz Yisrael. That verse teaches <b>that</b> the Jewish people <b>were not obligated in</b> the mitzva of bringing <b>the <i>omer</i> before they entered Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains the basis of Rabbi Yosei’s opinion: <b>And he holds</b> that even <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, consuming the <b>new</b> crop <b>is</b> prohibited <b>by Torah law, as it is written: “From all your dwellings”</b> (Leviticus 23:17), which <b>indicates</b> that the prohibition applies <b>anywhere that you dwell,</b> even outside of Eretz Yisrael. Accordingly, the earlier verse, which introduces the prohibition with: <b>“When you come</b> into the land which I give to you” (Leviticus 23:10), <b>is</b> a reference to <b>the time</b> of the Jewish people <b>entering</b> Eretz Yisrael, and it indicates that the prohibition takes effect only from that time. <b>And since</b> Rabbi Yosei holds that the new crop outside of Eretz Yisrael <b>is</b> prohibited for consumption <b>by Torah law,</b> he consequently holds that <b>one may also offer</b> the <i>omer</i> from crops grown there.

### Part 4
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Shekalim</i> 4:1): The <b>guards</b> who are appointed by the court to protect some <b>of</b> the <b>produce that grew without being purposely planted [<i>sefiḥin</i>] during the Sabbatical</b> Year, in order that it can be used for the <i>omer</i> and the offering of the two loaves, <b>collect their wages from the collection of the</b> Temple treasury <b>chamber.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rami bar Ḥama raises a contradiction to Rav Ḥisda: We learned</b> in that mishna that <b>the guards of <i>sefiḥin</i> during the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>collect their wages from the collection of the</b> Temple treasury <b>chamber.</b> This indicates that even in the Sabbatical Year, the <i>omer</i> is brought from that year’s crop. <b>And one can raise a contradiction</b> to this from a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And the Sabbatical Year of the land shall be for you <b>for eating”</b> (Leviticus 25:6), which indicates it is to be used for eating, <b>but not for burning.</b> Accordingly, since the <i>omer</i> is burned on the altar, it should not be brought from produce of the Sabbatical Year.

### Part 6
Rav Ḥisda <b>said to him: The Merciful One said to you</b> about the <i>omer</i>: “It is a statute forever <b>throughout your generations”</b> (Leviticus 23:14), indicating that the mitzva can be fulfilled in all times, <b>and you say</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>should be canceled</b> in a Sabbatical Year?

### Part 7
Rami bar Ḥama <b>said to him: But am I saying</b> that the <i>omer</i> <b>should be canceled?</b> Certainly not. <b>Let one bring</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>from</b> grain that sprouted during <b>the previous year,</b> concerning which there is no prohibition against burning it. Rav Ḥisda rejects this suggestion: But to fulfill the mitzva <b>I require that</b> the grain be of the <b>“fresh ear”</b> (Leviticus 2:14), i.e., young grain, <b>and</b> this requirement <b>is not</b> fulfilled with grain that sprouted during the previous year, as it has already been growing a long time.

### Part 8
Rami bar Ḥama persists: <b>But let one bring</b> the <i>omer</i> <b>from the young grain</b> that was cut during the harvest <b>of</b> the <b>previous year,</b> when it was still fresh. Rav Ḥisda rejects this suggestion: <b>The verse states: “Fresh ear, you shall bring”</b> (Leviticus 2:14). The juxtaposition of the mitzva to bring the grain with the requirement that it be young indicates that <b>I need</b> it to still be <b>young grain at the time of offering</b> it, <b>and</b> this condition <b>is not</b> fulfilled if one uses grain from the previous year’s harvest. Young grain is soft (see 66b), whereas grain that was reaped during the previous year would have become brittle.

### Part 9
§ An amoraic dispute <b>was stated</b> concerning the source of the <i>halakha</i> that the <i>omer</i> may not be brought from the previous year’s crop: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> it is derived from: <b>“Fresh ear, you shall bring,”</b> as Rav Ḥisda explains. <b>Rabbi Elazar says</b> it is derived from the fact that the <i>omer</i> is referred to as: <b>“The first of your harvest”</b> (Leviticus 23:10), which indicates that the <i>omer</i> is brought only from <b>the first of your harvest,</b> i.e., from the first produce of the current year’s crop, <b>and not from the last of your harvest,</b> i.e., from produce taken from the remainder of the previous year’s crop.

### Part 10
<b>Rabba raises an objection</b> to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion, from a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And when you shall bring a meal offering of first fruits</b> to the Lord” (Leviticus 2:14). <b>The verse is speaking of the <i>omer</i> meal offering. From which</b> type of grain <b>does it come?</b> It comes <b>from barley. Do you say</b> that it comes <b>from barley, or</b> does <b>it</b> come <b>only from wheat?</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says</b> that it <b>is stated “in the ear,” with regard to</b> the plague of hail in <b>Egypt:</b> “And the flax and the barley were smitten; for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was in bloom” (Exodus 9:31), <b>and it is stated “in the ear”</b> with regard to the mitzva of the new crop, which is <b>for</b> all <b>generations. Just as</b> the term <b>“in the ear” that is stated with regard to</b> the plague of hail in <b>Egypt</b> is referring to <b>barley,</b> as is clear from the next verse: “But the wheat and the spelt were not smitten; for they ripen late” (Exodus 9:32), <b>so too</b> the term <b>“in the ear” that is stated</b> with regard to the new crop <b>for</b> all <b>generations</b> is referring to <b>barley.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> cites another proof that the <i>omer</i> offering is brought from barley. <b>And Rabbi Akiva says: We found an individual who brings his obligation</b> of a meal offering <b>from wheat,</b> which is brought by a poor person for a false oath of testimony, a false oath of utterance, or for entering the Temple while ritually impure, <b>and</b> one who brings <b>his obligation</b> of a meal offering <b>from barley,</b> in the case of a sinner’s meal offering or the meal offering of a <i>sota</i>. <b>And</b> we also found with regard to the <b>community that they bring their obligation</b> of a meal offering <b>from wheat,</b> in the case of the two loaves offering of <i>Shavuot</i>, and therefore, to keep the <i>halakha</i> of the offering of a community parallel to that of an individual there should be a case where the community <b>brings their obligation</b> of a meal offering <b>from barley. And if you say</b> that the <i>omer</i> offering <b>comes from wheat,</b> then <b>we</b> will <b>not</b> have <b>found</b> a case of <b>a community that brings their obligation</b> of a meal offering <b>from barley.</b> Consequently, it must be that the <i>omer</i> offering comes from barley.

### Part 13
Rabbi Akiva suggests another proof: <b>Alternatively, if you say</b> that the <b><i>omer</i></b> offering <b>comes from wheat,</b> then <b>the two loaves</b> offering would <b>not</b> be brought from the <b>first fruits.</b> The verse states that the two loaves offering of <i>Shavuot</i> should come from the first fruits: “Also in the day of the first fruits, when you bring a new meal offering to the Lord in your feast of weeks” (Numbers 28:26). If the <i>omer</i> is from wheat, then the two loaves offering would not be the first offering of the first fruit, as the <i>omer</i> offering of Passover precedes it. Therefore, the <i>omer</i> offering must come from barley. Rabba explains the objection to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion: <b>Evidently,</b> the <i>omer</i> offering is brought from the new crop <b>because</b> the grain used is referred to as <b>first fruits,</b> i.e., “the first of your harvest.” The Gemara concludes: This <i>baraita</i> is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion.

### Part 14
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Bikkurim</i> 1:3): <b>One may bring first fruits only from the seven species</b> with which Eretz Yisrael is praised in the verse: “A land of wheat and barley, vines, figs and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey” (Deuteronomy 8:8). <b>But</b> one may <b>not</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC