
### Part 1
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that the Rabbis and Rabbi Eliezer <b>disagree</b> only <b>in those</b> cases, where one’s intention is to drink the blood or burn the meat of the offering. In those cases, the Rabbis deem the offering fit, since the improper intention involves making use of the item in an unusual manner. But if one’s intention is <b>to leave</b> of its blood until the next day, <b>everyone agrees</b> that the offering is <b>unfit. What is the reason</b> for this? It is a rabbinic <b>decree</b> disqualifying the offering when <b>some of its blood</b> is left over until the next day <b>due to</b> the concern that a priest may intend to leave over <b>all of its blood, and</b> if one’s intention is to leave <b>all of its blood</b> until the next day, the offering is rendered <b>unfit by Torah law.</b>

### Part 2
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda said to</b> the Rabbis: <b>Do you not concede to me that if he left</b> the blood <b>until the next day</b> without presenting it, <b>that</b> the offering is <b>unfit?</b> Therefore, if <b>he intended to leave</b> the blood <b>until the next day,</b> it is <b>also unfit.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Elazar comes to say</b> that <b>even in this</b> case <b>Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> the offering <b>unfit and the Rabbis deem</b> it <b>fit,</b> as there is no distinction between a case where one intended to drink of the blood on the next day and where one intended to merely leave the blood until the next day.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> in fact <b>hold</b> that if one’s intention is <b>to leave</b> some <b>of the blood until the next day, everyone agrees</b> that the offering is <b>unfit? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: When I went to Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua to clarify my knowledge, and some say</b> that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi said: When I went <b>to clarify the knowledge of,</b> i.e., study under, <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua, I found Yosef the Babylonian sitting before</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua. <b>And</b> every ruling that Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua taught <b>was especially dear to him, until</b> they began discussing <b>one</b> <i>halakha</i>, when Yosef the Babylonian <b>said to him: My teacher,</b> with regard to <b>one who slaughters the offering</b> with the intention <b>to leave</b> some <b>of its blood for the next day, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 5
Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him:</b> The offering is <b>fit.</b> Yosef the Babylonian repeated this question that <b>evening,</b> and Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him</b> that the offering is <b>fit.</b> He asked again the following <b>morning,</b> and Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him</b> that the offering is <b>fit.</b> Once again, he asked this question at <b>noon,</b> and Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him</b> that the offering is <b>fit.</b> When he asked the question a further time that late <b>afternoon,</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him:</b> I hold that the offering is <b>fit, but Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> it <b>unfit. Yosef the Babylonian’s face lit up [<i>tzahavu panav</i>]</b> with joy.

### Part 6
Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>said to him: Yosef, it seems to me that our,</b> i.e., my, <b><i>halakhot</i> were not accurate until now,</b> when I said that the offering is fit. Yosef the Babylonian <b>said to him: My teacher, yes,</b> I agree that the offering is fit, as you said. <b>But</b> my reluctance to accept your statement was due to the fact <b>that Rabbi Yehuda taught me</b> that the offering is <b>unfit, and I went around to all of</b> Rabbi Yehuda’s <b>disciples, seeking another</b> disciple who had also heard this from him, <b>but I could not find</b> one, and thought that I must have been mistaken. <b>Now that you have taught me</b> that Rabbi Eliezer deems it <b>unfit, you have returned to me that which I had lost.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Upon hearing this, <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua’s eyes streamed with tears,</b> and <b>he said: Happy are you, Torah scholars, for whom matters of Torah are exceedingly dear.</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>recited this verse about</b> Yosef the Babylonian: <b>“O how I love Your Torah; it is my meditation all the day”</b> (Psalms 119:97). He continued: <b>Because Rabbi Yehuda</b> is <b>the son of Rabbi Elai, and Rabbi Elai</b> is <b>the student of Rabbi Eliezer, therefore</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>taught you the mishna of Rabbi Eliezer</b> that the offering is unfit.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains its objection: <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that Rabbi Yehuda <b>taught</b> Yosef the Babylonian that <b>all agree</b> that the offering is <b>unfit, what</b> did Yosef the Babylonian mean when he said to Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua: <b>You have returned to me that which I had lost?</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>had said to him</b> only that whether the offering is rendered unfit is subject to <b>a dispute,</b> and Yosef the Babylonian would have been taught that all agree that it is unfit.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, what</b> is it that Rabbi Yehuda taught Yosef the Babylonian? Did he <b>teach him</b> that the Rabbis deem the offering <b>fit and Rabbi Eliezer deems</b> it <b>unfit? If that is so, what</b> did Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua mean when he said <b>that</b> it was only <b>because</b> Rabbi Yehuda was the son of Rabbi Elai, who was the student of Rabbi Eliezer, that Rabbi Yehuda taught this <b>dispute?</b> According to Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua, <b>we too teach</b> this <b>dispute.</b> The fact that Rabbi Yehuda taught both opinions in a dispute does not require justification.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>actually,</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>taught</b> Yosef the Babylonian that <b>all agree</b> that the offering is <b>unfit; and what</b> did Yosef the Babylonian mean when he said: <b>You have returned to me that which I had lost?</b> He meant <b>that</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua <b>had in any event returned to him</b> that there is <b>some</b> opinion <b>in the world</b> concerning the <b>unfitness</b> of the offering if one’s intention was to leave over the blood until the next day. His answer reassured Yosef the Babylonian that there is in fact such an opinion.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one <b>did not pour</b> the oil onto the meal offering, or <b>did not mix</b> the oil into the meal offering, <b>or did not break</b> the loaves into pieces, <b>or did not</b> add <b>salt, or did not wave</b> the <i>omer</i> meal offering or the meal offering of a <i>sota</i>, or <b>did not bring</b> the meal offering to the altar, <b>or</b> if it happened <b>that</b> the priest <b>broke</b> the meal offerings that require breaking into <b>greater pieces</b> than appropriate, <b>or did not smear</b> oil on the wafers requiring this (see Leviticus 2:4), in all these cases the meal offering is <b>fit.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the mishna mean when it states that if one <b>did not pour</b> the oil onto the meal offering, the meal offering is fit? <b>If we say</b> that it means that <b>he did not pour</b> oil <b>at all,</b> that is difficult: Doesn’t the verse <b>write with regard to</b> the pouring of the oil that doing so is <b>indispensable? Rather,</b> the mishna must be referring to a case where <b>a priest did not pour</b> the oil onto the meal offering, <b>but a non-priest</b> did pour it. The Gemara notes: <b>If so,</b> that the first clause of the mishna is understood in this manner, then the next <i>halakha</i> in the mishna: If one <b>did not mix</b> the oil into the meal offering, should <b>also</b> be understood as referring to a case where <b>a priest did not mix</b> the oil into the meal offering, <b>but a non-priest</b> did mix it, so it is fit. <b>This</b> would indicate that if one <b>did not mix</b> the oil into the meal offering <b>at all,</b> the meal offering is <b>unfit.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC