### Part 1
and it is practiced both <b>in</b> the cases of offerings when they are <b>alive,</b> e.g., the guilt offering of a leper and the lambs of <i>Shavuot</i>, <b>and in</b> the cases of offerings after they are <b>slaughtered,</b> e.g., the breast and thigh. By contrast, placing hands is practiced with a live animal. A further stringency is that waving is practiced both <b>in</b> the case of <b>an item in which there is a living spirit,</b> i.e., an animal offering, <b>and in</b> the case of <b>an item in which there is not a living spirit,</b> e.g., the <i>omer</i> offering, the <i>sota</i> meal offering, and the loaves accompanying a thanks offering and the ram of the nazirite, whereas placing hands is only ever performed upon living beings.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to placing hands: “And he shall place his hand on the head of his offering” (Leviticus 3:2). The term <b>“his offering”</b> serves <b>to include all</b> of the <b>owners of an offering</b> in the requirement <b>of placing hands,</b> i.e., each one must perform it.

### Part 3
It is necessary for the verse to teach this, <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought: <b>Could it not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference</b> that only one partner needs to place his hands on the offering? The inference is as follows: <b>If</b> the requirement of <b>waving, which was amplified to apply</b> also <b>to slaughtered</b> animals, nevertheless <b>was limited with regard to</b> an offering jointly owned by a number of <b>partners,</b> as only one of them waves on behalf of all of them, then with regard to the requirement of <b>placing hands, which was not amplified to apply</b> also <b>to slaughtered</b> animals, <b>is it not logical that it was</b> also <b>limited with regard to</b> an offering jointly owned by <b>partners,</b> and it is sufficient for one partner to place his hands on behalf of the others? To counter this inference, <b>the verse states: “His offering,” to include each of the owners of an offering in</b> the requirement of <b>placing hands.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one could suggest the opposite inference and conclude that the requirement of <b>waving should be amplified with regard to partners, through</b> the following <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If</b> the requirement of <b>placing hands, which was not amplified to apply</b> also <b>to slaughtered</b> animals, <b>was amplified with regard to</b> an offering jointly owned by <b>partners,</b> requiring each partner to perform it himself, then with regard to the requirement of <b>waving, which was amplified to apply</b> also <b>to slaughtered</b> animals, <b>is it not logical that it was</b> also <b>amplified with regard to</b> an offering jointly owned by <b>partners,</b> requiring each partner to perform it himself?

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this: This inference cannot be correct, <b>because</b> it is obvious that only one of the partners needs to perform the waving. <b>It is not possible</b> to have all of them perform it, <b>as how would it be done?</b> If one says: <b>Let all of</b> the partners <b>wave together,</b> with each one placing his hands under those of another, that is difficult: There <b>would be</b> an invalidating <b>interposition</b> between the offering and hands of the partners who are not directly holding onto the offering. And if one says: <b>Let</b> one partner <b>wave, and then</b> the next one <b>will wave,</b> and so on, that would also be invalid, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah that one must perform <b>a waving,</b> using a singular noun, which indicates that one waving, <b>but not</b> multiple <b>wavings,</b> should be performed.

### Part 6
§ The mishna states that placing hands is not performed upon a slaughtered offering. The Gemara questions this: <b>And is there no</b> instance of <b>placing hands</b> performed <b>on slaughtered</b> animals? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Tamid</i> 33b): <b>When the High Priest</b> would <b>want to sacrifice</b> the daily offering, as it is his right to be the one to sacrifice it whenever he wishes to, <b>he would ascend the ramp</b> to the top of the altar, <b>and the deputy [<i>segan</i>]</b> High Priest would also ascend <b>to the right</b> of the High Priest. If it occurred that the High Priest <b>reached halfway</b> up <b>the ramp</b> and grew tired, the <b>deputy</b> would <b>hold</b> him <b>by his right hand</b> to assist him <b>and</b> would <b>bring him up</b> to the top of the altar. <b>And the first</b> of the group of priests who had been selected to bring the limbs of the daily offering to the altar would <b>hold out the head and the</b> right hind <b>leg</b> of the offering to the High Priest, <b>who would place</b> his <b>hands upon them, and</b> then <b>he would throw</b> the limbs onto the fire of the altar.

### Part 7
Then <b>the second</b> priest <b>would hold out the two forelegs to the first</b> priest, and the first priest would <b>give them to the High Priest,</b> who would <b>place</b> his <b>hands upon them and</b> then <b>throw them</b> onto the fire. At this stage <b>the second priest</b> would <b>slip away and leave,</b> as he was no longer needed. The first priest remained where he was, as he was still needed to present the other limbs of the offering to the High Priest. <b>And in this manner</b> the other priests who had been selected <b>would hold out the rest of all the limbs</b> to the first priest, who would present them to the High Priest, who would then <b>place</b> his <b>hands upon them and throw them</b> onto the fire.

### Part 8
The mishna concludes: <b>And when</b> the High Priest <b>wants, he</b> may merely <b>place</b> his <b>hands</b> upon the limbs, <b>and</b> then the <b>other</b> priests <b>throw</b> the limbs onto the fire of the altar.

### Part 9
This mishna apparently demonstrates an instance of placing hands performed upon a slaughtered animal. In resolution of this difficulty, <b>Abaye said:</b> In the mishna <b>there,</b> the placing of hands is not in fulfillment of the requirement to do so to an offering; rather, it is done merely <b>due to the eminence of the High Priest,</b> so that his sacrifice of the limbs of an offering is more distinguished than when performed by ordinary priests.

### Part 10
end of chapter

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The two loaves</b> that are brought on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> from the new wheat are each made from a tenth of an ephah of fine flour. They <b>are kneaded one</b> by <b>one and they are baked one</b> by <b>one,</b> i.e., each loaf is placed separately in the oven. <b>The</b> loaves of the <b>shewbread are kneaded one</b> by <b>one and baked two</b> by <b>two,</b> i.e., two loaves are placed in the oven at the same time. <b>And</b> the baker <b>would prepare</b> the shewbread <b>in a mold [<i>defus</i>]</b> when he made the dough. <b>When he removes</b> the shewbread from the oven <b>he</b> again <b>places</b> the loaves <b>in a mold so that their</b> shape <b>will not be ruined.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the two loaves are kneaded one by one and baked one by one. The loaves of the shewbread are also kneaded one by one but are baked two at a time. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? They are derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And you shall take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes from it; two-tenths of an ephah shall be in one cake. And you shall set them in two arrangements, six in an arrangement, upon the pure Table before the Lord” (Leviticus 24:5–6). The phrase <b>“Two-tenths of an ephah shall be in one cake” teaches that</b> the loaves of the shewbread <b>are kneaded one</b> by <b>one.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that this</b> is <b>also</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the two loaves,</b> i.e., that they are kneaded one at a time? <b>The verse states: “Shall be,”</b> to include the two loaves. <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that the baking</b> of the loaves of the shewbread is performed <b>two</b> by <b>two? The verse states: “And you shall set them [<i>vesamta otam</i>],”</b> the plural form indicating that two loaves should be baked together. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>the two loaves</b> brought on <i>Shavuot</i> should <b>also</b> be baked in <b>this</b> manner. <b>The verse states: “Them [otam],”</b> which is a term of exclusion, indicating that only the loaves of the shewbread are baked two at a time, but not the two loaves brought on <i>Shavuot</i>.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you</b> already <b>derive</b> from <b>this</b> term: <b>“Them,”</b> that the shewbread must be baked two loaves at a time? The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> i.e., if the term “them” teaches only that the shewbread is baked two loaves at a time, <b>let the verse say: And you shall set them [<i>vesamtam</i>],</b> using the shortened form. <b>What</b> is the verse teaching by using the longer form <b>“<i>vesamta otam</i>”? You</b> may <b>learn from</b> the verse <b>two</b> matters, both that the loaves of the shewbread should be baked two at a time and that this requirement does not apply to the two loaves brought on <i>Shavuot</i>.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches that the shewbread was placed in a mold, and with regard to this <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And you shall set them”</b> (Leviticus 24:6), which means to set them <b>in a mold. There are three molds</b> that are used in the Temple in the preparation of the loaves. First, the baker <b>places</b> the shewbread <b>in a mold</b> while <b>it is still dough. And</b> second, <b>there was a type of mold for</b> the shewbread <b>in the oven,</b> in which the loaves were baked. <b>And when he removes [<i>rodah</i>]</b> the shewbread from the oven, <b>he places it in</b> a third <b>mold so that its</b> shape <b>will not be ruined.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why is a third mold necessary? <b>Let him return</b> the shewbread <b>to the first mold,</b> in which the dough was kneaded. The Gemara answers: <b>Once</b> the dough <b>is baked, it rises,</b> and no longer fits into the first mold.

### Part 16
§ <b>It was stated: How is the shewbread prepared,</b> i.e., in what shape?