
### Part 1
<b>and what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>The beginning of the upper third</b> of the entrance, <b>that</b> Shmuel <b>says?</b> This is referring <b>to</b> the maximum <b>distancing of</b> the <i>mezuza</i> from the doorframe, i.e., <b>that one should not distance it from the upper</b> cross <b>beam more than one-third</b> of the height of the entrance.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rava says:</b> It is <b>a mitzva to place</b> the <i>mezuza</i> <b>in the handbreadth adjacent to the public domain.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The Rabbis say</b> that it is <b>in order that one encounter the <i>mezuza</i> immediately</b> upon one’s entrance to the house. <b>Rav Ḥanina from Sura says:</b> It is <b>in order that</b> the <i>mezuza</i> <b>protect</b> the entire house, by placing it as far outside as one can.

### Part 3
The Gemara adds: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: Come and see that the attribute of flesh and blood is not like the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He. The attribute of flesh and blood</b> is that <b>a king sits inside</b> his palace, <b>and</b> the <b>people protect him from the outside,</b> whereas with regard to <b>the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> it is <b>not so.</b> Rather, <b>His servants,</b> the Jewish people, <b>sit inside</b> their homes, <b>and He protects them from the outside. As it is stated: “The Lord is your keeper, the Lord is your shade upon your right hand”</b> (Psalms 121:5).

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef, son of Rava, taught in the name of Rava:</b> If one <b>dug one handbreadth deep</b> into the doorpost and placed a <i>mezuza</i> there, it is <b>unfit.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the following <i>baraita</i> <b>supports his</b> ruling: In a case where one <b>affixed</b> a <i>mezuza</i> deep <b>in the wooden doorpost</b> of an entrance, <b>or</b> after placing it in the entrance one <b>added [<i>tala</i>]</b> an inner <b>framework [<i>malben</i>] to it</b> that covers the doorpost, <b>if there is</b> a depth of <b>one handbreadth there,</b> one <b>requires another <i>mezuza</i>,</b> but <b>if not,</b> one <b>does not require another <i>mezuza</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara deflects the support: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught,</b> it is referring <b>to an entrance that is behind the door,</b> i.e., there is another entrance on the other side of the framework, which serves for both entrances. The <i>baraita</i> is teaching that if the framework is one handbreadth thick, then each side is considered a separate entrance, and each requires its own <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara raises a difficulty: But the same <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches explicitly</b> this ruling of the case of another entrance: With regard to <b>an entrance that is behind the door, if there is</b> a depth of <b>one handbreadth there,</b> one <b>requires another <i>mezuza</i>, but if not,</b> one <b>does not require another <i>mezuza</i>.</b> The Gemara explains: This clause of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>teaching which</b> case is the subject of the previous clause, i.e., the <i>baraita</i> does not state two <i>halakhot</i> but only one, which it explains as it proceeds: In what case is it taught that if there is a depth of a handbreadth there, one requires another <i>mezuza</i>? It is taught in the case of an entrance that is behind the door.

### Part 7
§ It is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the affixing of a <i>mezuza</i>: If one <b>positions</b> a <i>mezuza</i> in an entrance which was <b>a framework of reeds,</b> to which one cannot affix the <i>mezuza</i> with nails, he <b>carves</b> a kind of <b>tube</b> from the reed on the right side <b>and places</b> the <i>mezuza</i> in that tube. <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, says: They taught</b> that one may affix the <i>mezuza</i> in this manner <b>only</b> in a case <b>where one positioned</b> the framework in its place first, <b>and ultimately carved</b> a tube <b>and</b> then <b>placed</b> the <i>mezuza</i> in <b>it. But</b> if before positioning the framework one <b>carved</b> a tube <b>and placed</b> the <i>mezuza</i> in it, <b>and ultimately positioned</b> the framework, the <i>mezuza</i> is <b>unfit.</b> This in accordance with the principle stated with regard to objects used for mitzvot: <b>Prepare</b> it, <b>and not from what has already been prepared.</b> In this case he affixed the <i>mezuza</i> before the obligation took effect with regard to the framework.

### Part 8
<b>And Rava says:</b> With regard to <b>these broken entrances [<i>pitḥei shima’ei</i>],</b> which lack the proper form of doorways, one is <b>exempt from the</b> obligation of placing <b>a <i>mezuza</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are broken entrances? Rav Riḥumi and Abba Yosei disagree with regard to this. One says that they do not have</b> a proper <b>ceiling, and one says that they do not have lintels [<i>shakofei</i>]</b> above the openings.

### Part 9
<b>Rabba bar Sheila says</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda says:</b> With regard to <b>a portico,</b> i.e., a structure at the entrance to a house that is entirely open on its front side, one is <b>exempt from the</b> obligation of placing <b>a <i>mezuza</i>, because it does not have doorposts [<i>patzimin</i>]</b> on its sides. The Gemara questions this reason: This indicates <b>that</b> if <b>it has doorposts,</b> one would be <b>obligated</b> to place a <i>mezuza</i>. But that is not logical, as these doorposts are not there to serve as an entrance; rather, <b>they are made to strengthen the ceiling.</b> In that case, why should one be obligated?

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what Rav Ḥisda <b>is saying: Even if it has doorposts,</b> one is <b>exempt</b> from the obligation to place a <i>mezuza</i> there, <b>because they are made only to strengthen the ceiling,</b> not as an entrance. Similarly, <b>Abaye said: I saw the porticos [<i>le’ispelidei</i>] of the house of the Master,</b> Rabba, <b>that they had doorposts but they did not have <i>mezuzot</i>.</b> Rabba evidently <b>holds</b> that its doorposts <b>are made to strengthen the ceiling.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a gatehouse, a portico, and a balcony,</b> one is <b>obligated to</b> place <b>a <i>mezuza</i>.</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to</b> a specific type of portico, <b>the portico of a study hall,</b> which is closed on all sides, but its walls do not reach the ceiling. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>A portico of a study hall is like a full-fledged room [<i>inderona</i>],</b> and therefore it should not be labeled a portico with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>mezuza</i>. The Gemara answers: The <i>halakha</i> of the <i>baraita</i> is stated <b>with regard to a Roman portico,</b> which is more open than the portico of a study hall, as it is built with many windows instead of proper walls. The <i>baraita</i> is teaching that one is obligated to place a <i>mezuza</i> on this type of portico.

### Part 12
§ <b>Raḥava says</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>a <i>bei harziki</i>,</b> one is <b>obligated to</b> place <b>two <i>mezuzot</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>a <i>bei harziki</i>? Rav Pappa the Elder says in the name of Rav:</b> It is <b>a gatehouse that opens to a courtyard, and houses</b> also <b>open</b> directly <b>to</b> the <b>gatehouse.</b> It requires two <i>mezuzot</i>, one for the entrance from the courtyard to the gatehouse, and one for the entrance from the gatehouse to the houses.

### Part 13
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a gatehouse that</b> has two entrances, as it <b>opens</b> both <b>to a garden,</b> which is exempt from a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and to a small room [<i>ulekitonit</i>], Rabbi Yosei says: Its</b> halakhic <b>status is like</b> that of <b>a small room,</b> and it requires a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and the Rabbis say:</b> Its halakhic status <b>is like</b> that of <b>a gatehouse,</b> and it does not require a <i>mezuza</i>. There is a difference of opinion among <i>amora’im</i> with regard to this dispute. <b>Rav and Shmuel both say:</b> With regard to the entrance through which one enters <b>from the garden to the house,</b> i.e., the entrance of the gatehouse to the small room, <b>everyone agrees</b> that one is <b>obligated</b> to place a <i>mezuza</i>. <b>What is the reason? It is</b> the way of <b>entering</b> the <b>house,</b> and the house requires a <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 14
Rav and Shmuel continue: <b>When they disagree</b> it is with regard to the entrance through which one enters <b>from</b> the <b>house to the garden,</b> i.e., the entrance of the gatehouse to the garden. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, <b>holds</b> that the <b>small room</b> into which the gatehouse opens is the <b>main</b> area, and therefore the gatehouse, which is used for entering the small room, is considered like a regular gatehouse to a house, and all its entrances require a <i>mezuza</i>. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>hold</b> that the <b>garden</b> is the <b>main</b> area, and therefore this entrance does not require a <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 15
Conversely, <b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say:</b> With regard to the entrance through which one enters <b>from</b> the <b>house to the garden,</b> i.e., the entrance between the gatehouse and the garden, <b>everyone agrees</b> that one is <b>exempt</b> from placing a <i>mezuza</i>. <b>What is the reason? It is</b> the <b>entrance to the garden,</b> and the garden does not require a <i>mezuza</i>. <b>When they disagree</b> it is with regard to the entrance <b>from</b> the <b>garden to the house,</b> i.e., the entrance between the gatehouse and the small room. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, <b>holds</b> that <b>it is</b> the way of <b>entering the house,</b> and the house requires a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>the entire</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC