
### Part 1
<b>And he would make a space above and a space below</b> the text <b>and would prepare the passages of</b> the <i>mezuza</i> in the <b>open</b> manner, i.e., he would begin the second passage on the line following the end of the first passage. <b>I said to him: My teacher,</b> for <b>what reason</b> do you prepare the passages in the open manner, when in a Torah scroll those same passages are written in the closed manner? <b>He said to me: Since</b> the passages <b>are not adjacent</b> to one another <b>in the Torah,</b> as the first passage is Deuteronomy 6:4–9 and the second is Deuteronomy 11:13–21, I prepare them as open passages.

### Part 2
The Gemara continues: <b>And Rav Ḥananel says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar. What, is it not</b> correct that Rav stated this <b>with regard to</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar’s opinion that one prepares the passages in the <b>open</b> manner? This would present a difficulty to the opinion of Rav Huna, Rav’s student, who wrote them in the closed manner.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>No;</b> he meant that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar <b>with regard to</b> the <b>space</b> that one must leave above and below the text. The Gemara asks: <b>And how much space</b> must one leave? <b>Rav Menashya bar Ya’akov says, and some say</b> it is <b>Rav Shmuel bar Ya’akov</b> who <b>says:</b> The space <b>of a full scribe’s clip [<i>atba</i>],</b> with which the sheets of parchment are held.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: And you, do you not hold that when Rav said</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar he was referring <b>to</b> the <b>space,</b> not the manner of writing the passages? <b>But Rav is of</b> the opinion that an established <b>custom</b> must be observed, <b>and nowadays the general custom</b> is to write the passages of the <i>mezuza</i> <b>in</b> the <b>closed</b> manner.

### Part 5
The Gemara provides the source that according to Rav one must observe established customs. <i>Ḥalitza</i> is the ritual that frees the widow of a childless man from the obligation to enter into levirate marriage with her late husband’s brother. This ceremony involves the widow removing her brother-in-law’s sandal from his foot. Rabba spoke of the importance of observing customs in that context, <b>as Rabba says</b> that <b>Rav Kahana says</b> that <b>Rav says: If Elijah comes and says</b> that <b>one performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with a shoe,</b> the Sages <b>listen to him.</b> But if he says that <b>one may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with a sandal, they do not listen to him, as the people are already accustomed</b> to performing <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>with a sandal.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara presents another version of Rav’s statement: <b>And Rav Yosef says</b> that <b>Rav Kahana says</b> that <b>Rav says: If Elijah comes and says</b> that <b>one may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with a shoe,</b> the Sages <b>listen to him;</b> if he says that <b>one may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with a sandal, they do not listen to him, as the people are already accustomed</b> to performing <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>with a sandal.</b>

### Part 7
Abaye continues: <b>And we say,</b> when discussing these versions of his statement: <b>What</b> is the difference <b>between</b> these two versions of his statement? The <b>difference is</b> whether one may use <b>a shoe <i>ab initio</i>.</b> In any case, according to both statements Rav maintains that a custom must be observed, and the custom in this case is to write the passages in a closed manner. <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from it</b> that when Rav says that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar he was speaking <b>of</b> the <b>space,</b> not the manner of preparing the passages? The Gemara affirms: <b>Conclude from it</b> that this is correct.

### Part 8
§ <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> It is <b>a mitzva</b> <i>ab initio</i> <b>to prepare</b> the passages of a <i>mezuza</i> in the <b>closed</b> manner,<b>but if one prepared them</b> in the <b>open</b> manner, it is <b>permitted</b> to use the <i>mezuza</i>. <b>And what is Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar saying</b> when he says that Rabbi Meir would prepare the passages in the <b>open</b> manner? He means that one may prepare them <b>even</b> in the <b>open</b> manner.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that a <i>baraita</i> <b>supports his</b> opinion: <b>Similarly,</b> just as one may not convert phylacteries of the head into phylacteries of the arm, with regard to <b>a Torah scroll that became worn and</b> parchment of <b>phylacteries that became worn, one may not fashion them into a <i>mezuza</i></b> by excising the relevant passages, despite the fact that the Torah passages of a <i>mezuza</i> appear in them. This is prohibited <b>because one does not reduce</b> the sanctity of an item <b>from</b> a level of <b>greater sanctity,</b> that of a Torah scroll or phylacteries, <b>to</b> a level of <b>lesser sanctity,</b> that of a <i>mezuza</i>. The Gemara infers from this <i>baraita</i>: If it were permitted to <b>reduce</b> the sanctity of an item from a level of greater sanctity to a level of lesser sanctity, one could <b>fashion</b> a <i>mezuza</i> from a Torah scroll.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains the proof: But <b>why</b> is that the <i>halakha</i>, when <b>here,</b> in a Torah scroll, the passages are prepared in the <b>closed</b> manner, <b>but there,</b> in a <i>mezuza</i>, the passages are prepared in the <b>open</b> manner? Evidently, it is permitted to write a <i>mezuza</i> with the passages prepared in the closed manner. The Gemara refutes this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> one should infer from the <i>baraita</i> that were it not for the fact that it is prohibited to reduce the sanctity of an item from a level of greater sanctity to a level of lesser sanctity, one would be allowed <b>to complete</b> a line or two of a <i>mezuza</i> by sewing to it those lines from a Torah scroll or parchment of phylacteries that became worn, but one may not fashion an entire <i>mezuza</i> from a sheet of a Torah scroll or parchment of phylacteries, as the passages in a Torah scroll and phylacteries are prepared in the closed manner.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks another question: The <i>baraita</i> indicates <b>that</b> if it were permitted to <b>reduce</b> the sanctity of an item from a level of greater sanctity to a level of lesser sanctity, one could <b>fashion</b> a <i>mezuza</i> from phylacteries. <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is <b>a <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted <b>to Moses from Sinai</b> that the passages of <b>phylacteries</b> are written <b>on parchment,</b> the outer layer of an animal’s hide, <b>and</b> the passages of <b>a <i>mezuza</i></b> are written <b>on <i>dokhsostos</i>,</b> the inner layer, and when writing on <b>parchment,</b> one writes <b>on the side of</b> the hide that faced the <b>flesh;</b> when writing on <b><i>dokhsostos</i>,</b> one writes <b>on the side of</b> the hide on which there was <b>hair?</b> How, then, can one use the other side of the hide for a <i>mezuza</i>? The Gemara answers that this requirement is of <i>dokhsostos</i> for a <i>mezuza</i> is stated <b>as a mitzva,</b> but it is not indispensable.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that if one <b>changed</b> between parchment and <i>dokhsostos</i>, the item is <b>unfit?</b> The Gemara responds that this <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to phylacteries</b> that one wrote on <i>dokhsostos</i> in the manner of a <i>mezuza</i>, not to a <i>mezuza</i> which one wrote on parchment. The Gemara raises a further difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that if one <b>changed whether in this</b> manner <b>or in that</b> manner, it is <b>unfit?</b> The Gemara explains that this <i>baraita</i> does not mean that one changed either in the case of phylacteries or a <i>mezuza</i>. Rather, both <b>this</b> manner <b>and that</b> manner are referring <b>to phylacteries, and this</b> case is <b>where one wrote them on parchment</b> but <b>on the side of</b> the hide on which there was <b>hair,</b> not on the side that faced the flesh, <b>and that</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC