
### Part 1
<b>that Moses fashioned</b> were <b>fit for his</b> generation <b>and</b> were <b>fit for</b> future <b>generations.</b> Yet the <b>trumpets</b> that Moses fashioned were <b>fit for his</b> generation <b>but</b> were <b>unfit for</b> future <b>generations.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that the <b>trumpets</b> were unfit for future generations? <b>If we say that</b> it is because <b>the verse states: “Make for you</b> two silver trumpets” (Numbers 10:2), meaning that they are fit <b>for you, but not for</b> future <b>generations,</b> that is difficult; <b>if that is so,</b> then the verse: <b>“Make for you an Ark of wood”</b> (Deuteronomy 10:1), should <b>also</b> teach <b>that</b> the Ark is fit only <b>for you, but not for</b> future <b>generations.</b> This cannot be the <i>halakha</i>, as the <i>baraita</i> stated explicitly that all vessels, other than the trumpets, that were fashioned by Moses were fit for future generations.

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> the term “for you” that is written with regard to the fashioning of the Ark should be understood <b>either according to the one who says</b> that <b>“for you”</b> means <b>from your own</b> property, <b>or according to the one who says</b> that God said to Moses: <b>I desire, as it were,</b> that the Ark be fashioned <b>from your</b> property <b>more than</b> I desire that it be fashioned <b>from</b> the property <b>of</b> the rest of the nation (see <i>Yoma</i> 3b). Accordingly, <b>here too,</b> with regard to the trumpets, the term “for you” <b>should be</b> understood in <b>this</b> manner. The Gemara responds: <b>There,</b> with regard to the trumpets, <b>it is different, as the verse states “for you” twice: “Make for you</b> two trumpets of silver, of beaten work you shall make them, <b>and they shall be for you</b> for the calling of the congregation” (Numbers 10:2).

### Part 4
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa, son of Rav Ḥanin, taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Yosef:</b> The <b>Candelabrum</b> could be <b>fashioned from</b> a complete <b>block</b> and <b>from gold.</b> If one <b>fashioned it from silver,</b> it is <b>fit.</b> If one fashioned it <b>from tin, or from lead, or from other types of metal [<i>gisteron</i>], Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>deems</b> it <b>unfit, and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, deems</b> it <b>fit.</b> If one fashioned it <b>from wood, or from bone, or from glass, everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 5
Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What,</b> in <b>your opinion,</b> is the explanation of the dispute between Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda? Rav Pappa, son of Rav Ḥanin, <b>said to him: Both</b> this <b>Sage and</b> that <b>Sage interpret</b> the verse: “And you will make a Candelabrum of pure gold; of beaten work will the Candelabrum be made” (Exodus 25:31), by means of the principle of <b>generalizations and details.</b> The verse begins with a generalization: “And you will make a Candelabrum,” followed by a detail: “Of pure gold,” which is then followed by a generalization: “Will the Candelabrum be made.” According to the hermeneutic principle of generalizations and details, this teaches that any item that is similar to the detail is also deemed fit.

### Part 6
<b>But</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that <b>just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail</b> is clearly <b>defined</b> as a type <b>of metal, so too, all</b> other types <b>of metal</b> may be used in fashioning the Candelabrum. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that <b>just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail</b> is clearly <b>defined</b> as <b>an item of substantial value, so too, all items of substantial value</b> may be used in fashioning the Candelabrum. Rav Yosef <b>said to him: Remove your</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>in light of my</b> <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 7
Rav Yosef continued: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to Temple <b>service vessels that</b> one <b>fashioned from wood, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>deems</b> them <b>unfit and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, deems</b> them <b>fit.</b> According to this <i>baraita</i>, their dispute was with regard to a Candelabrum fashioned from wood, not from metal. Rav Yosef explains: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do they disagree? Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>interprets</b> verses by means of the principle of <b>generalizations and details, and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, interprets</b> verses by means of the principle of <b>amplifications and restrictions.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>interprets</b> the verse: “And you will make a Candelabrum of pure gold; of beaten work will the Candelabrum be made” (Exodus 25:31), by means of the principle of <b>generalizations and details. “And you will make a Candelabrum of”</b> is <b>a generalization,</b> as the material of the Candelabrum is not specified; <b>“pure gold”</b> is <b>a detail,</b> limiting the material exclusively to gold; and by then stating: <b>“Of beaten work will the Candelabrum be made,”</b> the verse <b>then makes a generalization.</b> The result is <b>a generalization and a detail and a generalization,</b> from which <b>you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail,</b> leading to this conclusion: <b>Just as</b> the item mentioned in <b>the detail</b> is clearly <b>defined</b> as a type <b>of metal, so too, all</b> other types <b>of metal</b> may be used in fashioning the Candelabrum.

### Part 9
By contrast, <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, interprets</b> the verse by means of the principle of <b>amplifications and restrictions. “And you will make a Candelabrum of”</b> is <b>an amplification,</b> as the material of the Candelabrum is not specified; <b>“pure gold”</b> is <b>a restriction,</b> limiting the material exclusively to gold; and by then stating: <b>“Of beaten work will the Candelabrum be made,”</b> the verse <b>repeated and amplified.</b> There is a hermeneutical principle that when a verse <b>amplified and</b> then <b>restricted and</b> then <b>amplified, it amplified</b> the relevant category to include <b>everything</b> except the specific matter excluded in the restriction. <b>And what did</b> the verse <b>include? It includes all materials,</b> even wood. <b>And what did</b> the verse <b>exclude</b> with this restriction? <b>It excluded</b> a Candelabrum fashioned <b>from earthenware,</b> which is furthest in quality from gold.

### Part 10
Rav Pappa, son of Rav Ḥanin, said to him: <b>On the contrary, remove your</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>in light of my</b> <i>baraita</i>. Rav Yosef responded: That <b>cannot enter your mind, as it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: If the one who is fashioning the Candelabrum <b>has no gold, he may bring even</b> a Candelabrum made <b>of silver, of copper, of iron, of tin, or of lead. Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, deems</b> it <b>fit even</b> if it was fashioned <b>from wood.</b> It is evident from this <i>baraita</i> that the dispute pertains only to a Candelabrum fashioned from wood, and Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi agrees that it may be fashioned from other types of metal.

### Part 11
<b>And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not construct a house</b> in the exact <b>form of</b> the <b>Sanctuary,</b> nor <b>a portico [<i>akhsadra</i>] corresponding to</b> the <b>Entrance Hall</b> of the Sanctuary, nor <b>a courtyard corresponding to</b> the Temple <b>courtyard,</b> nor <b>a table corresponding to</b> the <b>Table</b> in the Temple, nor <b>a candelabrum corresponding to</b> the <b>Candelabrum</b> in the Temple. <b>But one may fashion</b> a candelabrum <b>of five or of six or of eight</b> branches. <b>And</b> one <b>may not fashion</b> a candelabrum <b>of seven</b> branches, <b>and</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even</b> if he constructs it <b>from other kinds of metal</b> rather than gold, since the Candelabrum used in the Temple may be fashioned from other metals.

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> One <b>may not even fashion</b> a candelabrum <b>from wood, in the manner that the kings of the Hasmonean monarchy did</b> in the Temple. The Candelabrum used in the Temple in the time of the Hasmonean kings was fashioned from wood. The Rabbis <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda: You seek to bring <b>a proof from there?</b> In the time of the Hasmoneans the Candelabrum was not fashioned from wood but from <b>spits [<i>shappudim</i>] of iron, and they covered them with tin.</b> Later, when <b>they grew richer</b> and could afford to fashion a Candelabrum of higher-quality material, <b>they fashioned</b> the Candelabrum <b>from silver.</b> When <b>they again grew richer, they fashioned</b> the Candelabrum <b>from gold.</b>

### Part 13
§ <b>Shmuel says in the name of</b> a certain <b>elder: The height of</b> the <b>Candelabrum</b> was <b>eighteen handbreadths. The base and the flower</b> that was upon the base were a height of <b>three handbreadths; and two handbreadths</b> above that were <b>bare; and</b> there was above that <b>one handbreadth, which</b> had <b>a goblet, knob, and flower on it. And two handbreadths</b> above that were <b>bare, and</b> there was above that <b>one handbreadth</b> that had <b>a knob.</b>

### Part 14
<b>And two branches emerge from</b> the knob, <b>one toward this</b> direction <b>and one toward that</b> direction, <b>and they extend and rise up to the height of the Candelabrum. And one handbreadth</b> above that was <b>bare, and</b> there was above that <b>one handbreadth</b> that had <b>a knob. And two branches emerge from</b> the knob, <b>one toward this</b> direction <b>and one toward that</b> direction, <b>and they extend and rise up to the height of</b> the <b>Candelabrum. And</b> one <b>handbreadth</b> above that was <b>bare, and</b> there was above that one <b>handbreadth</b> that had <b>a knob. And two branches emerge from</b> the knob, <b>one toward this</b> direction <b>and one toward that</b> direction, <b>and they extend and rise up to the height of</b> the <b>Candelabrum. And two handbreadths</b> above that were <b>bare.</b> There then <b>remained there three handbreadths in which</b> there were <b>three goblets, and a knob, and a flower.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And</b> the <b>goblets</b> of the Candelabrum, <b>to what are they similar?</b> They were <b>like Alexandrian goblets,</b> which are long and narrow. The <b>knobs, to what are they similar?</b> They were <b>like</b> the shape of <b>the apples of the Cherethites.</b> The <b>flowers, to what are they similar?</b> They were <b>like the ornaments</b> that are etched in <b>columns. And</b> there <b>are found to be</b> a total of <b>twenty-two goblets, eleven knobs,</b> and <b>nine flowers</b> on the Candelabrum.

### Part 16
With regard to the <b>goblets,</b> the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others;</b> with regard to the <b>knobs,</b> the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others;</b> with regard to the <b>flowers,</b> the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others.</b> With regard to the <b>goblets, knobs, and flowers,</b> the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> there were <b>twenty-two goblets</b> on the Candelabrum, <b>as it is written: “And in the Candelabrum four goblets</b> made like almond blossoms” (Exodus 25:34), <b>and it is written: “Three goblets made like almond blossoms in one branch, a knob, and a flower;</b> and three goblets made like almond blossoms in the other branch, a knob, and a flower; so for the six branches going out of the Candelabrum” (Exodus 25:33). Therefore, the Candelabrum contains the <b>four</b> goblets <b>of its</b> main shaft,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC