
### Part 1
<b>and</b> the <b>eighteen of the</b> six <b>branches; this</b> equals <b>twenty-two</b> goblets. Concerning the <b>knobs as well,</b> it is clear how the number <b>eleven</b> was reached. The Candelabrum contains the <b>two knobs of its</b> main shaft, as the verse states: “Its knobs” (Exodus 25:34), with the plural “knobs” indicating that there were two, <b>and</b> the <b>six of</b> the six <b>branches,</b> as it is written: “In one branch, a knob and a flower” (Exodus 25:33). In addition to these eight knobs, the verse states: <b>“And a knob</b> under two branches of one piece with it, <b>and a knob</b> under two branches of one piece with it, <b>and a knob</b> under two branches of one piece with it” (Exodus 25:35); <b>this</b> equals <b>eleven</b> knobs.

### Part 2
<b>But from where do we</b> derive that the Candelabrum contained <b>nine flowers?</b> According to the verse there are the <b>two flowers of its</b> main shaft, as it is written: “And its flowers” (Exodus 25:34), <b>and the six of</b> the six <b>branches,</b> as it is written: “In one branch, a knob and a flower” (Exodus 25:33), meaning that <b>there are eight,</b> not nine, flowers on the Candelabrum. <b>Rav Shalman said</b> in response: <b>It is written: “It was a beaten work, from the base to the flower”</b> (Numbers 8:4), which teaches that there was a ninth flower near the base.

### Part 3
<b>Rav says: The height of</b> the <b>Candelabrum</b> is <b>nine handbreadths. Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya raised an objection to</b> the statement of <b>Rav:</b> We learned in a mishna (<i>Tamid</i> 30b): <b>There was a stone before</b> the <b>Candelabrum and it had three steps, upon which the priest</b> would <b>stand and prepare the lamps</b> for kindling. If the Candelabrum was only nine handbreadths high, why would it be necessary for the priest to stand on an elevated surface to reach the lamps?

### Part 4
Rav <b>said to him: Shimi,</b> is it <b>you</b> who is asking me such a question? <b>When I said</b> that the height of the Candelabrum is nine handbreadths, I was referring not to the total height, which is eighteen handbreadths; rather, I meant that the Candelabrum is nine handbreadths <b>from the point</b> at which the <b>branches</b> extend from the main shaft <b>and above.</b>

### Part 5
§ <b>It is written: “And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold, and that perfect gold [<i>mikhlot zahav</i>]”</b> (II Chronicles 4:21). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is meant by <b><i>mikhlot zahav</i>? Rav Ami says:</b> It is a reference to the fact <b>that</b> the Candelabrum and its vessels <b>exhausted [<i>kilattu</i>] all of Solomon’s pure [<i>sagur</i>] gold [<i>zahav</i>],</b> which was used in its fashioning in such great quantities. <b>As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav said: Solomon made ten Candelabrums, and for each and every one he brought one thousand talents of gold, and they placed</b> the gold <b>in the furnace</b> to refine it <b>one thousand times, until they reduced</b> the gold <b>to</b> one <b>talent</b> for each Candelabrum, as it is stated: “Of a talent of pure gold shall it be made” (Exodus 25:39).

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so</b> that all of Solomon’s gold was exhausted for the fashioning of the Candelabrum and its vessels? <b>But isn’t it written: “And all King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold;silver was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon”</b> (II Chronicles 9:20)? The Gemara answers: <b>We are saying</b> that Solomon’s <b>pure gold</b> was exhausted for the fashioning of the Candelabrum, but not all of his gold.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And would</b> refining the gold <b>reduce</b> it <b>to this extent,</b> that one thousand talents of gold would be reduced to one talent? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: An incident</b> occurred where the weight of <b>the Candelabrum of the Temple was</b> found to be <b>greater than</b> the weight of the Candelabrum <b>of Moses by</b> one <b><i>Kordikini</i> gold dinar, and they placed it in the furnace eighty times until</b> the weight of the Candelabrum <b>stood at</b> precisely one <b>talent.</b> Evidently, putting the Candelabrum into a furnace reduces its weight by very little. The Gemara answers: <b>Once it is standing, it is standing,</b> i.e., since the gold was refined to such a degree in the time of Solomon, later when it was refined eighty times it was reduced by the weight of only one dinar.

### Part 8
§ <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Upon the pure Candelabrum”</b> (Leviticus 24:4)? It teaches <b>that</b> the procedure for <b>fashioning it descended,</b> i.e., was shown to Moses, <b>from the place of purity,</b> i.e., by God, who showed Moses a model of the Candelabrum. The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> is that to say that phrase <b>“upon the pure Table”</b> (Leviticus 24:6) also teaches <b>that</b> the procedure for <b>fashioning it</b> was shown to Moses <b>from the place of purity? Rather,</b> the expression “the <b>pure</b> Table” teaches, <b>by inference, that it is</b> susceptible to becoming <b>ritually impure. Here too,</b> the expression “the <b>pure</b> Candelabrum” teaches, <b>by inference, that it is</b> susceptible to becoming <b>ritually impure.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Granted,</b> the inference drawn <b>there</b> with regard to the Table is <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Reish Lakish</b> says; <b>as Reish Lakish says: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Upon the pure Table”</b> (Leviticus 24:6)? The expression “pure Table” teaches, <b>by inference, that it is</b> susceptible to becoming <b>ritually impure,</b> but why? Isn’t the Table <b>a wooden vessel designated to rest</b> in a fixed place, <b>and any wooden vessel that is designated to rest</b> in a fixed place <b>is not susceptible to</b> becoming <b>ritually impure? Rather,</b> this <b>teaches that</b> the Table was not always left in a fixed place; the priests would <b>lift</b> the Table with its shewbread <b>to display the shewbread to the pilgrims</b> standing in the Temple courtyard, <b>and</b> a priest would <b>say to them: See your affection before the Omnipresent.</b> For this reason, the Table is susceptible to becoming ritually impure.

### Part 10
Parenthetically, the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is meant by: See <b>your affection</b> before God? It is <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> says, <b>as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: A great miracle was performed with the shewbread:</b> Its condition at the time of <b>its removal</b> from the Table, after having been left there for a week, was <b>like</b> its condition at the time of <b>its arrangement</b> on the Table, <b>as it is stated: “To place hot bread on the day when it was taken away”</b> (I Samuel 21:7), indicating that it was as hot on the day of its removal as it was on the day when it was placed on the Table.

### Part 11
The Gemara resumes stating its objection: <b>But here,</b> with regard to the Candelabrum, there is no reason to explain that the expression “the <b>pure</b> Candelabrum” teaches, <b>by inference, that it is</b> susceptible to becoming <b>ritually impure;</b> this is <b>obvious,</b> as the Candelabrums <b>are metal vessels, and metal vessels are susceptible to</b> becoming <b>ritually impure</b> whether or not they remain in a fixed location. <b>Rather,</b> it must be that the expression “the pure Candelabrum” teaches <b>that</b> the procedure for <b>fashioning it descended,</b> i.e., was shown to Moses, <b>from the place of purity.</b>

### Part 12
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: An Ark of fire and a Table of fire and a Candelabrum of fire descended from the Heavens, and Moses saw</b> their format <b>and fashioned</b> the vessels for the Tabernacle <b>in their likeness. As it is stated</b> after the command to fashion these items: <b>“And see that you make them after their pattern, which is being shown to you in the mount”</b> (Exodus 25:40).

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> is that to say that the verse: <b>“And you shall set up the Tabernacle according to its fashion which has been shown to you in the mount”</b> (Exodus 26:30), <b>also</b> indicates that God showed Moses a Tabernacle of fire? The Gemara answers: <b>Here,</b> with regard to the Tabernacle, <b>it is written: “According to its fashion,”</b> meaning that it should be built according to the instructions given to Moses, whereas <b>there,</b> with regard to the Ark, Table, and Candelabrum, <b>it is written: “After their pattern,”</b> indicating that an actual model of the items was shown to Moses.

### Part 14
Apropos this discussion the Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The angel <b>Gabriel</b> was <b>girded with a type of</b> wide <b>belt [<i>pesikiyya</i>]</b> in the manner of artisans who tie up their clothes to prevent these clothes from hindering them in their work. <b>And he showed</b> the precise <b>way to fashion the Candelabrum to Moses, as it is written: “And this is the work of the Candelabrum”</b> (Numbers 8:4), and the term “this” indicates that an exact replica was shown to him.

### Part 15
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: Three matters were difficult for Moses</b> to comprehend precisely, <b>until the Holy One, Blessed be He, showed</b> them to <b>him with His finger, and these are</b> the three matters: The form of the <b>Candelabrum, and</b> the exact size of the <b>new moon, and</b> the impure <b>creeping animals.</b> The <b>Candelabrum</b> was shown to him, <b>as it is written: “And this is the work of the Candelabrum”</b> (Numbers 8:4). The <b>new moon</b> was shown to him, <b>as it is written: “This month shall be for you the beginning of months”</b> (Exodus 12:2). The <b>creeping animals</b> were shown to him, <b>as it is written: “And these are they which are unclean for you</b> among the swarming things” (Leviticus 11:29). <b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that God <b>also</b> showed Moses <b>the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughtering, as it is stated: “Now this is that which you shall sacrifice upon the altar”</b> (Exodus 29:38), and slaughtering is the first ritual of sacrifice.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to the <b>two passages that are in the <i>mezuza</i>,</b> the absence of <b>each prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with the others. And</b> furthermore, the absence of <b>even one letter prevents fulfillment of the mitzva with</b> the rest of <b>them.</b> The Gemara asks: Isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that the absence of even one letter prevents fulfillment of the mitzva, since it is written: “And you shall write them [<i>ukhtavtam</i>]” (Deuteronomy 6:9), which teaches that the writing [<i>ketav</i>] must be complete [<i>tam</i>]?

### Part 17
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> It <b>was necessary</b> to state that <b>only</b> to teach that even the absence of <b>the thorn,</b> i.e., the small stroke, <b>of</b> a letter <b><i>yod</i></b> prevents fulfillment of the mitzva. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> isn’t <b>this also obvious,</b> since the letter is not formed properly? <b>Rather,</b> it is necessary <b>according to another</b> statement <b>that Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav</b> says, <b>as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Any letter that is not encircled with</b> blank <b>parchment on</b> all <b>four of its sides,</b> i.e., where its ink connects to the letter above it, below it, preceding it, or succeeding it, is <b>unfit.</b> When the mishna makes reference to one letter preventing fulfillment of the mitzva, it is referring to a letter that touches an adjacent letter.

### Part 18
<b>Ashiyan bar Nadbakh says in the name of Rav Yehuda:</b> If <b>the inner</b> part <b>of</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i> was perforated</b> it is <b>fit,</b> but if the perforation was in <b>the leg of</b> the letter <i>heh</i> it is <b>unfit. Rabbi Zeira says:</b> This matter was <b>explained to me by Rav Huna, and Rabbi Ya’akov says:</b> This matter was <b>explained to me by Rav Yehuda:</b> If <b>the inner</b> part <b>of</b> the letter <b><i>heh</i> was perforated</b> it is <b>fit.</b> In a case where the perforation was in <b>the leg of</b> the letter <i>heh</i>, then <b>if there remained in</b> the leg that is attached to the roof of the letter <b>the equivalent of the measure of a small letter,</b> i.e., the letter <i>yod</i>, then it is <b>fit. But if not,</b> it is <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara relates: <b>Agra, the father-in-law of Rabbi Abba,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC