
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: <b>What is this</b> comparison? <b>Granted,</b> it would all be well <b>were it not for</b> the difficulty with regard to a mark the color of the <b>lime</b> plaster <b>of the Sanctuary</b> walls, as the difficulty raised with regard to <b>an egg membrane–</b>colored mark is <b>not difficult. As even though</b> the shade of <b>an egg membrane</b> is two stages <b>below</b> that <b>of a <i>se’et</i>, the Merciful One states: “And for a <i>se’et</i> and for a <i>sappaḥat</i>”</b> (Leviticus 14:56), which indicates that <b>a <i>sappaḥat</i> is secondary to a <i>se’et</i></b> and can combine with it <b>even though</b> a <i>sappaḥat</i> <b>is</b> of <b>a much lower</b> degree of brightness <b>than it.</b> Rabbi Akiva holds that both of the additional shades not explicitly mentioned in the Torah are derived from the word: <i>Sappaḥat</i>, and so both of them can combine with a <i>se’et</i>. <b>But</b> the difficulty raised with regard to a mark the color of the <b>lime</b> plaster <b>of the Sanctuary</b> walls is indeed <b>difficult. Rather, it is clear</b> that <b>the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara elaborates on Rabbi Akiva’s opinion: <b>And where have we learned</b> that <b>according to Rabbi Akiva</b> the different shades should be ordered <b>this</b> one <b>above that</b> one, i.e., according to their degrees of brightness, and only two adjacent shades can combine together?

### Part 3
<b>If we say</b> we learned it <b>from that which is taught</b> in the following <i>baraita</i>, it is difficult. The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>Rabbi Yosei said</b> that <b>Yehoshua, son of Rabbi Akiva, asked of Rabbi Akiva: For what</b> reason <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say</b> that the different <b>shades of</b> leprous <b>marks are two</b> types <b>that are four,</b> and proceed to specify their names? Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: But if not</b> that, <b>what</b> else <b>could they say?</b> Rabbi Yehoshua answered him: <b>Let them say</b> that any mark of a degree of brightness <b>from</b> that of <b>an egg membrane and above is ritually impure.</b>

### Part 4
Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him:</b> They specified the four different shades in order <b>to say that they combine with each other</b> in that order, i.e., each one with its adjacent shade. Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to him:</b> If so, <b>let them</b> simply <b>say:</b> Any mark of a degree of brightness <b>from</b> that of an <b>egg membrane and above is ritually impure, and they combine with each other.</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him:</b> They specified their names in order <b>to tell you: Any priest who is not an expert in</b> distinguishing between <b>them and</b> in identifying <b>their names is not</b> authorized to <b>inspect the</b> leprous <b>marks</b> and make a decision regarding them.

### Part 5
The Gemara explains the difficulty: Rabbi Yehoshua suggested that according to Rabbi Akiva’s opinion it should be sufficient to say that any mark of a degree of brightness from that of an egg membrane and upward is impure, <b>but he did not say</b> that it would also be necessary to add: And any mark of a degree of brightness <b>from</b> that of the <b>lime</b> plaster <b>of the Sanctuary</b> walls <b>and above</b> is impure. If Rabbi Akiva agrees to the categorization of the mishna, then it would be necessary to state separately each category of marks, in a dual formulation, in order to indicate that only shades that are categorized together can combine.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Conclude from</b> the fact <b>that he did not say</b> this <b>to</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>that</b> Rabbi Yehoshua <b>heard of Rabbi Akiva that he says: All</b> the different shades <b>combine with a <i>se’et</i>.</b> Accordingly, both a snow-white <i>baheret</i> and a lime-colored mark will each combine with a <i>se’et</i>, as they are adjacent to it when listed in order of their degrees of brightness. An egg membrane–colored mark will also combine with a <i>se’et</i>, as it is derived from the word: <i>Sappaḥat</i>, and the Torah indicates that a <i>sappaḥat</i> is secondary to a <i>se’et</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>But perhaps</b> Rabbi Akiva does hold that the only combinations possible are <b><i>a se’et</i> and its secondary</b> mark, i.e., an egg membrane–colored mark; and <b>a <i>baheret</i> and its secondary</b> mark, i.e., a lime-colored mark. And perhaps Rabbi Yehoshua in fact proposed that the Sages should use a dual formulation, but the <i>baraita</i> cites only the first half of his suggestion.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Akiva’s opinion can be inferred <b>from that</b> which <b>Rabbi Ḥanina</b> says, <b>as Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> The following is <b>an analogy</b> to illustrate the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva: To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to four cups of milk,</b> and <b>two drops of blood fell into one</b> of them, <b>and four drops of blood fell into</b> another <b>one</b> of them, <b>and eight</b> drops of blood <b>fell into</b> another <b>one, and twelve drops</b> of blood <b>fell into</b> the last <b>one. And some say</b> that <b>sixteen drops</b> fell into the last cup. This is a suitable analogy, <b>as</b> the milk in <b>all of</b> the cups still <b>has</b> a similar <b>shade of white, but</b> the cups can be ordered according to their degrees of brightness, <b>as this</b> one is <b>above this</b> one, <b>and that</b> one is <b>above that</b> one. Rabbi Ḥanina’s analogy would appear to portray Rabbi Akiva’s opinion in the same way it was cited earlier.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this. The Torah states that a “reddish-white affliction” (Leviticus 13:42), not just a flawless white one, renders a person ritually impure. Therefore, the Gemara suggests: <b>Say that you heard Rabbi Akiva</b> express this opinion <b>with regard to</b> combining different shades of a mark that is <b>mixed [<i>befatukh</i>]</b> with red, which is the case most similar to the analogy offered by Rabbi Ḥanina, but <b>with regard to</b> different shades of <b>flawless</b> white, <b>have you heard</b> Rabbi Akiva express this opinion?

### Part 10
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>just as you heard</b> Rabbi Akiva express this opinion <b>with regard to</b> a mark that is <b>mixed</b> with red, <b>so too,</b> by logical extension, <b>you have</b> effectively <b>heard</b> Rabbi Akiva express this opinion <b>with regard to</b> different shades of <b>flawless</b> white, as what possible reason is there to differentiate between them, this is difficult. <b>And</b> this suggestion is problematic, as <b>in the case of a mixed</b> reddish-white mark <b>itself, did you</b> ever <b>hear him</b> express this opinion? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> otherwise in a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 1:2): With regard to the various shades of white that are mixed with red, <b>Rabbi Akiva says</b> the <b>reddish</b> variation <b>of this</b> one, i.e., of a <i>baheret</i>, <b>and of that</b> one, i.e., of a lime-colored mark, <b>are like wine diluted in water, except</b> for the following distinction: That the reddish variation <b>of a <i>baheret</i> is</b> still an <b>intense</b> white, <b>like snow,</b> albeit with a somewhat pinkish hue, <b>but</b> the reddish variation <b>of lime is darker than it.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC