
### Part 1
One is considered suspect with regard to oaths if he has been found to have taken a false oath, <b>whether</b> it was <b>an oath of testimony, or whether</b> it was <b>an oath on a deposit, or even an oath</b> taken <b>in vain,</b> which is a less severe prohibition. There are also categories of people who by rabbinic decree are considered suspect with regard to oaths: If <b>one of</b> the litigants <b>was a dice player, or one who lends with interest, or</b> among <b>those who fly pigeons, or</b> among <b>the vendors of</b> produce of the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year, then the litigant <b>opposing him takes an oath and receives</b> payment of his claim.

### Part 2
If <b>both</b> litigants <b>were suspect, the oath returned to its place.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei,</b> and will be explained in the Gemara. <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> Since neither can take an oath, <b>they divide</b> the disputed amount.

### Part 3
<b>And how</b> does this <i>halakha</i> apply to <b>the storekeeper</b> relying <b>on his ledger?</b> This ruling is <b>not</b> referring to the case <b>where</b> a storekeeper <b>says to</b> a customer: <b>It is written in my ledger that you owe me two hundred dinars. Rather,</b> it is referring to a case where a customer <b>says to</b> a storekeeper: <b>Give my son two <i>se’a</i> of wheat,</b> or: <b>Give my laborers a <i>sela</i></b> in small <b>coins.</b> And later the storekeeper <b>says: I gave</b> it to them; <b>but they say: We did not receive</b> it. In such a case, where the father or employer admits that he gave those instructions and it is also recorded in the storekeeper’s ledger, the storekeeper <b>takes an oath</b> that he gave the son the wheat or paid the laborers, <b>and he receives</b> compensation from the father or employer; <b>and</b> the laborers <b>take an oath</b> that they were not paid <b>and receive</b> their wages from the employer.

### Part 4
<b>Ben Nannas said: How</b> is it that both <b>these and those come to</b> take <b>an oath in vain?</b> One of them is certainly lying. <b>Rather,</b> the storekeeper <b>receives</b> his compensation <b>without</b> taking <b>an oath, and</b> the laborers <b>receive</b> their wages <b>without</b> taking <b>an oath.</b>

### Part 5
§ If one <b>said to a storekeeper: Give me produce</b> valued <b>at a dinar, and he gave him</b> the produce. And later the storekeeper <b>said to him: Give me that dinar</b> you owe me, and the customer <b>said to him: I gave it to you, and you put it in</b> your <b>wallet [<i>be’unpali</i>], the customer shall take an oath that he gave him the dinar.</b> If, after he gave the storekeeper the money, the customer <b>said to him: Give me the produce,</b> and the storekeeper <b>said to him: I gave it to you and you transported it to your house, the storekeeper shall take an oath</b> that he has already filled the order, and he is exempt from supplying the produce. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Whoever has the produce in his possession has the advantage,</b> and his claim is accepted without his taking an oath.

### Part 6
Similarly, if one <b>said to a money changer: Give me</b> small <b>coins</b> valued <b>at a dinar, and he gave him</b> the coins, and subsequently the money changer <b>said to him: Give me the dinar,</b> and the customer <b>said to him: I gave it to you, and you put it in your wallet; the customer shall take an oath</b> that he paid. If the customer <b>gave</b> the money changer <b>the dinar,</b> and then <b>said to him: Give me the coins,</b> and the money changer <b>said to him: I gave them to you and you cast them into your purse, the money changer shall take an oath. Rabbi Yehuda says: It is not a money changer’s way to give</b> even <b>an <i>issar</i> until he receives a dinar.</b> Therefore, the fact that the customer received the coins indicates that the money changer already received his payment.

### Part 7
§ These cases of taking an oath are <b>just like</b> other cases where the Sages <b>said</b> that one takes an oath and receives payment. The mishna (see <i>Ketubot</i> 87a) teaches: A woman <b>who vitiates her marriage contract</b> by acknowledging receipt of partial payment <b>may collect</b> the remainder <b>only by</b> taking <b>an oath; or</b> if <b>one witness testifies that</b> her marriage contract <b>has been paid, she may collect</b> it <b>only by</b> taking <b>an oath. She may collect</b> it <b>from liened property</b> that has been sold to a third party, <b>or from the property of orphans, only by</b> taking <b>an oath, and</b> a woman <b>who collects</b> it from her husband’s property <b>when not in his presence may collect</b> it <b>only by</b> taking <b>an oath. And likewise, orphans may collect</b> a loan <b>with</b> a promissory note inherited from their father <b>only by</b> taking <b>an oath.</b>

### Part 8
Orphans who wish to collect payment of money owed to their father must take the following oath: On our <b>oath our father did not direct us</b> on his deathbed not to collect with this promissory note, <b>and our father did not say to us</b> that this note was paid, and <b>we did not find among our father’s documents</b> a record showing <b>that this</b> promissory <b>note was paid.</b> After taking that oath, they may collect the money. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says: Even</b> if <b>the son was born after the father’s death, he</b> needs to <b>take an oath</b> in order to <b>receive</b> the money owed to his father. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: If there are witnesses that the father said at the time of his death: This</b> promissory <b>note has not been paid,</b> the son <b>collects</b> the debt <b>without</b> having to take <b>an oath.</b>

### Part 9
§ <b>And these</b> people are sometimes required to <b>take an oath</b> that they do not owe anything even <b>when</b> there is <b>no</b> explicit <b>claim</b> against them: <b>Partners, sharecroppers, stewards [<i>apotropin</i>], a woman who does business from home,</b> where she manages the property of orphans, <b>and the member of the household</b> appointed to manage the household’s affairs. For example, in a case where one of these people <b>said to</b> one of the people whose property he or she manages: <b>What is your claim against me?</b> If the other replied: <b>It is</b> simply <b>my wish that you take an oath to me</b> that you have not taken anything of mine, the former is <b>liable</b> to take that oath.

### Part 10
Once <b>the partners or the sharecroppers have divided</b> the common property, each taking his share, then one side <b>may not require an oath of</b> the other absent a definite claim. But if <b>an oath was imposed upon him due to some other situation, that oath can be extended</b> to impose <b>upon him any</b> other oath, i.e., it can be extended to apply to any other of their disputes. The mishna adds: <b>And the Sabbatical</b> Year <b>abrogates the</b> obligation to take <b>an oath</b> about a debt, just like it abrogates a debt.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: <b>All</b> those <b>who take an oath that</b> is legislated <b>by the Torah take an oath and do not pay.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that oaths mandated by Torah law serve only to exempt one from payment? We derive it from the fact <b>that the verse states:</b> “The oath of the Lord shall be between them both, to see whether he has not put his hand on his neighbor’s goods; <b>and its owner shall accept it, and he shall not make restitution”</b> (Exodus 22:10). According to the verse, with regard to <b>he who would</b> otherwise <b>need to pay,</b> it is <b>on him</b> that the obligation to take the <b>oath</b> is imposed.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And these</b> litigants <b>take an oath and receive</b> possession of the disputed funds or property, and it lists a hired worker in that category. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>a hired worker that the Sages instituted for him that he take an oath and receive</b> his wages? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: Great <i>halakhot</i> were taught here.</b> The Gemara asks: <b><i>Halakhot</i>? Are these</b> oaths actually <b><i>halakhot</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai, as is usually indicated by the use of the term <i>halakhot</i>? They are instituted by rabbinic law. <b>Rather, say: Great ordinances were taught here.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: Since these ordinances are called <b>great,</b> can one conclude <b>by inference that there are</b> also <b>minor</b> ordinances? Are there rabbinic ordinances that are less important?

### Part 14
<b>Rather, Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Permanent ordinances were taught here; the Sages uprooted the oath from the employer and imposed it upon the hired worker due to</b> the fact that his wages are <b>his livelihood.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Due to</b> the need to protect <b>the hired worker’s livelihood, do we penalize the employer</b> by leaving him vulnerable to a dishonest worker? The Gemara answers: <b>The employer himself is amenable to the hired worker taking an oath and collecting</b> his wages, <b>so that laborers will accept employment from him.</b> If the workers are not protected in this manner, they will be wary of accepting work.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>On the contrary, isn’t</b> it <b>preferable for the hired worker that</b> in the case of a dispute between them <b>the employer takes the oath and is released</b> from payment? He would agree to this arrangement <b>in order</b> to create conditions in <b>which the employer will</b> readily <b>hire him.</b> If employers are exposed to the risk of being cheated by dishonest workers, they will be wary of hiring. The Gemara answers: <b>The employer perforce hires</b> workers, since he needs the work done. The Gemara asks: Doesn’t <b>the hired worker also perforce accept employment,</b> since he needs it for his livelihood? <b>Rather,</b> the reason the worker takes the oath is that <b>the employer is distracted with</b> managing <b>his laborers,</b> so it is reasonable to assume that he forgot to pay.

### Part 16
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> if it is presumed that the employer forgot to pay, <b>let him give</b> the wages to the worker <b>without</b> the worker taking <b>an oath.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara explains: The oath was instituted <b>to alleviate the concerns of the employer,</b> to ensure him that he is not being cheated. <b>And</b> why did the Sages not institute that the employer <b>should give</b> the worker his wages <b>in</b> the presence of <b>witnesses</b> so that it could readily be established whether he was paid? The Gemara answers: Finding witnesses whenever he pays wages would be <b>a burdensome matter for him. And</b> why did the Sages not institute that the employer <b>should give him</b> his wages <b>at the outset,</b> when he hires him, so there would be no need for an oath? The Gemara answers: <b>They both want</b> the work to be done <b>on credit,</b> i.e., before the wages are paid, as sometimes the employer has no money ready when he hires a worker, and the worker also prefers receiving his money at the end of the day.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC