
### Part 1
<b>Don’t we derive</b> the atonement of the goat of the <b>New Moon through</b> a comparison to the goat <b>of Yom Kippur and we did not refute it</b> by saying that the atonement of the goat of Yom Kippur is more extensive, that is not relevant: <b>There,</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon, the basic fact that it provides <b>atonement is written</b> in the verse, as Rav Yehuda explains above, and the comparison to the goat of Yom Kippur is <b>merely revealing a matter,</b> i.e., it teaches in what way its atonement is limited. <b>But here,</b> with regard to the goats of the Festivals, the verse does not mention any details about atonement, so <b>it is</b> valid <b>to say</b> that <b>we do not derive the entire matter</b> from the comparison to the goat of Yom Kippur, as it provides a more extensive atonement.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> the atonement of the goats of the Festivals is derived just <b>as Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says</b> in explanation of the opinion of Rabbi Meir (10a): The matter is derived from the fact that with regard to the goat of the Festivals (see Numbers, chapters 28–29) the verses that mention the goat could have simply stated: <b>A goat,</b> but instead state: <b>“And a goat.” Here too,</b> the fact that the verse could have simply stated: <b>A goat,</b> but instead states: <b>“And a goat,”</b> indicates that the <b>goats of</b> the <b>Festivals are juxtaposed with</b> the <b>goat of the New Moon,</b> which are mentioned at the beginning of that passage, and teaches that they all effect a similar atonement. <b>Just as</b> the <b>goats of</b> the <b>New Moon atone only for</b> cases <b>in which</b> one <b>did not have awareness, neither at the beginning nor at the end, so too,</b> the <b>goats of the Festivals atone only for</b> cases <b>in which</b> one <b>did not have awareness, neither at the beginning nor at the end.</b>

### Part 3
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>When Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that the goats of the New Moons and the Festivals atone <b>for</b> cases <b>in which</b> one <b>did not have awareness, neither at the beginning nor at the end,</b> does <b>that statement</b> apply only <b>to a sin that will never eventually become known,</b> e.g., where no one was present when the person became ritually impure, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>a sin that will eventually become known,</b> it is considered to be <b>like</b> a case of <b>one who has awareness</b> of his sin <b>at the end, and</b> therefore only the <b>goat whose</b> blood presentation is <b>performed outside</b> the Sanctuary <b>and Yom Kippur</b> itself <b>atone</b> for it? <b>Or perhaps, even</b> with regard to <b>a sin that will eventually become known,</b> right <b>now, at least,</b> before it becomes known, <b>I can call it a sin of which only God is aware,</b> and therefore the goats of the New Moons and the Festivals atone for it.

### Part 4
The Gemara concludes: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution of this dilemma, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>For</b> a case <b>in which</b> one <b>did not have awareness, neither at the beginning nor at the end, and</b> it is <b>a sin that will eventually become known,</b> the <b>goats of the Festivals and</b> the <b>goats of</b> the <b>New Moons atone.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The <b>goats of the Festivals atone</b> for a case in which one never had awareness of his transgression, <b>but</b> the <b>goats of</b> the <b>New Moons</b> do <b>not.</b> Rather, the latter atone for a ritually pure person who unwittingly partook of ritually impure sacrificial food.

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Rabbi Elazar says</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya says: What is the reasoning of Rabbi Shimon? The verse states: “And He gave it to you to bear the sin of the congregation”</b> (Leviticus 10:17), <b>and this verse is written with regard to</b> the <b>goat of</b> the <b>New Moon. And</b> its capacity to atone <b>is derived from the frontplate</b> through a verbal analogy between the words <b>“sin”</b> in this verse, and the word <b>“sin”</b> stated with regard to the frontplate. The verse there states: “And it shall be on Aaron’s forehead and Aaron will bear the sin of the sacred offerings” (Exodus 28:38). The verbal analogy teaches as follows: <b>It is stated here,</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon: <b>“Sin,” and it is stated there,</b> with regard to the frontplate: <b>“Sin.” Just as there,</b> in the verse in Exodus, the atonement is for a sin involving the <b>ritual impurity of</b> sacrificial <b>meat,</b> i.e., where such meat is placed on the altar, <b>so too here,</b> in the verse in Leviticus, the atonement is for a sin involving the <b>ritual impurity of</b> sacrificial <b>meat,</b> i.e., where a ritually pure person partakes of it.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the two cases are to be compared, then one could take the comparison further: <b>Just as there,</b> in the verse in Exodus, the atonement is only for meat that <b>ascends</b> upon the altar, <b>so too here,</b> in the verse in Leviticus, the atonement is only for meat that <b>ascends</b> upon the altar. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: It <b>is written</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon: “To bear <b>the sin of the congregation.”</b> This indicates that it atones for the personal sin of partaking of sacrificial meat that was to be consumed by an individual, which became ritually impure.

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Now,</b> the atonement of the goats of the New Moon and that of the frontplate <b>are derived from one another</b> by a verbal analogy. If so, <b>let</b> the goat <b>of</b> the <b>New Moon atone for itself,</b> i.e., for the cases that it normally atones for, <b>and for that which the frontplate</b> normally atones for, and the practical <b>difference</b> will be in a case <b>where the frontplate was broken.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon: “To bear <b>the sin</b> of the congregation,” which indicates that <b>it bears,</b> i.e., atones for, only <b>one sin, but</b> it <b>does not bear two sins.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>But let</b> the <b>frontplate atone for itself,</b> i.e., for those cases that it normally atones for, <b>and for</b> that which the goats <b>of</b> the <b>New Moon</b> normally atone for, and the practical <b>difference</b> will be in a case of the <b>defiling</b> of the Temple or its sacrificial foods <b>that occurred between</b> the goat offering of <b>this</b> New Moon <b>and that</b> New Moon which follows. The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon: “And He gave <b>it</b> to you to bear the sin of the congregation,” which indicates that <b>it bears,</b> i.e., atones for, that <b>sin, but another does not bear</b> that <b>sin.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi states</b> another proof for the opinion that each atones in a different case: <b>It is stated here</b> with regard to the goat of the New Moon: <b>“The sin of the congregation,”</b> which indicates that it atones for the sin of the <b>congregation, but not</b> for <b>the</b> sin involving <b>sacred offerings. And there,</b> with regard to the frontplate, <b>it is written: “The sin of the sacred offerings,”</b> which indicates that it atones for the sin involving <b>sacred offerings, but not</b> for the sin of the <b>congregation.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara says: <b>We found</b> a source for Rabbi Shimon’s opinion about the <b>goats of</b> the <b>New Moons, that they atone for a ritually pure</b> person <b>who partook of ritually impure</b> sacrificial food. <b>From where do we</b> derive his opinion about the <b>goats of</b> the <b>Festivals, that they atone for</b> cases of the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods <b>in which</b> one <b>did not have awareness, neither at the beginning nor at the end?</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: It is derived just <b>as Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says,</b> in explanation of the opinion of Rabbi Meir (10a): The fact that with regard to the goat of the Festivals the verses that mention the goats could have simply stated: <b>A goat,</b> but instead state: <b>“And a goat,”</b> teaches that the goats of the Festivals effect an atonement similar to that of the goat of the New Moon that is mentioned at the beginning of that passage. <b>Here too,</b> the fact that the verse could have simply stated: <b>A goat,</b> but instead states: <b>“And a goat,”</b> teaches that the goats of the Festivals effect an atonement similar to that of the goat of the New Moon, which is mentioned at the beginning of that passage.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC