
### Part 1
<b>But if you say that</b> it is <b>learned</b> as a tradition <b>specifically</b> that if an impure person tarries long enough to bow down, he is liable even if he does not exceed the time required to go out the shortest way, then <b>how can you find these</b> circumstances?

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said: What is the difficulty? You find it</b> in a case <b>such as</b> where <b>he went out</b> from the Temple via the <b>shortest</b> way, <b>but</b> as he was leaving <b>he turned over</b> one of the limbs of an offering on the altar <b>with a fork [<i>betzinnora</i>].</b> This is an action that takes only a brief moment to perform, <b>and</b> yet it is considered priestly service, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Huna. As Rav Huna says: A non-priest who turns over</b> part of an offering on the altar <b>with a fork is liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty, because he engaged in Temple service restricted to priests.

### Part 3
The Gemara proceeds to analyze <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: Rav Huna says: A non-priest who turns over</b> part of an offering on the altar <b>with a fork is liable</b> to receive the <b>death</b> penalty. <b>What are the circumstances</b> of such a case? <b>If</b> in the event <b>that he had not turned it over,</b> the offering <b>would not have been consumed</b> by the fire, then it is <b>obvious</b> that the non-priest is liable, as he performed the service of burning the offering on the altar. <b>And if</b> in the event <b>that he had not turned it over, it would also have been consumed</b> by the fire, then <b>what</b> service <b>did he perform?</b> Even without his action, the offering would have been burned.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for Rav Huna to state this <i>halakha</i> with regard to a case <b>where, had</b> the non-priest <b>not turned it over, it would have been consumed</b> by the fire <b>in two hours, but now</b> that he turned it over, <b>it is consumed</b> by the fire <b>in one hour. And he teaches us this: That any</b> act <b>that accelerates the service,</b> causing it to be performed more quickly, <b>is</b> itself considered <b>a service.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara returns to the general topic of one who enters the Temple while in a state of ritual impurity, citing <b>Rabbi Oshaya,</b> who <b>said: I wish to say something, but I am afraid of my colleagues,</b> i.e., I am afraid that they will raise an objection against me. What did he want to say? With regard to <b>one who enters a house afflicted with leprosy,</b> if he enters the house <b>backward,</b> then <b>even</b> if <b>his entire</b> body entered <b>except for his nose,</b> which remained outside the house, he remains <b>pure, as it is written: “He that enters into the house</b> all the time that it is shut up shall be impure until evening” (Leviticus 14:46), teaching that <b>the Torah prohibited,</b> i.e., conferred impurity, only with regard to <b>the normal manner of entering into</b> a house, i.e., face-first.

### Part 6
<b>But I am afraid of my colleagues,</b> as they might raise the following objection: <b>If so,</b> that the impurity depends on the person entering the house in the normal manner, then even if <b>his entire</b> body entered the house, he would <b>also</b> be pure, as he did not go into the house in the normal fashion. <b>Rava said:</b> This is not difficult, as if <b>his entire</b> body entered in this manner, he is impure, because he is <b>no worse</b> now, i.e., his <i>halakha</i> should be no more lenient, <b>than vessels that are in the house,</b> which become impure, <b>as it is written:</b> “And they shall empty the house…<b>so that all that is in the house shall not be made impure”</b> (Leviticus 14:36).

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Oshaya, that wherever entering is mentioned in the Torah, the reference is to the normal manner of entering: With regard to <b>those roofs</b> that covered the various chambers found in the Temple courtyard, <b>offerings of the most sacred order may not be eaten there,</b> on them, <b>and offerings of lesser sanctity may not be slaughtered there,</b> because those roofs do not have the sanctity of the Temple courtyard. <b>And a ritually impure person who enters the Sanctuary via</b> those <b>roofs is exempt, as it is stated</b> with regard to a woman who became ritually impure: <b>“And she shall not enter into the Sanctuary”</b> (Leviticus 12:4), teaching that <b>the Torah prohibited</b> only <b>the normal manner of entering</b> the Temple. So too, in the case of a house afflicted with leprosy, where mention is made of entering, only one who enters into the house in the normal manner becomes impure, as stated by Rabbi Oshaya.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: <b>This</b> mitzva that the ritually impure must be sent out of the Temple <b>is the positive mitzva concerning the Temple for which</b> the Sanhedrin <b>is not liable</b> to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling. The Gemara asks: <b>To what does</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>refer when he says: This is</b> the positive mitzva concerning the Temple for which the Sanhedrin is not liable to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling? Where was it taught that there is such a mitzva for which they are not liable? The Gemara answers: <b>He is referring to</b> a mishna found <b>there</b> in tractate <i>Horayot</i> (8b), which teaches: The Sanhedrin <b>is not liable</b> to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling <b>with regard to a positive mitzva or prohibition concerning</b> ritual impurity <b>in the Temple,</b> as this offering is brought only for an erroneous ruling on a matter whose unwitting violation requires the bringing of a fixed sin-offering, and not a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 9
The mishna there continues: <b>And</b> one who is uncertain whether or not he unwittingly transgressed a prohibition that requires a sin-offering <b>does not bring a provisional guilt-offering for a positive mitzva or prohibition concerning</b> ritual impurity <b>in the Temple,</b> as this offering is brought only when certainty about the unwitting transgression would require a fixed sin-offering, not a sliding-scale offering. Unwitting transgression of a mitzva concerning ritual impurity in the Temple results in an obligation to bring a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 10
The mishna there continues: <b>But</b> the Sanhedrin <b>is liable</b> to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling <b>with regard to a positive mitzva or prohibition concerning a menstruating woman. And</b> one who is uncertain whether or not he unwittingly transgressed a prohibition that requires a sin-offering <b>brings a provisional guilt-offering for a positive mitzva or prohibition concerning a menstruating woman.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And</b> it is in reference to that mishna that the <i>tanna</i> in the mishna here <b>says: This</b> mitzva, that the ritually impure must be sent out of the Temple, <b>is the positive mitzva concerning the Temple for which</b> the Sanhedrin <b>is not liable</b> to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling. <b>And which is the positive mitzva with regard to a menstruating woman for which</b> the Sanhedrin is <b>liable</b> to bring a bull offering for an erroneous ruling? If a man <b>was engaging in intercourse with a ritually pure woman, and</b> during the course of their act of intercourse <b>she</b> experienced menstrual bleeding and <b>said to him: I have become impure, and</b> unwittingly <b>he immediately withdrew</b> from her and did not wait until his penis became flaccid, he is <b>liable</b> to bring a sin-offering for engaging in intercourse with a menstruating woman, <b>because his withdrawal</b> from her <b>is as pleasant to him as his entry.</b> If the Sanhedrin mistakenly ruled that one may withdraw immediately, they bring a bull offering for their erroneous ruling.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara further clarifies the matter of a man who immediately withdrew from the woman after she told him that she had experienced menstrual bleeding. <b>It was stated</b> that <b>Abaye says in the name of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rav:</b> He is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings for this unwitting transgression. <b>And so Rava says</b> that <b>Rav Shmuel bar Shaba says</b> that <b>Rav Huna says:</b> He is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>two</b> sin-offerings, <b>one for</b> his initial <b>entry and one for</b> his immediate <b>withdrawal.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabba discusses this</b> matter, raising a question: <b>About what</b> case are we speaking? <b>If we say</b> that it was <b>near her expected date</b> of menstruation, when sexual intercourse is prohibited due to a concern that the woman might already be menstruating or that she might begin to menstruate during the act of intercourse, and nevertheless they engaged in intercourse, there is a difficulty: <b>With whom</b> are we dealing? <b>If we say</b> that we are dealing <b>with a Torah scholar, granted</b> that <b>he will be liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>for</b> his initial <b>entry.</b> That was an unwitting transgression, as <b>he thought</b> to himself: <b>I can engage in intercourse</b> with her before she begins to menstruate. <b>But why will he be liable</b> to bring a sin-offering <b>for</b> his immediate <b>withdrawal?</b> That transgression was <b>intentional,</b> since he is a Torah scholar and he knows that in such a case he must not withdraw immediately, and a sin-offering is not brought for an intentional transgression.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC