
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The oath of testimony is practiced with regard to men but not with regard to women, with regard to non-relatives</b> of the litigants <b>but not with regard to relatives, with regard to</b> those <b>fit</b> to testify <b>but not with regard to</b> those <b>unfit</b> to testify due to a transgression that they performed. <b>And</b> the oath of testimony <b>is practiced only with regard to</b> those <b>fit to testify.</b>

### Part 2
The oath of testimony is practiced both <b>in the presence of a court and not in the presence of a court,</b> when the potential witness takes the oath <b>on his own. But</b> if the oath is administered <b>by others</b> and those denying that they witnessed the incident in question neither take an oath nor answer amen to the administered oath, <b>they are not liable until they deny</b> any knowledge of the incident in question <b>in court.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: Whether</b> one of the witnesses takes the oath <b>on his own or whether</b> the oath is administered <b>by others,</b> the witnesses <b>are not liable until they deny</b> any knowledge of the incident in question before the litigants <b>in court.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And one is liable for</b> the act of taking a false <b>oath with intent and for an unwitting</b> act of taking a false oath, i.e., he is unaware of the liability for taking a false oath, provided that he takes the oath <b>with intent</b> in terms of <b>the testimony,</b> i.e., he takes an oath that he has no knowledge of the matter even though he knows that he witnessed the incident. <b>But</b> witnesses <b>are not liable for</b> taking the oath if they were <b>unwitting</b> in terms of the testimony, i.e., they believe that they have no knowledge of the matter. <b>And what are they liable for</b> by taking a false <b>oath with intent?</b> They are liable to bring <b>a sliding-scale offering.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the oath of testimony is not practiced with regard to women because they are unfit to testify. The Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter,</b> that women do not testify, derived? The Gemara answers: It is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When the verse states: “If an unrighteous witness rises up against any man…<b>then the two men shall stand”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:16–17), it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that <b>the verse is speaking.</b> Apparently, men, not women, may testify.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Do you say</b> that it is <b>with regard to witnesses, or</b> perhaps it is <b>only with regard to litigants</b> that the verse is speaking? <b>When it states: “Between whom the controversy is”</b> (Deuteronomy 19:17), <b>the litigants are</b> already <b>stated</b> in the verse. <b>How do I realize</b> the meaning of the phrase <b>“then the two men shall stand”?</b> Apparently, it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that <b>the verse is speaking. And if it is your wish to say</b> that this is not a proof, another proof may be cited. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses” (Deuteronomy 19:15); <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the statement of the <i>baraita</i>: And <b>if it is your wish to say?</b> Why is the initial proof inadequate? The Gemara answers: <b>And if you would say</b> that <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the verse <b>did not write:</b> Then the two men <b>and those between whom the controversy is</b> shall stand, which would indicate that the verse changes its focus from the witnesses to the litigants, perhaps throughout <b>the entire verse</b> it is <b>with regard to litigants</b> that <b>it is speaking.</b> Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> cites an additional proof. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses”; <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 7
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: When the verse states: <b>“Then the two men shall stand,”</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that <b>the verse is speaking.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Do you say</b> that it is <b>with regard to witnesses, or</b> perhaps it is <b>only with regard to litigants</b> that the verse is speaking? The <i>tanna</i> asks: Did <b>you say</b> that? If the reference is to litigants, why does the verse mention two? <b>Do two</b> people <b>come</b> to court <b>for judgment</b> but <b>three</b> people <b>do not come</b> to court <b>for judgment? And if it is your wish to say</b> that this is not a proof, another proof may be cited. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses”; <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: And <b>if it is your wish to say?</b> Why is the initial proof inadequate? The Gemara answers: <b>And if you would say</b> that even though there are cases where there are more than two litigants, it is <b>with regard to a plaintiff and a defendant</b> that <b>the verse is speaking.</b> Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> cites an additional proof. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses”; <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: When the verse states: <b>“Then the two men shall stand,”</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that <b>the verse is speaking.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Do you say</b> that it is <b>with regard to witnesses, or</b> perhaps it is <b>only with regard to litigants</b> that the verse is speaking? The <i>tanna</i> asks: Did <b>you say</b> that? If the reference is to litigants, why does the verse mention men? Do <b>men come</b> to court <b>for judgment</b> but <b>women do not come</b> to court <b>for judgment? And if it is your wish to say</b> that this is not a proof, another proof may be cited. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses”; <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: And <b>if it is your wish to say?</b> Why is the initial proof inadequate? The Gemara answers that it means: <b>And if you would say</b> that with regard to <b>a woman, it is not</b> typical <b>conduct</b> for <b>her</b> to appear in court <b>due to</b> the verse that is stated with regard to women: <b>“All the glory of the king’s daughter is within”</b> (Psalms 45:14), and that is why the verse addressed a situation that is prevalent, i.e., a case where the litigants are men, and there is no proof that women are unfit for testimony. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> cites an additional proof. <b>It is stated here:</b> “The <b>two</b> men,” <b>and it is stated there:</b> “On the basis of <b>two</b> witnesses”; <b>just as there,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks, <b>so too here,</b> it is <b>with regard to witnesses</b> that the verse speaks.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara cites another interpretation of the verse. <b>The Sages taught: “Then the two men shall stand”;</b> this indicates that there is <b>a mitzva for the litigants to stand</b> during the court proceedings. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: I heard that if</b> the judges <b>wished to seat both</b> of the litigants, <b>they may seat</b> them. <b>What,</b> then, <b>is prohibited</b> for the judges? They must ensure <b>that there will not be</b> a situation where <b>one</b> litigant <b>is standing and one</b> litigant <b>is sitting,</b> or a situation where <b>one</b> litigant <b>says everything</b> that <b>he needs</b> to say to present his case <b>and one</b> litigant, the judge <b>says to him: Curtail your statement.</b>

### Part 12
<b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states: <b>“But in righteousness shall you judge your colleague”</b> (Leviticus 19:15), from which it is derived: The court must ensure <b>that there will not be</b> a situation where <b>one</b> litigant <b>is sitting and one</b> litigant <b>is standing,</b> or a situation where <b>one</b> litigant <b>says everything</b> that <b>he needs</b> to say to present his case <b>and one</b> litigant, the judge <b>says to him: Curtail your statement. Alternatively,</b> it is derived from the verse: <b>“But in righteousness shall you judge your colleague,”</b> that you <b>should judge another favorably,</b> and seek to find justification for his actions, even if when interpreted differently his actions could be judged unfavorably.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yosef teaches</b> that from the verse: <b>“But in righteousness shall you judge your colleague [<i>amitekha</i>],”</b> it is derived: <b>With</b> regard to one <b>who is with you [<i>im she’itekha</i>] in</b> observance of <b>Torah and in</b> fulfillment of <b>mitzvot, try to judge him favorably,</b> in the manner that the Gemara will now explain.

### Part 14
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Ulla, son of Rav Ilai, had a trial</b> pending <b>before Rav Naḥman. Rav Yosef sent</b> a message <b>to</b> Rav Naḥman: <b>Ulla our friend</b> is <b>a colleague in Torah and mitzvot,</b> with regard to whom the verse states that you should judge him favorably. Rav Naḥman <b>said: For what</b> purpose <b>did he send</b> this message <b>to me?</b> Does he expect me <b>to grant him preferential</b> treatment? Every judgment must be undertaken with righteousness. Rav Naḥman <b>then said:</b> Rav Yosef sent me the message <b>to</b> ensure I would <b>open with</b> Rav Ulla’s <b>dispute</b> in the event that other cases come before me for judgment, in deference to the Torah because he is a Torah scholar.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC