
### Part 1
<b>Or perhaps he is liable for</b> his oath concerning <b>each and every</b> claim made by each claimant.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from <b>that</b> which <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There are twenty sin-offerings here</b> that the defendant must bring. The Gemara elaborates: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the <i>baraita</i>? <b>If</b> the defendant <b>specified</b> each claim of each of the claimants in his oath, does <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya come to teach us a number?</b> Obviously, the defendant is liable to bring twenty offerings. <b>Rather, is it not</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where he did not specify</b> an oath to each claimant, but he specified it to the first claimant and said: And neither are yours, to each of the remaining claimants? <b>And</b> therefore, <b>conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that such a denial <b>is</b> considered <b>specific.</b>

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches that if one accuses another: <b>You raped or you seduced my daughter,</b> and the other says: I did not rape and I did not seduce your daughter, to which the father replied: I administer an oath to you, and the defendant said: Amen, the defendant is liable to bring a guilt-offering if it is false oath, and Rabbi Shimon deems him exempt from liability for a false oath on a deposit. The reason is that the payment for rape or seduction is a fine, and one does not pay a fine based on his own admission; therefore, he is also exempt from bringing a guilt-offering for having taken a false oath. The Rabbis hold that he is liable since he would have been liable to pay compensation for humiliation and degradation resulting from her being raped or seduced, which are monetary claims. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: What is the reasoning of Rabbi Shimon?</b> Rabbi Shimon holds that <b>since</b> the father <b>is primarily claiming the fine</b> and his claim to the other payments is secondary, the defendant is exempt from liability.

### Part 4
<b>Rava says: To what</b> case is this explanation of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon compared?</b> It is compared <b>to</b> a case <b>where a person said to another: Give me</b> back <b>my wheat and barley and spelt that are in your possession,</b> and the other <b>said to him:</b> On my <b>oath your wheat</b> is <b>not in my possession; and it was</b> then <b>discovered that it</b> was only <b>wheat that he did not have, but he did have</b> the claimant’s <b>barley and spelt.</b> In that case, the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that he is exempt</b> from liability for an oath on a deposit, <b>as when he took an oath with regard to the wheat, he took a truthful oath.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rava: <b>Are</b> the two cases <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case of the grain, the defendant <b>denies</b> only the other’s claim of <b>wheat,</b> but he <b>does not deny his</b> claim of <b>barley and spelt. Here,</b> the defendant <b>denies the entire matter,</b> as he claims that he never raped or seduced the man’s daughter. Rather, <b>this</b> explanation <b>is comparable only to</b> a case where one <b>said to another: Give me</b> back <b>my wheat and barley and spelt that are in your possession,</b> and the defendant said to him: On my <b>oath nothing</b> of <b>yours</b> is <b>in my possession at all, and it was</b> then <b>discovered</b> that it was only <b>wheat that he did not have, but he did have</b> the claimant’s <b>barley and spelt.</b> In that case, the <i>halakha</i> is <b>that he is liable</b> for an oath on a deposit. This, then, cannot be the reasoning of Rabbi Shimon, as he exempts the defendant from liability.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> According <b>to the statement of Rabban Shimon,</b> the father <b>is claiming</b> only the <b>fine and not</b> the compensation for <b>humiliation and degradation</b> resulting from his daughter’s having been raped or seduced. According <b>to the statement of the Rabbis, he is also claiming</b> payment for <b>humiliation and degradation</b> resulting from her having been raped or seduced. The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do they disagree? Rav Pappa said: Rabbi Shimon holds: A person does not forgo</b> a claim to <b>something with a fixed</b> value, such as a fine, <b>and claim something whose</b> value is <b>not fixed</b> and requires an appraisal, such as humiliation and degradation resulting from being raped or seduced. <b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that one does <b>not forgo</b> a claim to <b>something that</b> the defendant <b>is not exempt</b> from paying <b>if he admits</b> his guilt, <b>and claim something that</b> the defendant <b>is exempt</b> from paying <b>if he admits</b> his guilt, such as a fine.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC