
### Part 1
<b>And for</b> marring <b>the</b> edges of his <b>beard</b> there are <b>two</b> edges <b>from here,</b> on one side of his face, <b>and two from there,</b> on the other side, <b>and one from below.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara explains: As apparent from the mishna in <i>Makkot</i>, this is a case where there is <b>one</b> prohibition <b>for which one is liable</b> to receive <b>two</b> punishments. Continuing on this theme, the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the beginning of tractate <i>Shevuot</i> examples of other sets of <i>halakhot</i> that can be formulated similarly, beginning with: With regard to <b>oaths</b> on an utterance, there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are</b> actually <b>four</b> types.

### Part 3
The Gemara inquires: <b>What is different here,</b> in tractate <i>Shevuot</i>, <b>that</b> the mishna <b>teaches all</b> the sets of <i>halakhot</i> that can be formulated as: Two that are four, <b>and what is different with regard to</b> the chapter beginning: The acts of <b>carrying out</b> that are prohibited <b>on Shabbat,</b> i.e., the first chapter of tractate <i>Shabbat</i>, <b>and</b> the chapter beginning: <b>And</b> the <b>shades of</b> leprous <b>marks,</b> i.e., the first chapter of tractate <i>Nega’im</i>, <b>where</b> the mishna <b>does not teach all of them,</b> rather only the specific set of <i>halakhot</i> relevant to that tractate?

### Part 4
The Sages <b>say</b> in explanation: Since the passages of <b>oaths and</b> of liability based on one’s <b>awareness of the defiling</b> of the Temple or its sacrificial foods <b>are written together</b> in the Torah (see Leviticus 5:2–4), <b>and they are</b> also <b>similar to each other</b> in that they can both incur liability <b>to</b> bring <b>a sliding-scale offering,</b> the mishna therefore <b>taught</b> both of <b>them together</b> here. <b>And once it</b> already <b>taught two</b> sets, it continued and <b>taught all of them.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara inquires further: Tractate <i>Shevuot</i> <b>opens with</b> a reference to <b>oaths, but</b> then proceeds to <b>explain</b> the cases of one’s <b>awareness of the defiling</b> of the Temple or its sacrificial foods, returning to discuss oaths only in the third chapter. Why? The Gemara explains: <b>Since</b> the <b>cases</b> of one’s awareness of the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods <b>are</b> relatively <b>few,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>addressed</b> them <b>directly</b> and <b>dispensed with them, and then</b> afterward returned to <b>teach</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>oaths, which have numerous details.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>oaths</b> on an utterance, there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are</b> actually <b>four</b> types. The Gemara explains: The <b>two</b> types are where one states: On my oath <b>I will eat, and</b> where he states: On my oath <b>I will not eat.</b> If he violates either oath he is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering. These two types <b>are</b> actually <b>four</b> types because they also include the cases where a person falsely states: On my oath <b>I ate, and</b> where he falsely states: On my oath <b>I did not eat.</b>

### Part 7
The mishna continues: With regard to cases of one’s <b>awareness of the defiling</b> of the Temple or its sacrificial foods, for which one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering, there are <b>two</b> cases <b>that are</b> actually <b>four.</b> The Gemara explains: The <b>two</b> cases are where one’s lack of <b>awareness of</b> the fact that he was <b>ritually impure</b> led him to eat <b>sacrificial</b> food, <b>and</b> where one’s lack of <b>awareness</b> of the fact that he was <b>ritually impure</b> led him to enter the <b>Temple.</b> These two types <b>are</b> actually <b>four</b> types, because one is also liable where he was aware that he was impure, but had a lapse of awareness about the status of the <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>or</b> the identity of the <b>Temple.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna continues: With regard to acts of <b>carrying out</b> that are prohibited <b>on Shabbat,</b> there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are four.</b> The Gemara explains the cases by using the analogy of a poor person who remains in the public domain and a homeowner who remains in the private domain and one passes an item to the other: The <b>two</b> types are the <b>carrying out by a poor person</b> of an item from the private domain to the public domain <b>and</b> the <b>carrying out by a homeowner</b> of an item from the private domain to the public domain. These two types <b>are</b> actually <b>four</b> types because they also include the <b>bringing in by a poor person</b> of an item from the public domain to the private domain <b>and</b> the <b>bringing in by a homeowner</b> of an item from the public domain to the private domain.

### Part 9
The mishna’s final example: With regard to <b>shades of</b> leprous <b>marks,</b> there are <b>two</b> shades <b>that are</b> actually <b>four.</b> The Gemara explains: The <b>two</b> shades are of <b>a wool-white</b> leprous <b>mark [<i>se’et</i>] and</b> of <b>a snow-white</b> leprous <b>mark [<i>baheret</i>].</b> These two <b>are</b> actually <b>four</b> because they also include <b>a <i>se’et</i> and its secondary</b> mark, i.e., one similar to it, and <b>a <i>baheret</i> and its secondary</b> mark, i.e., one similar to it.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara asks: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna?</b> It is <b>neither</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael nor</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>If</b> one suggests that it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> that suggestion can be refuted, as <b>doesn’t he say</b> with regard to oaths: <b>One is liable only for</b> oaths pertaining to <b>the future,</b> but not for those pertaining to the past? The mishna states that one is liable also for oaths pertaining to the past. And <b>if</b> one suggests it is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> that suggestion can be refuted, as <b>doesn’t he say: For</b> having defiled the Temple or its sacrificial foods during <b>a lapse of awareness of</b> the fact that one is <b>ritually impure</b> one <b>is liable</b> to bring a sliding-scale offering, <b>but</b> one <b>is not liable for</b> having done so during <b>a lapse of awareness of</b> the fact that the place he entered was actually the <b>Temple?</b> The mishna states that one is liable also in such a case.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the mishna expresses the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> and <b>if you wish, say</b> that the mishna expresses the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the mishna expresses the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> and the intent of the mishna is that while there are four types of oaths, <b>among them</b> are types <b>for</b> which there is <b>liability</b> to bring an offering for one who violates them <b>and among them</b> are types <b>for</b> which there is <b>exemption</b> from liability for one who violates them. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that the mishna expresses the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> and the intent of the mishna is that while there are four cases defined by one’s awareness of the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods, <b>among them</b> are cases <b>for</b> which there is <b>liability</b> to bring an offering <b>and among them</b> are cases <b>for</b> which there is <b>exemption</b> from liability.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: How can one say that the mishna teaches types <b>for</b> which there is <b>exemption</b> from liability?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC