
### Part 1
<b>one can bring a sliding-scale</b> offering for the unwitting violation of a transgression whose intentional violation is not punishable by <i>karet</i>; <b>just as is</b> the case of a violation <b>for “hearing the voice”</b> (Leviticus 5:1), which is where a litigant asks a witness to testify about an event and he takes a false oath that he did not witness the event, <b>and for</b> taking a false oath with the <b>“utterance of lips”</b> (Leviticus 5:4). In both of these cases, an intentional violation is not punishable by <i>karet</i>, and nevertheless one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering for an unwitting violation.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: It cannot be referring to one who partakes of <i>teruma</i> while ritually impure, as <b>the verse</b> concerning a sliding-scale offering <b>states:</b> “Or if he will touch impurity of a man in any manner of his impurity <b>through which</b> he can become impure” (Leviticus 5:3). The verse states <b>“through which” to exclude</b> an impure person who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> from liability to bring a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: But <b>say</b> the verse states <b>“through which” to exclude</b> one who defiles the <b>Temple,</b> and teaches <b>that</b> due to the severity of that transgression it is <b>not sufficient for him</b> to achieve atonement <b>with a sliding-scale offering;</b> rather, he will not achieve atonement <b>until he brings a fixed</b> sin-<b>offering.</b> Accordingly, no proof can be drawn from here.

### Part 4
<b>Rava read</b> the following verse <b>about Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>“One who draws water from deep wells”</b> (see Proverbs 20:5); this verse describes Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, because by delving deeply into the Bible he found a source that a sliding-scale offering atones for the unwitting defiling of sacrificial foods by partaking of them while ritually impure.

### Part 5
This is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> concerning the verse: “Or if a person will have touched any impure object, whether the carcass of an impure animal [<i>ḥayya</i>] or the carcass of an impure domesticated animal [<i>behema</i>]” (Leviticus 5:2). <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> Since a domesticated animal is also referred to a <i>ḥayya</i>, it would be sufficient if <b>I would read</b> only the verse’s clause about <b>a <i>ḥayya</i>. Why</b> then is an explicit clause about <b>a <i>behema</i> stated?</b> It is in order to derive a verbal analogy. It is <b>stated</b> in the verse <b>here: “An impure domesticated animal,” and it is stated</b> in the verse <b>below</b> with regard to one who intentionally defiles an offering by partaking of it while he is impure: <b>“An impure domesticated animal”</b> (Leviticus 7:21). <b>Just as below</b> the reference is to the <b>defiling of sacrificial</b> foods, <b>so too here,</b> the reference is to the <b>defiling of sacrificial</b> foods.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues: <b>We found</b> a source for the <i>halakha</i> that the sliding-scale offering atones for the <b>defiling of sacrificial</b> foods; <b>from where do we</b> derive that it also atones for the <b>defiling of</b> the <b>Temple</b> by entering it while ritually impure? <b>The verse states</b> with regard to a woman after childbirth, who is impure due to having given birth: <b>“She may not touch any sacred item and she may not enter the Temple”</b> (Leviticus 12:4). The verse <b>juxtaposes the Temple to sacred</b> items to teach that the <i>halakhot</i> that apply to one apply to the other. Accordingly, the sliding-scale offering atones for both.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that the liability to bring a sliding-scale offering is derived from this verse, then one should <b>also</b> be liable to bring the offering if he partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> while impure, <b>as the Master said</b> that the general term “sacred item,” in the verse: <b>“She may not touch any sacred item,”</b> serves <b>to include <i>teruma</i></b> in the prohibition. Accordingly, it should also be included in the obligation to bring a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains: <b>The Merciful One excludes</b> something with the term <b>“through which”</b> (Leviticus 5:3). Should <b>we say</b> that the term <b>“through which”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> the defiling of the <b>Temple?</b> No, it <b>is reasonable</b> that <b>we should not exclude</b> the defiling of the <b>Temple, as</b> its intentional violation is punishable <b>by <i>karet</i>, just like</b> one who defiles sacrificial foods by partaking of them while he is impure. Rather, the term must serve to exclude one who partakes of <i>teruma</i> while impure.

### Part 9
The Gemara offers a counterargument: <b>On the contrary, we should not exclude</b> one who partakes of <b><i>teruma</i></b> while impure, <b>as</b> it is a violation done through <b>eating, similar to</b> one who eats sacrificial food while impure. Therefore, there is still no proof that one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering for defiling the Temple.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rava said</b> it can be derived from the following: <b>Why</b> does the Torah mention <b>three</b> times the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> with regard to</b> one who partakes of <b>peace-offerings</b> while he is impure? The three times are Leviticus 22:3, 7:20, and 7:21. <b>One</b> time is <b>to</b> apply the punishment to the <b>general</b> case of a ritually impure person who partakes of any type of offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>to</b> apply it to the <b>specific</b> instance of a peace-offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>to</b> apply it to another case of <b>defiling</b> something sacred <b>that is written in the Torah without specifying</b> what it is referring to, <b>and I do not know</b> from that passage <b>what</b> that case <b>is.</b>

### Part 11
Rava continues: The only passage that describes the defiling of something sacred without specifying the situation is the passage in the Torah that discusses a sliding-scale offering brought for the defiling of sacrificial foods. Therefore, <b>you must say</b> that the third mention of <i>karet</i> is referring to the <b>defiling of sacrificial</b> foods. <b>But if it is not</b> needed to teach the <b>matter of defiling sacrificial</b> foods, <b>as that has been derived through</b> the verbal analogy <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of defiling</b> the <b>Temple.</b> Accordingly, one who intentionally defiles the Temple by entering it while impure is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, and it is reasonable that he should be liable to bring a sliding-scale offering for doing so unwittingly.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But that</b> third mention <b>is necessary</b> in order <b>to</b> expound it <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Abbahu, as Rabbi Abbahu says: Why</b> does the Torah mention <b>three</b> times the punishment of <b><i>karet</i> with regard to</b> one who partakes of <b>peace-offerings</b> while he is ritually impure? <b>One</b> time is <b>to</b> apply the punishment to the <b>general</b> case of an impure person who partakes of any type of offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>to</b> apply it to the <b>specific</b> instance of a peace-offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>to</b> apply it to an impure person who eats <b>items that are not</b> generally <b>eaten,</b> such as frankincense.

### Part 13
The Gemara adds: <b>And according to Rabbi Shimon, who says</b> that for <b>items that are not</b> generally <b>eaten one is not liable</b> to be punished with <b><i>karet</i> for</b> partaking of <b>them</b> while he is <b>ritually impure,</b> the third mention is necessary in order <b>to include</b> the case of an impure person who eats <b>an internal sin</b>-offering, <b>as it could enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since Rabbi Shimon says: For any</b> type of offering <b>that is not sacrificed on</b> and its blood applied to <b>the external altar in the manner</b> that <b>peace-offerings</b> are, <b>one cannot be liable</b> to be punished with <i>karet</i> <b>for</b> eating it if it is <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> i.e., for eating such an offering if it was sacrificed with the intent to consume it after its appointed time. One might have thought that similarly, for such an offering, <b>one is also not</b> liable to be punished with <i>karet</i> <b>for</b> intentionally partaking of <b>it</b> while <b>ritually impure;</b> the third mention <b>teaches us that one is</b> indeed <b>liable.</b> Therefore, there is still no proof that one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering for unwittingly entering the Temple while impure.

### Part 14
<b>Rather,</b> the Sages <b>of Neharde’a said in the name of Rava</b> that it can be derived from the following: <b>Why</b> does the Torah mention <b>three</b> times the <b>ritually impure</b> status <b>with regard to</b> one who partakes of <b>peace-offerings</b> while he is impure? That is, each of the three times that the Torah mentions the punishment of <i>karet</i>, it also mentions the fact that the person was impure at the time. <b>One</b> time is <b>for</b> the <b>general</b> case of a impure person who partakes of any type of offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>for</b> the <b>specific</b> instance of one who partakes of a peace-offering, <b>and one</b> time is <b>to</b> apply it to another case of <b>defiling</b> something sacred <b>that is written in the Torah without specifying</b> what it is referring to, <b>and I do not know</b> from that passage <b>what</b> the case <b>is.</b>

### Part 15
Now, the only passage that describes the defiling of something sacred without specifying the situation is the passage in the Torah that discusses a sliding-scale offering that is brought for the defiling of sacrificial foods. Therefore, <b>you must say</b> that the third mention of <i>karet</i> is referring to the <b>defiling of sacrificial</b> foods. <b>But if it is not</b> needed to teach the <b>matter of defiling sacrificial</b> foods, <b>as that has been derived through</b> the verbal analogy <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>apply it</b> to the <b>matter of defiling</b> the <b>Temple.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But that</b> third mention <b>is also necessary,</b> because <b>since it is necessary</b> for the Torah <b>to write</b> the <b><i>karet</i></b> punishment three times in order <b>to</b> expound it <b>in accordance with</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Abbahu, it also</b> has to <b>write</b> that the person was <b>ritually impure, as it is not sufficient</b> to mention the punishment <b>without</b> mentioning for what the punishment is given. Accordingly, there is still no proof that one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering for unwittingly defiling the Temple.

### Part 17
<b>Rather, Rava said: It is derived</b> from a verbal analogy between the terms <b>“his impurity”</b> and <b>“his impurity,”</b> as follows: <b>It is written here,</b> with regard to a sliding-scale offering: “Or if he will touch impurity of a man <b>in any manner of his impurity</b> through which he can become impure” (Leviticus 5:3),

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC