### Part 1
<b>for</b> their <b>defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods. <b>Through which</b> means, then, <b>do they achieve atonement</b> for this? Is it through the internal goat or the bull of Aaron? It is <b>better</b> to say <b>that they achieve atonement through the bull of Aaron, as</b> in any event <b>with regard to his household an exception was made to its rule</b> that it atones only for Aaron. <b>And</b> one should <b>not</b> say that <b>they achieve atonement through the goat whose</b> blood presentation is <b>performed inside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>as it is not</b> found that with regard to Aaron’s household <b>an exception was made to its rule.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And if it is your wish to say</b> that this reasoning can be refuted, one can bring another proof, as <b>it states: “House of Aaron, bless the Lord,”</b> which is referring to all priests and not just to Aaron’s immediate household, and so it is reasonable that Aaron’s bull should atone for them.

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies the last part of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And what</b> possible refutation is the <i>baraita</i> referring to when it says: <b>If it is your wish to say</b> that this reasoning can be refuted? The Gemara explains: <b>And if you would say</b> of the preceding proof that it is incorrect to suggest that all priests achieve atonement from the bull of Aaron, as with regard to it the term: <b>“His household”</b> (Leviticus 16:6), <b>is written,</b> which suggests that it atones only for his immediate family, then this can be refuted, as <b>all of</b> the priests <b>are</b> collectively <b>referred to as his household,</b> as is evident from <b>that</b> which <b>is stated: “House of Aaron, bless the Lord;</b> house of Levi, bless the Lord, <b>those who fear the Lord, bless the Lord.”</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara questions some of the expositions of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>this</b> phrase: “Goat <b>of the people”</b> (Leviticus 16:15), <b>does it come to</b> teach <b>that</b> which the <i>baraita</i> teaches, i.e., that the priests do not achieve atonement through it? But <b>that</b> phrase <b>is necessary</b> to teach <b>that the Merciful One states</b> that the goat <b>must be</b> purchased with funds collected <b>from</b> the <b>people.</b> The Gemara refutes this: <b>That</b> requirement <b>is derived from</b> the verse: <b>“And from the assembly of the children of Israel</b> he shall take two goats” (Leviticus 16:5).

### Part 5
The Gemara asks further: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>this</b> phrase: <b>“His own</b> bull sin-offering” (Leviticus 16:6), <b>does it come to</b> teach <b>that</b> which the <i>baraita</i> teaches, i.e., that it atones only for Aaron’s transgressions, not for the transgressions of others? But <b>that</b> phrase <b>is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The High Priest <b>brings,</b> i.e., purchases, the bull <b>from his own</b> funds, <b>but he does not bring it from</b> funds collected <b>from the public.</b>

### Part 6
One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>he does not bring it from</b> funds collected <b>from the public because the public does not achieve atonement through it, but he may bring</b> it <b>from</b> funds belonging to <b>his brethren the priests because his brethren the priests achieve atonement through it.</b> To counter this, <b>the verse states: “His own</b> bull sin-offering,” to indicate that he must purchase it using only his own funds. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>he should not bring</b> it from others’ funds, <b>but</b> nevertheless, <b>if he did</b> it would still be <b>valid.</b> To counter this, <b>the verse again states “his own.” The verse repeats</b> the phrase <b>to render</b> the requirement <b>essential.</b>

### Part 7
If both mentions of the phrase “his own” are necessary to teach about the ownership of the bull, how can the above <i>baraita</i> suggest that the phrase indicates that the bull atones only for the High Priest’s transgressions? The Gemara explains: <b>This is what</b> is <b>difficult for the <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is different about</b> the goat <b>of the people that</b> explains why <b>it does not atone</b> for the priests? The difference is <b>that</b> the priests <b>did not forfeit</b> any <b>money over</b> the purchase of <b>it.</b> Therefore, it does not atone for the priests, but only for the Israelites, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the internal goat: <b>“Of the people.” With regard to</b> the bull <b>of Aaron as well,</b> the priests <b>do not forfeit</b> any <b>money over</b> the purchase of <b>it,</b> so it follows that they should not achieve atonement through it. <b>And</b> therefore, to explain why they do achieve atonement, the <i>baraita</i> <b>states</b> that <b>all of</b> the priests <b>are</b> collectively <b>referred to as: His household.</b>

### Part 8
§ The Gemara returns to its discussion of the dispute between Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to Rabbi Shimon,</b> who holds that the priests do not achieve atonement through the scapegoat, <b>that is</b> why <b>it is written</b> in the Torah that <b>two confessions</b> are to be recited over the bull <b>and</b> that the <b>blood of the bull</b> is to be presented inside the Sanctuary: Of these three forms of atonement, <b>one corresponds to</b> the atonement provided by the <b>goat whose</b> blood presentation is <b>performed inside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>one corresponds to</b> the atonement provided by the <b>goat whose</b> blood presentation is <b>performed outside</b> the Sanctuary, <b>and one corresponds to</b> the atonement provided by <b>the scapegoat.</b>

### Part 9
<b>But according to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that the priests do achieve atonement through the scapegoat, <b>why do I</b> need the <b>two confessions</b> recited over the bull <b>and</b> the <b>blood of the bull</b> to be presented inside the Sanctuary? <b>One confession</b> over the bull <b>and its blood</b> being presented inside the Sanctuary <b>would be sufficient.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: Two confessions are necessary, <b>one for</b> the High Priest <b>himself, and one for his household,</b> i.e., the priests, <b>as the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> The High Priest must first confess his own transgressions and only afterward those of the priests, because <b>that is</b> how <b>the attribute of justice functions:</b> It is <b>better that the innocent come and atone for the guilty, than</b> that <b>the guilty come and atone for the guilty.</b> When the High Priest confesses the transgressions of those in his house, it is better that he already be considered innocent, having confessed and been absolved of his own transgressions.

### Part 11
end of chapter

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to cases of <b>awareness of the defiling</b> of the Temple by entering it while one is ritually impure, or defiling its sacrificial foods by partaking of them while one is ritually impure, there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are</b> actually <b>four.</b> How so? If <b>one became ritually impure and he was aware</b> that he was impure, <b>but</b> afterward his <b>impurity was hidden from him, though he remembered</b> that he was partaking of <b>sacrificial</b> food, which is forbidden to one who is in a state of ritual impurity; this is one of the four types of awareness of impurity.

### Part 13
If the fact that he was partaking of <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>was hidden from him, though he remembered the ritual impurity</b> that he had contracted; this is the second of the four types of awareness of impurity. And the same <i>halakha</i> applies if both <b>this and that were hidden from him,</b> both the fact that he was impure and the fact that he was partaking of sacrificial food. In all these cases, if <b>he partook of the sacrificial</b> food <b>and was unaware</b> either that he was impure, or that the food was sacrificial food, or both, <b>and after he partook of</b> it <b>he became aware</b> of that which he had forgotten, <b>he is</b> required to bring <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering. In this type of offering, the sinner sacrifices an animal, bird, or meal-offering, depending on his financial status.

### Part 14
And similarly with regard to entering the Temple: If <b>one became ritually impure and he was aware</b> that he was impure, <b>but</b> afterward his <b>impurity was hidden from him,</b> though <b>he remembered</b> that he was entering <b>the Temple,</b> which is prohibited for one who is in a state of ritual impurity; this is the third of the four types of awareness of impurity. If the fact that he was entering <b>the Temple was hidden from him,</b> though <b>he remembered the ritual impurity</b> that he had contracted; this is the fourth type of awareness of impurity. And the same <i>halakha</i> applies if both <b>this and that were hidden from him,</b> both the fact that he was impure and the fact that he was entering the Temple. In all these cases, if <b>he entered the Temple and was unaware</b> either that he was impure, or that he was entering the Temple, or both, <b>and after he left he became aware</b> of what was hidden from him, <b>he is</b> required to bring <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering.

### Part 15
As for the boundaries of the Temple with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of impurity, <b>the same</b> <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>one who enters the</b> area that was part of the original Temple <b>courtyard and</b> to <b>one who enters the</b> later <b>addition to the</b> Temple <b>courtyard,</b> because the additional section is sanctified with the full sanctity of the Temple courtyard. The mishna notes: <b>As, additions can be made to the city</b> of Jerusalem <b>or to the</b> Temple <b>courtyards only by</b> a special body comprising the <b>king, a prophet, the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>, and the Sanhedrin of seventy-one</b> judges, <b>and with two thanks-offerings and with</b> a special <b>song.</b> Once the addition to the courtyard is made by this body and this process, it is given the full sanctity of the original courtyard area.

### Part 16
The mishna provides certain details of the consecration ceremony. <b>And the court</b> would <b>move</b> forward, <b>and two thanks-offerings</b> would be brought <b>after them, and all of the Jewish people</b> would follow <b>behind them.</b>