
### Part 1
It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Shabbat</i> 73a): <b>One who carries out</b> an item <b>from</b> one <b>domain to</b> another <b>domain</b> is <b>liable.</b> The Gemara claims: <b>Are we not</b> also <b>dealing</b> with a case <b>where he is bringing</b> it <b>in</b> from a public domain to a private domain, <b>and</b> nevertheless the mishna <b>refers to it</b> as <b>carrying out?</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara questions this assertion: <b>But perhaps</b> the mishna is dealing with a case of <b>carrying out</b> an item <b>from a private domain to a public domain.</b> The Gemara defends its claim: <b>If so, let it</b> instead <b>teach: One who carries out</b> an item <b>from a private domain to a public domain</b> is liable. <b>What</b> is the reason it used the more generalized formulation: <b>From</b> one <b>domain to</b> another <b>domain?</b> To teach <b>that</b> one is liable <b>even</b> if one transfers an item <b>from a public domain to a private domain.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains further: Even though the mishna addresses carrying an item in from a public domain to a private domain, <b>it refers to it as carrying out.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>The <i>tanna</i> refers to any</b> act that involves <b>removal of an item from its place as carrying out.</b> Accordingly, the term can appropriately be used even when an item is brought in to a private domain from a public domain.

### Part 4
<b>Ravina said:</b> The language of <b>the mishna</b> in tractate <i>Shabbat</i> <b>is also precise</b> in indicating this, <b>as it teaches:</b> With regard to acts of <b>carrying out [<i>yetziyyot</i>]</b> that are prohibited <b>on Shabbat,</b> there are primarily <b>two</b> basic actions <b>that are four</b> cases from the perspective of a person <b>inside</b> a private domain, <b>and two</b> basic actions <b>that are four</b> cases from the perspective of a person <b>outside,</b> in a public domain. <b>And</b> then, immediately, in the continuation of that mishna, <b>it explicates</b> the cases of <b>bringing in</b> an item. <b>Conclude from it</b> that the term: Carrying out, is also used to refer to bringing in an item.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said:</b> One cannot make any inference from the language of the mishna, as it is not referring to acts of carrying out. Rather, <b>it teaches domains.</b> In other words, it means: With regard to the <b>domains of Shabbat</b> there are <b>two</b> types, the existence of which leads to four types of prohibited transfers, two with regard to carrying out and two with regard to bringing in.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to different <b>shades of</b> leprous <b>marks,</b> there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are</b> actually <b>four. We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Nega’im</i> 1:1): With regard to different <b>shades of</b> leprous <b>marks,</b> there are <b>two</b> types <b>that are</b> actually <b>four:</b> The <b><i>baheret</i>,</b> mentioned in the Torah (see Leviticus 13:2), is considered a primary mark; it is <b>an intense</b> white, <b>like snow. Secondary to it,</b> i.e., a sub-category of it, is a mark that is white <b>like</b> the <b>lime</b> plaster <b>of the Sanctuary</b> walls.

### Part 7
That mishna continues: The <b><i>se’et</i></b> mentioned in the Torah is considered a primary mark; it is <b>like white wool. Secondary to it</b> is a mark that is white <b>like the membrane of an egg.</b> The ordering of different shades is relevant in determining which shades can be combined together. In order for a leprous mark to be halakhically significant, it must at least be the size of a split Cilician bean [<i>geris</i>]. If a mark is that size, but it is composed of different shades of white, none of which is alone the size of a <i>geris</i>, then if the different shades are compatible they can combine together and will thereby render the person ritually impure.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> this mishna, which delineates the different <b>shades of leprous marks</b> into two groups? It is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. As if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> one would be presented with a difficulty: <b>Since</b> with regard to which shades can combine together, Rabbi Akiva <b>says:</b> The different shades should be ordered <b>this</b> one <b>above this</b> one, <b>and that</b> one <b>above that</b> one, i.e., according to their degrees of brightness, from the most bright to the darkest shade, as follows: Snow white, i.e., <i>baheret</i>; wool white, i.e., <i>se’et</i>; lime; and egg membrane; and only two adjacent shades can combine together. But <b>if so, you have rendered pure</b> a mark that is white like the <b>lime</b> plaster <b>of the Sanctuary</b> walls and is smaller than a <i>geris</i>, as <b>it cannot be combined</b> with any other shade of white.

### Part 9
The Gemara explains: <b>With which</b> other shade <b>could we combine</b> the lime-colored mark? We cannot say: <b>Let us combine it together with</b> a snow-white <b><i>baheret</i>,</b> which is the primary mark relative to a lime-colored mark, as <b>there is</b> a wool-white <b><i>se’et</i>, which is a more</b> bright white <b>than</b> a lime-colored mark but less bright than snow white. Since <i>baheret</i> is not adjacent to lime it cannot combine with it. We cannot say: <b>Let us combine it together with a <i>se’et</i>,</b> as a lime-colored mark <b>is not its secondary</b> mark and a primary mark can combine only with its secondary mark. This is difficult because the mishna’s categorization of a lime-colored mark as a secondary mark indicates that it can be combined with another shade of white. Perforce, the mishna is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>If that is so,</b> that Rabbi Akiva holds that only adjacent shades of white can combine together, why didn’t Rabbi Ḥanina <b>also</b> bring proof from a mark that is white like the <b>membrane of an egg,</b> as <b>with which</b> other shade <b>could we combine it?</b> We cannot say: <b>Let us combine it together with</b> a wool-white <b><i>se’et</i>,</b> which is the primary mark relative to an egg membrane–colored mark, as <b>there is a lime</b>-colored mark, <b>which is a more</b> bright white <b>than</b> an egg membrane–colored mark but less bright that wool white. Since <i>se’et</i> is not adjacent to egg membrane it cannot combine with it. We cannot say: <b>Let us combine it together with a lime</b>-colored mark, as it <b>is not its type,</b> i.e., they are not of the same category, and so they cannot combine.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC