
### Part 1
Yom Kippur <b>itself is called “Shabbat,” as it is written:</b> “From evening until evening, <b>you shall rest on your Shabbat”</b> (Leviticus 23:32). The Gemara compares the various opinions. <b>Granted, Rav Pappa did not say as Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov</b> did because <b>a verse that is written about the matter itself is preferable</b> to a verbal analogy. <b>But what is the reason</b> that <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov did not state</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rav Pappa?</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>He requires this</b> verse of “keep your Shabbat” <b>for that which was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And you shall afflict your souls on the ninth day of the month</b> at evening, from evening until evening, you shall rest on your Shabbat” (Leviticus 23:32). One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>one should start to afflict oneself on the ninth</b> of Tishrei; therefore, <b>the verse states “at evening.” If</b> the Torah had stated only <b>“at evening,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the fast starts only <b>when darkness falls;</b> therefore, <b>the verse states “on the ninth,”</b> implying that one begins to fast on the ninth of Tishrei. <b>How</b> can these verses be reconciled? <b>One begins to fast while it is still daytime; from here</b> it is derived <b>that one</b> sanctifies and <b>extends from</b> the <b>non-sacred</b> weekday <b>to</b> the <b>sacred</b> day of Yom Kippur.

### Part 3
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that one must add time <b>at the beginning</b> of Yom Kippur. <b>From where</b> do I derive that one adds time <b>at the conclusion of</b> Yom Kippur? <b>The verse states: “From evening until evening”</b> (Leviticus 23:32),implying that one adds at the end as well, just as he does at the beginning. <b>And I</b> have derived <b>only</b> the mitzva of adding to <b>Yom Kippur; from where</b> is it derived that one must also sanctify and append time before and after <b>Festivals? The verse states: “You shall rest”</b> (Leviticus 23:32), to teach that this rule applies even to Festivals, on which one is commanded to rest. <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that one adds an extension to <b>Festivals; from where</b> do I derive that one must also sanctify and append to <b><i>Shabbatot</i>? The verse states: “Your Shabbat”</b> (Leviticus 23:32). <b>How so? Every place the term: Rest [<i>shevut</i>] is stated,</b> it teaches <b>from here that one</b> sanctifies and <b>appends from</b> the <b>non-sacred</b> weekday <b>to</b> the <b>sacred.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> who learns a verbal analogy from the words “that <b>same</b> day,” “that <b>same</b> day,” <b>what does he do with</b> the phrase: <b>“On the ninth day of the month”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He requires it, in accordance with</b> that <b>which Ḥiyya bar Rav of Difti taught. As Ḥiyya bar Rav of Difti taught:</b> It states: <b>“And you shall afflict your souls on the ninth</b> day of the month” (Leviticus 23:32). <b>But does one afflict oneself on the ninth</b> of Tishrei? <b>Doesn’t one</b> in fact <b>afflict oneself on the tenth</b> of Tishrei? <b>Rather,</b> the verse comes <b>to tell you: Anyone who eats and drinks on the ninth</b> of Tishrei and then fasts on the tenth, <b>the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he fasted on</b> both the <b>ninth and the tenth.</b> The verse alludes to this when it states that the fast is on the ninth.

### Part 5
§ It was taught in the mishna: If one <b>ate food that is</b> not <b>fit for eating,</b> he is exempt. <b>Rava said:</b> If <b>one chews</b> raw <b>pepper on Yom Kippur, he is exempt,</b> since this is not considered eating. Similarly, if <b>one chews ginger [<i>zangvila</i>] on Yom Kippur, he is exempt.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this. <b>Rabbi Meir would say</b> about the verse: “And when you shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then you shall count the fruit of it as forbidden [<i>orla</i>]; three years it shall be forbidden to you, it shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 19:23). <b>From the implication of what is stated: “Then you shall count the fruit of it as forbidden,” do I not know that</b> the verse is referring to <b>“trees for food,”</b> since it uses the word “fruit”? <b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states “trees for food”?</b> It includes <b>a tree whose wood and fruit taste the same,</b> i.e., a tree that is itself eaten in addition to its fruit. One <b>must say</b> that <b>this</b> is referring to <b>pepper</b> that grows on a tree, <b>to teach you that</b> even <b>pepper is subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of <i>orla</i>. And</b> this also teaches that <b>Eretz Yisrael lacks nothing,</b> as even pepper can grow there, <b>as it is stated</b> among the listed praises of Eretz Yisrael: <b>“You will not lack anything in it”</b> (Deuteronomy 8:9). In any event, it has been derived that pepper is called food, which contradicts Rava’s statement. 

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement about edible pepper is referring <b>to</b> fresh pepper, which is <b>moist; and that</b> <i>halakha</i> pertaining to Yom Kippur is referring to <b>dry</b> pepper, which is not considered food.

### Part 8
<b>Ravina said to Mareimar: But didn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>it is permitted</b> to eat <b>this cooked ginger [<i>himalta</i>] that comes from India,</b> and there is no concern that gentiles may have cooked it. <b>And we recite the blessing: Who creates the fruit of the ground, over it.</b> Apparently, ginger is edible. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult: This</b> statement is referring <b>to wet</b> ginger, which is considered food; <b>and that</b> earlier statement pertaining to Yom Kippur, which maintained that ginger is not food, is referring <b>to dry</b> ginger.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one ate leaves of reeds</b> on Yom Kippur, <b>he is exempt,</b> but if one ate <b>grapevine shoots he is liable.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>What are these grapevine shoots? Rabbi Yitzḥak from</b> the city of <b>Migdal said: All</b> shoots <b>that sprouted between Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur</b> and are still very soft are considered food. <b>And Rav Kahana said:</b> All shoots that sprouted up to <b>thirty days</b> before Yom Kippur are considered food. The Gemara comments: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak from Migdal:</b> If <b>one ate leaves of reeds he is exempt, but</b> if one ate <b>grapevine shoots he is liable. What are these grapevine shoots?</b> They are <b>all those that sprouted between Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 10
It was taught in the mishna that if on Yom Kippur one <b>drank fish brine or</b> the briny <b>liquid</b> in which fish are pickled, <b>he is exempt.</b> The Gemara comments: From the language of the mishna it may be inferred that <b>if one drank vinegar, he is liable. Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the mishna? It is Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Vinegar revives the spirit</b> and is therefore considered a beverage.

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Giddel bar Menashe from</b> the town of <b>Birei DeNeresh taught</b> in a public lecture that the <b><i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, and vinegar is not considered a beverage. <b>The</b> next <b>year everyone went out and mixed</b> vinegar with water <b>and drank vinegar</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>Rav Giddel heard</b> this <b>and became angry</b> with them for their actions. <b>He said: Say that I said</b> one is not liable for drinking vinegar <b>only after the fact;</b> however, <b>did I say</b> it is permitted to drink it <b><i>ab initio</i>?</b> Furthermore: <b>Say that I said</b> my statement with regard to one who drinks <b>a little,</b> but <b>did I say</b> it is permitted to drink <b>a lot?</b> Furthermore: <b>Say that I said</b> my statement in reference to <b>pure</b> vinegar, which is very strong, <b>but did I say</b> anything about <b>diluted</b> vinegar? That is certainly prohibited.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC