
### Part 1
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that it is derived by means of an <b><i>a fortiori</i> inference: Just as</b> before donning <b>golden garments, with which</b> the High <b>Priest does not enter the innermost sanctum,</b> the Holy of Holies, the High Priest <b>requires immersion,</b> before donning <b>white garments, with which</b> the High <b>Priest enters the innermost sanctum, is it not right that</b> the High Priest <b>require immersion?</b> The Gemara asks: The <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>can be refuted: What</b> is the comparison <b>to golden garments, as</b> the <b>atonement</b> that <b>they</b> effect <b>is extensive?</b> The High Priest serves in the golden garments throughout the year atoning for the sins of the Jewish people; he wears the white garments on just one Yom Kippur. Therefore, it is reasonable that before donning them, the High Priest would require immersion. <b>Rather, it is derived</b> from the verse cited by <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes an additional clause from the <i>baraita</i> cited above. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: From where</b> are derived the <b>five immersions and ten sanctifications</b> that the <b>High Priest im-merses and sanctifies</b> his hands and feet, respectively, <b>on the day</b> of Yom Kippur? They are derived from <b>the verse</b> that <b>states: “He shall be dressed in a sacred linen tunic</b>, and with linen trousers next to his flesh, and he shall be girded with a linen belt, and he shall wear a linen mitre; they are sacred garments, and he shall wash his flesh in water and then put them on” (Leviticus 16:4). From <b>this you learned: Anyone who moves from</b> an inner <b>service,</b> in the Holy of Holies, <b>to</b> an outer <b>service,</b> and vice versa, <b>requires immersion.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> proof that the High Priest requires immersion when he changes <b>from golden garments to white garments;</b> however, <b>from where</b> is it derived that he requires immersion when he changes <b>from white garments to golden garments?</b>

### Part 3
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that it is derived by means of an <b><i>a fortiori</i> inference: Just as</b> before donning <b>white garments,</b> with regard to <b>which</b> the <b>atonement</b> that <b>they</b> effect <b>is minimal</b> as the priest wears them only on one Yom Kippur, <b>immersion is required,</b> before donning <b>golden garments,</b> with regard to <b>which</b> the <b>atonement</b> that <b>they</b> effect <b>is extensive</b> throughout the year, <b>is it not right that immersion should be required?</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: The <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>can be refuted: What</b> is the comparison <b>to white garments, as he enters with them to the innermost sanctum?</b> As the High Priest does not enter the Holy of Holies with the golden garments, apparently the sanctity of the white garments is greater. The Gemara comments: The source for the requirement to immerse when changing from white garments to golden garments <b>is that which is taught</b> later in the <i>baraita</i>: The verse <b>states: “They are sacred garments, and he shall wash his flesh in water and then put them on”</b> (Leviticus 16:4), meaning immersion is required before donning all sacred garments.

### Part 5
<b>And they are five services:</b> The sacrifice of the <b>daily morning offering,</b> performed <b>in golden garments; the service of the day,</b> the bull and the goat, which is performed <b>in white garments;</b> the sacrifice of <b>his ram</b> guilt-offering and the <b>ram of the people,</b> performed <b>in golden garments.</b> After that the High Priest places the <b>spoon and the coal pan</b> into the Holy of Holies <b>in white garments.</b> He emerges from the Holy of Holies and sacrifices the <b>daily afternoon offering in golden garments</b> and then removes the spoon and the coal pan in white garments.

### Part 6
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that each and every immersion requires two sanctifications</b> of the hands and the feet? It is derived from <b>the verse</b> that <b>states:</b> “And Aaron shall come into the Tent of Meeting <b>and he shall remove</b> the linen garments that he put on when he entered the Sanctuary and leave them there. <b>And he shall wash</b> his flesh in water” (Leviticus 16:23–24). And it says: <b>“And he shall wash</b> his flesh in water in a sacred place <b>and put on</b> his garments” (Leviticus 16:24). The Gemara asks: <b>That is written</b> with regard <b>to immersion.</b> The washing mentioned in this verse is not sanctification of the hands and feet but rather immersion. The Gemara answers: <b>If it is not a matter</b> relating <b>to immersion, which is derived from</b> the phrase: <b>“They are sacred garments”</b> (Leviticus 16:4), indicating that every change of clothes requires immersion, then <b>render it a matter</b> relating <b>to sanctification.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And let the Merciful One write</b> the obligation <b>in</b> the <b>language of sanctification</b> of the hands and feet rather than the language of immersion. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> language comes to <b>teach us that</b> in this case, the legal status of <b>immersion is like</b> that of <b>sanctification. Just as sanctification</b> of the hands and feet is performed <b>in a sacred area,</b> as the basin used for sanctification is situated in the courtyard, <b>so too,</b> the <b>immersion</b> before donning garments must be performed <b>in a sacred area,</b> not outside the Temple.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who derives immersion before donning the golden garments from this verse and does not derive anything from the phrase: They are sacred garments, <b>from where does he</b> derive the obligation to perform <b>sanctification</b> of the hands and feet? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it</b> as an <i>a fortiori</i> inference <b>from</b> the inference of <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon:</b> In a place that the Torah does not require immersion it nevertheless requires sanctification of the hands and feet; therefore, in a place that the Torah requires immersion for all changes of garments, is it not right that it requires sanctification of the hands and feet?

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: That</b> statement of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi with regard to immersion and sanctification <b>is</b> an original opinion <b>to the exclusion of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir</b> with regard to sanctification, <b>and to the exclusion of</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. It is to the exclusion of</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, as the Rabbis said</b> that <b>he sanctifies</b> his hands and feet when <b>he is dressed, and</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: He sanctifies</b> them <b>when he undresses. And it is to the exclusion of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, as Rabbi Meir said:</b> With regard to <b>this last sanctification</b> that he performs after each immersion, <b>he sanctifies</b> his hands and feet <b>when he is dressed. And</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: He sanctifies</b> them <b>when he undresses.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: Everyone agrees with regard to the second sanctification that one dresses, and afterward sanctifies</b> his hands and feet. <b>What</b> is <b>the reason</b> for this? It is <b>as the verse states: “Or when they approach the altar</b> to serve, to burn an offering by fire to God, they shall wash their hands and feet so that they do not die” (Exodus 30:20–21). This teaches that the priest who is obligated to sanctify his hands and feet is one who is <b>lacking only</b> the element of <b>approach</b> to the altar to begin performing the service, to the <b>exclusion of that</b> priest who has not yet donned the priestly vestments, <b>who is lacking</b> both the element of <b>donning</b> priestly vestments and the element of <b>approach</b> to the altar. Sanctification of the hands and feet prior to the service is performed when he is already dressed.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Aḥa, son</b> of <b>Rava, said to Rav Ashi: Neither does Rav Ḥisda,</b> who said that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the priest performs the two sanctifications before donning the garments, <b>agree with Rav Aḥa,</b> who said that that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the sanctification is done after donning the garments; <b>nor does Rav Aḥa,</b> who said that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the sanctification must be performed directly prior to the service, <b>agree with Rav Ḥisda,</b> who said that according to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi the two sanctifications are performed before donning the garments. <b>As, if</b> they <b>do</b> agree, according <b>to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>there are fifteen sanctifications.</b> For each change of garments he would require three sanctifications: One when he undresses, one prior to dressing, and one after he is dressed.

### Part 12
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>They brought him the</b> sheep for <b>the daily</b> morning <b>offering, which he slaughtered [<i>keratzo</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>keratzo</i>? Ulla said: It is a term</b> meaning <b>killing. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: What is the verse</b> that indicates this meaning? It is stated: <b>“Egypt is a very fair heifer, but the <i>keretz</i> out of north is come, it is come”</b> (Jeremiah 46:20). The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> may it be <b>inferred</b> that <i>keretz</i> means killing? The Gemara explains: It is <b>as translated by Rav Yosef: Egypt is a fair kingdom, but murderous nations will come upon it from the north.</b> The Gemara asks: When he <b>slaughtered</b> the sheep, <b>to what extent</b> did he do so? <b>Ulla said:</b> He slaughtered the animal <b>with</b> a cut through <b>the majority of</b> each of the <b>two</b> organs, the windpipe and the gullet, which is sufficient to render the animal ritually slaughtered.

### Part 13
<b>And similarly, Rav Yoḥanan said: With the majority of</b> each of the <b>two</b> organs. <b>And Reish Lakish also held: With the majority of</b> each of the <b>two</b> organs. This is indeed Reish Lakish’s opinion, <b>as Reish Lakish said: Once we learned</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter that <b>the majority of one</b> organ is <b>like the whole, why was</b> it necessary that <b>we</b> also <b>learn</b> there that in order for the slaughter to be valid it requires <b>the majority of one</b> organ <b>in a bird and the majority</b> of each of <b>two</b> organs <b>in an animal?</b> That is clear based on the principle that one organ is required in a bird and two in an animal. Rather, <b>since we learned: They brought him the</b> sheep for <b>the daily</b> morning <b>offering, which he slaughtered</b> by cutting most of the way through the gullet and the windpipe, <b>and a different</b> priest <b>completed</b> the <b>slaughter on his behalf</b> so that the High Priest could receive the blood in a vessel, and the High Priest <b>received the blood</b> in a vessel <b>and sprinkled it</b> on the altar; one <b>might</b> have thought that if the other priest <b>did not complete</b> cutting through the two organs, the slaughter <b>would be invalid.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: How is it possible that one <b>might</b> have thought that if the other priest <b>did not complete</b> cutting through the two organs, the slaughter <b>would be invalid? If</b> that is <b>so,</b> the completion of the slaughter <b>is</b> a Temple <b>service</b> performed by <b>another</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All Yom Kippur services are valid only</b> if performed <b>by</b> the High Priest. The Gemara answers that <b>this is what</b> Reish Lakish <b>is saying:</b> Clearly, there is no requirement by Torah law to complete the slaughter of the two organs. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>it would be invalid by rabbinic law;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC