
### Part 1
<b>“To that within the veil; and you shall serve;</b> I give you the priesthood as a service of gift” (Numbers 18:7), indicating that it is only with regard to services that are performed <b>within the veil,</b> i.e., in the Holy of Holies, <b>that there is</b> a distinction between services, and a non-priest who performs <b>services of giving</b> there, such as sprinkling the blood inside the Holy of Holies on Yom Kippur, is subject to the death penalty, <b>but not</b> one who performs <b>services of removing</b> there, such as the removal of the censer from the Holy of Holies on Yom Kippur. <b>This</b> leads to the conclusion that when it comes to services performed <b>outside</b> of the Holy of Holies, a non-priest would be liable if he performed any service, <b>even a service of removal,</b> such as the removal of ashes from the altar.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the limitations of the verse apply only to those services performed in the Holy of Holies, one should say that the phrase: “<b>And you shall serve [<i>va’avadtem</i>],”</b> from which it is derived that one is liable only for a service that is complete [<i>avoda tamma</i>] on its own and not incomplete, should <b>also</b> be similarly limited to services performed <b>to what is within the veil.</b> In that case, the liability of the non-priest, which is limited to cases where he performs <b>a complete service and</b> does <b>not</b> apply if he performs <b>a service that</b> is only preparatory and <b>has another service after it</b> that completes its purpose, should apply only to services performed in the Holy of Holies. <b>But</b> for services performed <b>outside</b> the Holy of Holies, a non-priest should be liable <b>even</b> if it is <b>a service that</b> is incomplete and <b>has a service after it.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: The phrase: “<b>And you shall serve [<i>va’avadtem</i>],”</b> which begins with the conjunction <i>vav</i>, meaning: And, indicates that <b>the verse goes back and combines</b> the service performed within the veil to services performed outside of it. This teaches that with regard to this <i>halakha</i> there is no difference between a service performed outside and a service performed inside.

### Part 4
According to Levi, if a non-priest performs a service involving removal within the veil, i.e., in the Holy of Holies, he does not incur the death penalty, but if he performs a service involving removal outside, such as the removal of the ashes from the external altar, he is liable to the death penalty. <b>Rava raised a dilemma</b> relating to Levi’s approach: <b>What</b> would be the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a service of removal</b> performed <b>in the Sanctuary</b> chamber that is before the Holy of Holies, such as removing the burnt incense from the inner altar, or removing burnt wicks and leftover oil from the candelabrum? Do <b>we compare</b> such an act <b>to</b> a service performed <b>inside</b> the Holy of Holies, so that he would be exempt from the death penalty, <b>or</b> do <b>we compare</b> it <b>to the outer</b> service?

### Part 5
Rava himself <b>went back and resolved</b> the dilemma: Had the Torah said only: <b>Within</b> the veil, it would have been understood that it is referring only to actions performed in the Holy of Holies. But since the Torah says: <b>And to what is within</b> the veil, the added conjunction: And, teaches that it is referring to something else besides the Holy of Holies, i.e., the Sanctuary.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>However, if</b> it is <b>so</b> that a non-priest is liable for performing a service that is complete on its own that takes place in the Sanctuary, one should say that <b>a non-priest who arranges the</b> loaves on the shewbread <b>table should be liable.</b> The Gemara answers: After arranging the bread <b>there is</b> still the <b>arranging of the vessels</b> of frankincense on the table that remains to be done, so the arrangement of the bread is not a service that is complete on its own. The Gemara asks: If so, <b>a non-priest who arranges the vessels</b> of frankincense on the table <b>should be liable.</b> The Gemara rejects this: After arranging the vessels, <b>there is</b> still the <b>removal</b> of these vessels <b>and the burning</b> of their frankincense on the altar that remain to be done; therefore, arranging the vessels is not considered a service that is complete on its own.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks further with regard to the notion that a non-priest is liable for performing a service that is complete on its own that takes place in the Sanctuary: If so, <b>a non-priest who arranges the</b> lamps of the <b>candelabrum should be liable.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>There is</b> still the <b>placing of the wicks</b> in the lamps that remains to be done, so arranging the lamps is not considered a service that is complete on its own. The Gemara asks: If so, a non-priest who <b>placed a wick</b> in the candelabrum’s lamps <b>should be liable.</b> The Gemara answers: That too is not a service that is complete on its own, as <b>there is</b> still the necessity of <b>placing the oil.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: If so, a non-priest who <b>placed the oil should be liable.</b> The Gemara answers: That too is not a service that is complete on its own, as <b>there is</b> still the service of <b>lighting</b> that needs to be done. The Gemara asks: If so, if a non-priest <b>who lit</b> the lamps <b>should be liable.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Lighting</b> the lamps <b>is not</b> considered a bona fide Temple <b>service,</b> since in doing so nothing is done to the candelabrum itself.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And is</b> kindling a fire really <b>not</b> considered a Temple service? <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar and lay out wood in order upon the fire”</b> (Leviticus 1:7), which <b>teaches that the kindling of chips [<i>alita</i>]</b> added to keep the altar’s fire going must <b>be performed only by a proper priest and</b> that he must be wearing <b>the priestly garments?</b> This shows that kindling is considered a service. The Gemara answers: <b>Kindling</b> the <b>chips is a</b> bona fide <b>service,</b> but <b>lighting</b> the candelabrum is <b>not</b> a bona fide <b>service.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara further asks: <b>However, if</b> it is <b>so</b> that a non-priest is liable for performing any service involving placing, as established above, <b>a non-priest who set up the arrangement</b> of wood on the altar <b>should be liable,</b> since that is a service involving placing. The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> still <b>the</b> mitzva of the <b>arrangement of two logs</b> on the altar that remains to be done, so that setting up the arrangement of wood is not a service that is complete on its own. The Gemara asks: If so, a non-priest who <b>arranged the two logs should be liable.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> still <b>the arrangement of limbs</b> of offerings on the fire that remains to be done, so placing the two logs is also not considered a service that is complete on its own.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rav Asi say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A non-priest who arranged the two pieces of wood is liable?</b> This shows that placing the two logs is a complete service and contradicts Rav’s statement that a non-priest is liable only if he performs the four services that he mentioned above. The Gemara answers: Indeed, Rav and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagree on this</b> point. <b>One Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds</b> that the placement of the two logs <b>is a service that is complete</b> on its own, as the arrangement of limbs that follows is not considered a continuation of the setting up of the wood; <b>and one Sage,</b> Rav, <b>holds</b> that the placement of the two logs <b>is not</b> considered <b>a service that is complete</b> on its own, since it is followed by the arrangement of the limbs on the wood.

### Part 12
The Gemara returns to the disagreement between Rav and Levi and notes: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav,</b> and <b>it was taught</b> in a second <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Levi. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav:</b> These are the <b>services for which a non-priest</b> who performs them <b>is liable to</b> receive the penalty of <b>death</b> by God’s hand: One who performs <b>the sprinkling of blood, whether inside</b> the Sanctuary; on the golden altar or at the veil; <b>or inside the innermost</b> chamber, the Holy of Holies, on Yom Kippur; or outside on the main altar; <b>and one who sprinkles</b> blood in the case of a <b>bird sin-offering; and one who squeezes</b> the blood of <b>a bird burnt-offering</b> on the wall of the altar <b>or burns</b> the bird on the altar; <b>and one who pours out three <i>log</i> of water</b> on the altar for the <i>Sukkot</i> water libation <b>or three <i>log</i> of wine</b> on the altar for an ordinary libation. The removal of ashes from the altar is not listed here.

### Part 13
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Levi:</b> These are the <b>services for which a non-priest</b> who performs them <b>is liable to</b> receive the penalty of <b>death</b> by God’s hand: <b>One who removes the ashes</b> from the altar; one who performs <b>the seven sprinklings that are</b> performed <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary <b>or</b> the sprinklings <b>of the leper; and one who raises up</b> an offering <b>onto the altar, whether it is</b> a <b>proper</b> offering <b>or</b> a <b>disqualified</b> one. In this <i>baraita</i>, the removal of ashes is listed.

### Part 14
§ The Gemara returns to its interpretation of the mishna. The mishna states that there were four lotteries held in the Temple every day. One of the Sages asked: <b>Why did</b> the Temple authorities <b>hold lotteries?</b> Before answering the question, the Gemara expresses astonishment at the question itself: <b>Why did they hold lotteries?</b> The reason is <b>as we said</b> clearly in the mishna: To prevent quarrels among the priests. The Gemara explains: <b>Rather,</b> this is the meaning of the question: <b>Why did they</b> assemble all the priests together and <b>hold a lottery, and once again</b> gather them together to <b>hold another lottery,</b> four times, when the priests could be gathered one time and all the necessary lotteries held at that time?

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It was done this way <b>in order to create a commotion throughout</b> the Temple <b>courtyard,</b> as the priests would converge from all over to assemble there, <b>as it is stated: “We took sweet counsel together, in the House of God we walked with the throng”</b> (Psalms 55:15). This verse teaches that it is proper to stir up a commotion and to cause public excitement in the course of the Temple services and the preliminary steps leading up to them, such as the assignment of tasks to the priests.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>With what</b> garments were the priests clothed when <b>they held the lottery? Rav Naḥman said:</b> The priests were clothed in their own <b>non-sacred garments. And Rav Sheshet said:</b> The priests were dressed in the priestly <b>sacred garments.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara explains the two approaches. <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> The priests were dressed in <b>non-sacred garments, because if you say</b> the lottery was to be held when they were dressed in their <b>sacred garments, there are</b> strong-<b>armed men who might act with force and perform the service</b> even if they did not win the lottery. Since they were already wearing the sacred garments, they would simply force their way into performing the service. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> They were wearing the <b>sacred garments, as, if you say</b> they wore their <b>non-sacred garments, due to</b> the fact that the service was so <b>beloved</b> to them, in their excitement over having been granted the privilege to perform the service, <b>it may happen</b> that <b>they would perform the service</b> immediately, forgetting to don their sacred garments, thereby disqualifying the service.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Naḥman said: From where do I state</b> my opinion? <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: After the lottery <b>they gave</b> the priests <b>over to the attendants, and they would take their clothes off them and they would leave only</b> their <b>trousers on them.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC