
### Part 1
However, <b>bread,</b> which is essential, <b>they asked for appropriately.</b> Therefore, it <b>was given to them appropriately,</b> in the morning, when there was time to prepare it. The Gemara comments: <b>From here, the Torah teaches etiquette, that</b> it is proper <b>to eat meat only at night,</b> as Moses said to the children of Israel: “This shall be, when the Lord will give you in the evening meat to eat” (Exodus 16:8). The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Abaye say</b> that <b>someone who has a meal should eat it only in the day?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>We mean to say: Like day.</b> It is not necessary to eat the food in the daytime, as long as one can see what he eats. <b>Rabbi Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: At the beginning, the Jewish people were like chickens pecking at the garbage;</b> any time there was food they grabbed it and ate it, <b>until Moses came and set specific times to eat,</b> as the verse implies. He set mealtimes for them in the morning and in the evening.

### Part 2
It was stated with regard to the quail: <b>“While the meat was yet between their teeth,</b> before it was chewed, the anger of the Lord was kindled against the people” (Numbers 11:33), which means that they died immediately. However, it also states: “You shall not eat it for only one day…but for <b>an entire month</b> until it comes out of your nostrils and becomes loathsome to you” (Numbers 11:19–20). <b>How</b> can <b>these</b> texts be reconciled? <b>The average people died immediately,</b> but <b>the wicked continued to suffer</b> in pain <b>for a month</b> and then died.

### Part 3
The verse states: <b>“And they spread them [<i>vayishteḥu</i>]</b> out for themselves round about the camp” (Numbers 11:32). <b>Reish Lakish said: Do not read it</b> as <b><i>vayishteḥu</i>. Rather,</b> read it as <b><i>vayishḥatu</i>.</b> This <b>teaches that</b> the <b>enemies of the Jewish people,</b> a euphemism for the Jewish people themselves, <b>were liable to</b> receive the punishment of <b>slaughter</b> due to their demand. The verse states: <b>“Spread out [<i>shato’aḥ</i>]”</b> (Numbers 11:32). A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa: Do not read it</b> as <b><i>shato’aḥ</i> but</b> as <b><i>shaḥot</i>.</b> This <b>teaches that</b> other food <b>fell for the Jewish people</b> along <b>with the manna.</b> The food was something <b>that requires ritual slaughtering [<i>sheḥita</i>],</b> referring to birds. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: And do you learn</b> this <b>from here?</b> Do we need to alter the word for this purpose? <b>Isn’t it already stated</b> explicitly: <b>“And he rained meat upon them like dust, and winged birds like the sand of the seas”</b> (Psalms 78:27)?

### Part 4
<b>And it was taught</b> in a related <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The verse states: <b>“Then you shall slaughter</b> of your herd and of your flock which the Lord has given you, <b>as I have commanded you”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:21). <b>This teaches that Moses was commanded in</b> the laws of ritual slaughter to cut the <b>gullet and the windpipe</b> in the neck. <b>And with a bird</b> one must cut through <b>the majority</b> of <b>one</b> pipe, <b>and with an animal</b> one must cut through <b>the majority of</b> both pipes. Moses was commanded these laws along with the other details of slaughtering. According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, the word <i>shatoaḥ</i> does not teach us about ritual slaughter. <b>Rather, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: <i>Shatoaḥ</i>?</b> It <b>teaches that</b> the manna <b>fell in layers [<i>mashtiḥin</i>]</b> in a straight row.

### Part 5
With regard to the manna, <b>it is written “bread”</b> (Exodus 16:4), <b>and it is written “oil”</b> (Numbers 11:8), <b>and it is written “honey”</b> (Exodus 16:31). How can we reconcile these verses? <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: For the youth</b> it was like <b>bread, for the elderly</b> it was like <b>oil,</b> and <b>for the children</b> it was like <b>honey.</b> Each received what was appropriate.

### Part 6
The Gemara comments further: The word quail <b>is written <i>shlav</i>,</b> with the letter <i>shin</i>, <b>but we read</b> it as <b><i>slav</i>,</b> with the letter <i>samekh</i>. What does this teach us? <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: The righteous eat it in peace [<i>shalva</i>],</b> based on the written form of the word; whereas <b>the wicked eat it, and it seems to them like thorns [<i>silvin</i>],</b> based on the way the word is read.

### Part 7
Furthermore, with regard to the quail: <b>Rav Ḥanan bar Rava said: There are four types of quail and these are they: <i>Sikhli</i>, and <i>kivli</i>, and <i>pasyoni</i>, and <i>slav</i>. The best</b> tasting <b>of all</b> is the <b><i>sikhli</i>. The worst of all</b> is the <b><i>slav</i>.</b> The Gemara relates how tasty even the quail was that the Jews ate in the desert: <b>It was</b> as small <b>as a sparrow, and they would place it in the oven</b> to roast, <b>and it expanded until it filled the</b> entire <b>oven. They would place it upon thirteen loaves</b> of bread, and even the <b>last</b> loaf on the bottom <b>could be eaten only</b> when <b>mixed with other food,</b> due to all the fat it had absorbed from the quail.

### Part 8
It is told that <b>Rav Yehuda found</b> quail <b>among his barrels of wine,</b> and <b>Rav Ḥisda found</b> quail <b>among logs of wood</b> in his storeroom. <b>Every day Rava’s sharecropper brought him</b> a quail that he found in his fields. <b>One day, he did not bring</b> him one because he failed to find any. Rava <b>said</b> to himself: <b>What is this,</b> why is today different? <b>He went up to the roof</b> to think about it. <b>He heard a child say</b> the verse: <b>“When I heard, my innards trembled,</b> my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness enters into my bones, and I tremble where I stand; that I should wait for the day of trouble when he comes up against the people that he invades” (Habakkuk 3:16). Rava <b>said: Learn from this that Rav Ḥisda has died.</b> I am therefore not worthy to receive the quail anymore, since it is on <b>account of the teacher</b> that <b>the student eats.</b> When Rav Ḥisda was alive, Rava received the quail due to Rav Ḥisda’s merit; now that he had died, Rava was not worthy to receive the quail.

### Part 9
§ Furthermore, with regard to the manna <b>it is written: “And when the layer of dew lifted,</b> behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a fine flaky substance, as fine as frost on the ground” (Exodus 16:14), indicating that the dew covered the manna. <b>And it is written:</b> “<b>And when the dew fell</b> upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it” (Numbers 11:9), meaning that the manna fell on top of the dew. How can these verses be reconciled? <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said:</b> There was <b>dew above and dew below,</b> with the manna in between, <b>and</b> the manna <b>appeared as if</b> it were <b>placed in a box [<i>kufsa</i>]</b> of dew.

### Part 10
The verse describes the manna as <b>“a fine flaky [<i>meḥuspas</i>]</b> substance” (Exodus 16:14). <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> <i>Meḥuspas</i> means it was <b>a substance that dissolved [</b><i>maḥ</i><b>] on the palm [</b><i>pas</i><b>] of the hand.</b> Since it was so fine, it dissolved upon contact. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It was a substance that was absorbed in</b> all <b>248 limbs,</b> the numerical equivalent of the word <i>meḥuspas</i>. The Gemara expresses surprise at this: If one calculates the value of the letters in the word <b><i>meḥuspas</i>,</b> it <b>is more,</b> totaling 254. <b>Rabbi Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: <i>Meḥuspas</i> is written</b> in the Torah without the letter <i>vav</i>. Therefore, the total is exactly 248.

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught:</b> The Torah states: “And He caused manna to rain upon them for food, and He gave them of the grain of heaven. <b>Man did eat the bread of the mighty [<i>abirim</i>]”</b> (Psalms 78:24–25). “Bread of the mighty” is <b>bread that the ministering angels eat;</b> this is the <b>statement of Rabbi Akiva. When these words were said before Rabbi Yishmael, he said to them</b> to <b>go and tell Akiva: Akiva you have erred. Do the ministering angels eat bread? It is already stated</b> about Moses, when he ascended on high: <b>“Bread I did not eat and water I did not drink”</b> (Deuteronomy 9:9). If even a man who ascends on high does not need to eat, certainly the ministering angels do not need to eat. <b>Rather, how do I establish</b> the meaning of the word <b><i>abirim</i>?</b> It can be explained as <b>bread that was absorbed into</b> all <b>248 limbs [<i>eivarim</i>],</b> so that there was no waste.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>how do I establish</b> the verses: <b>“And you shall have a spade among your weapons,</b> and it shall be that when you relieve yourself outside, you shall dig with it, and shall turn back and cover your excrement” (Deuteronomy 23:14) and “You shall have a place also outside the camp <b>where you can relieve yourself</b> ” (Deuteronomy 23:13). From here we learn that there was waste in their bowels, as they had to leave the camp to relieve themselves. The Gemara explains: This waste was not a byproduct of the manna; it was from food <b>items that the gentile merchants sold them.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar ben Perata</b> disagrees and <b>says: The manna caused even items that the gentile merchants sold them to be</b> completely <b>digested,</b> so that even other food that they ate produced no waste. <b>But</b> then <b>how do I establish</b> the verse: <b>“And you shall have a spade among your weapons”? After they sinned,</b> the manna was not as effective. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said: I</b> initially <b>said</b> that <b>they would be like ministering angels</b> who do not produce waste; <b>now I will trouble them to walk three parasangs</b> to leave the camp in order to relieve themselves.

### Part 14
How do we know that the Israelite camp was three parasangs? <b>As it is written: “And they camped by the Jordan from Beth-Jeshimoth to Abel-shittim”</b> (Numbers 33:49), <b>and Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: I saw that site and it was three parasangs</b> in length. <b>And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>taught: When</b> the Jews <b>relieved themselves</b> in the desert, <b>they did not relieve</b> themselves <b>ahead of themselves,</b> i.e., in the direction of their travel, <b>nor to the side</b> of the camp, <b>but behind</b> the camp, in a place that they had already traveled. Consequently, those near the front of the camp had to walk a distance of three parasangs from their homes to leave the camp.

### Part 15
Furthermore, with regard to the manna, the verse states Israel’s complaint: <b>“But now our soul is dry, there is nothing at all;</b> we have nothing beside this manna to look to” (Numbers 11:6). <b>They said: This manna will eventually swell in our stomachs</b> and kill us; <b>is there</b> anyone <b>born of a woman who ingests</b> food <b>but does not expel</b> waste? This supports the Gemara’s claim that the manna did not create waste.

### Part 16
<b>When these words were said before Rabbi Yishmael, he said to them: Do not read</b> it as <b><i>abirim</i>. Rather,</b> read it as <b><i>eivarim</i>,</b> limbs. The manna was <b>something that was absorbed by 248 limbs. But, how do I establish “And you shall have a spade among your weapons”? From the</b> food <b>items that came to them from overseas lands.</b> Rabbi Yishmael disagrees with Rabbi Elazar ben Perata with regard to the effect the manna had on the digestion of other foods.

### Part 17
<b>Alternatively, “Man [<i>ish</i>] did eat the bread of the mighty”</b> (Psalms 78:25);

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC