
### Part 1
Rather, <i>tohoro</i> means <b>on</b> top of <b>the altar itself, as it is written: “Like the very sky for purity [<i>latohar</i>]”</b> (Exodus 24:10). <i>Tohoro</i> refers to the top of the altar after the ashes of the incense are cleared and the pure gold is visible.

### Part 2
The Gemara returns to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon IshHaMitzpa: <b>What is different that</b> he says to <b>sprinkle</b> in accordance with the procedure of the <b>burnt-offering first and then sprinkle</b> in accordance with the procedure <b>that</b> is used for the <b>sin-offering? Let us first sprinkle</b> in accordance with the procedure <b>that</b> is used for the <b>sin-offering and then let us sprinkle</b> in accordance with the procedure <b>that</b> is used for the <b>burnt-offering.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the daily offering <b>is a burnt-offering,</b> that procedure <b>takes precedence,</b> and it is followed by the sin-offering.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different that</b> he says to <b>sprinkle</b> first on the <b>northeast</b> corner of the altar <b>and</b> then on the <b>southwest</b> corner? <b>Let him sprinkle</b> first on the <b>southeast</b> corner <b>and then</b> on the <b>northwest</b> corner. The Sages <b>say:</b> That is because the blood of the <b>burnt-offering requires</b> sprinkling on the side of the altar with <b>a base,</b> as it is stated: “On the base of the altar of burnt-offering” (Leviticus 4:18) <b>and the southeast corner did not have a base.</b> Therefore, the sprinkling was performed on the northeast corner, where part of the base of the altar was located.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different that</b> he says to <b>sprinkle</b> first on the <b>northeast</b> corner of the altar <b>and</b> then on the <b>southwest</b> corner? <b>Let him sprinkle</b> first on the <b>southwest</b> corner <b>and then</b> on the <b>northeast</b> corner. The Gemara answers that it is <b>since the Master said: All turns that you turn should be only to the right.</b> With regard to certain offerings sacrificed when the priest is on the south side of the altar, he would turn <b>to the east,</b> which was to his right. Since the animal to be offered is slaughtered to the north of the altar, he <b>first</b> sprinkles blood at the corner that <b>he encounters</b> first.

### Part 5
<b>And from where</b> is the conclusion drawn that <b>the Merciful One says with regard to a burnt-offering to perform it</b> in accordance with <b>the procedure of a sin-offering? Perhaps it is with regard to a sin-offering</b> of the New Moon <b>that the Merciful One says to perform it</b> in accordance with <b>the procedure of a burnt-offering.</b> The Gemara responds: This can <b>not enter your mind, as it is written: “It shall be offered aside from the daily burnt-offering and its libation”</b> (Numbers 28:15). <b>What is the Merciful One saying? Cast a matter of the sin-offering upon the burnt-offering,</b> i.e., apply the procedure of the sin-offering to the sacrifice of the burnt-offering.

### Part 6
§ Just as the contradiction above was resolved by attributing different sources to different <i>tanna’im</i>, the Gemara cites an additional contradiction with a similar resolution. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there: The appointee,</b> the deputy High Priest, <b>said to</b> the other priests: <b>Go out and bring a lamb from the Chamber of the Lambs,</b> where lambs awaiting sacrifice were kept after they underwent inspection and were found to be without blemish. That mishna continues: <b>The Chamber of the Lambs was</b> located <b>in the northwest corner</b> of the Hall of the Hearth in the Temple courtyard. <b>And there were four chambers there</b> in that hall. <b>One</b> was <b>the Chamber of the Lambs, and one</b> was <b>the Chamber of the Seals.</b> In the Temple, seals were dispensed as receipts to individuals who paid for sacrificial animals. The person then showed the seal to a Temple official, who supplied him with an animal. <b>And one</b> was <b>the Chamber of the Hall of the Hearth, and one</b> was <b>the chamber where the shewbread was prepared.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna in tractate <i>Middot</i>: <b>Four chambers were</b> open <b>into the Hall of the Hearth like small</b> semi-open <b>rooms [<i>kitoniyyot</i>] that open into a</b> central <b>hall [<i>teraklin</i>]. Two</b> of these chambers were located in the <b>sacred</b> area, in the Temple courtyard, <b>and two</b> of the chambers <b>were</b> located <b>in the non-sacred</b> area of the Temple Mount. <b>And the tops of</b> wooden <b>stakes [<i>pispasin</i>]</b> in the Hall of the Hearth <b>divided between the sacred</b> area and the <b>non-sacred</b> area to apprise the people in both areas where they were located and what conduct is required. <b>And what</b> purpose did these chambers <b>serve?</b> The <b>southwest</b> chamber <b>was the Chamber of the Sacrificial Lambs;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC