
### Part 1
<b>And some say:</b> The sound of <b>Ridya as well.</b> Ridya is the angel tasked with irrigating the earth, who calls to the heavens and to the aquifers to provide their water. The Gemara comments: <b>And the Sages asked for mercy</b> so that the sound of <b>the soul at the moment that it leaves the body</b> would no longer be heard to that extent, <b>and</b> God <b>eliminated it.</b> In any event, clearly this <i>baraita</i> understands <i>keriat hagever</i> as the proclamation of the Temple crier, in support of the opinion of Rav.

### Part 2
A <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Sheila:</b> With regard to <b>one who sets out on the path</b> at night <b>before <i>keriat hagever</i></b> and is killed by demons, <b>his blood is on his</b> own <b>head,</b> i.e., he is at fault. <b>Rabbi Yoshiya says:</b> The prohibition of traveling at night is in effect <b>until</b> the rooster crows <b>twice. And some say: Until he</b> crows <b>three times. And with regard to what rooster did</b> these Sages <b>state</b> this advisory? It is with regard to <b>a rooster</b> of <b>medium</b> size. Clearly, this <i>baraita</i> understands <i>keriat hagever</i> as the crow of the rooster.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: When the Jewish people ascend</b> to Jerusalem <b>for the pilgrimage</b> Festivals <b>they stand crowded, but</b> when they <b>bow</b> during confession they are <b>spaced</b> so that no one hears the confession of another. <b>And</b> due to the large crowd <b>they extend eleven cubits behind the Hall of the Ark Cover,</b> the Holy of Holies. The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying</b> in the reference to eleven cubits behind the Holy of Holies? The Gemara explains that <b>this is what he is saying: Even though</b> the crowd is so large that the people <b>extend eleven cubits behind the Hall of the Ark Cover and</b> people <b>stand crowded,</b> still, <b>when they bow, they bow spaced. And that is one of the ten miracles that were performed in the Temple.</b>

### Part 4
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Ten miracles were performed in the Temple. No woman miscarried from the aroma of the sacrificial meat,</b> as a pregnant woman craves various foods and occasionally that craving leads to miscarriage. <b>And the sacrificial meat never putrefied. And no fly was seen in the slaughterhouse,</b> although flies are generally attracted to a place where there is flesh and blood. <b>And a seminal emission did not befall the High Priest on Yom Kippur. And no disqualification was found in the <i>omer</i> or the two loaves,</b> which are communal offerings, <b>or in the shewbread.</b> And the Jewish people <b>stand crowded but bow spaced. And neither a snake nor a scorpion ever harmed</b> anyone <b>in Jerusalem. And a person never said to another: There is no room for me to stay overnight in Jerusalem.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara notes: This list <b>opened</b> with miracles that occurred <b>in the Temple, and closed</b> with miracles that occurred <b>in Jerusalem.</b> Apparently there were not actually ten miracles performed in the Temple. The Gemara answers: <b>There are two other</b> miracles <b>in the Temple, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rain never extinguished the fire of the arrangement of wood</b> on the altar, despite the fact that the altar stood in the courtyard, exposed to the elements. <b>And</b> with regard to <b>the smoke of the arrangement, even if all the winds in the world come and blow it, they do not move it from its place</b> and it rises directly heavenward.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And are there no more</b> miracles in the Temple? <b>But didn’t Rav Shemaya teach</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in the city of <b>Kalnevo: Shards of earthenware vessels were swallowed</b> in the earth <b>in their places,</b> and there was no need to dispose of them. The vessels used for cooking the meat of the offerings of the most sacred order absorbed some of the meat. The meat that was absorbed became <i>notar</i> when the period during which the offering may be eaten concludes. One was required to break those vessels in which the meat was absorbed. The shards of those vessels were miraculously swallowed in the earth where they were smashed. And similarly, <b>Abaye said: The crop and feathers</b> of sacrificial birds, <b>and the ashes of the inner altar, and the ashes of the candelabrum,</b> which were not removed to the place of ashes outside the Temple like the ashes of the outer altar, <b>were</b> also <b>swallowed</b> in the earth <b>in their places.</b> Apparently, there were more than ten miracles in the Temple.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>The disqualifications</b> mentioned that never occurred in the Temple, in the <i>omer</i>, the two loaves, or the shewbread, <b>were three; consider them as one</b> miracle. <b>Eliminate two</b> from the total <b>and introduce</b> these <b>two</b> to complete the list of ten miracles. The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> similar miracles are combined and considered as one, <b>the swallowing</b> of the earthenware, crops, feathers, and ashes <b>are also two</b> similar miracles that should be <b>considered as one,</b> the result being that <b>they are lacking</b> one miracle to complete the total of ten. The Gemara responds: <b>There is also another</b> miracle, <b>as Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: A great miracle was performed with regard to the shewbread</b> in the Temple, that the bread was as hot at <b>its removal</b> on Shabbat, after a week on the table, <b>as</b> it was at <b>its arrangement, as it is stated: “To put out hot bread on the day it was taken away”</b> (I Samuel 21:7).

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And were there no more</b> miracles in the Temple? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Levi say</b> that <b>this matter is a tradition</b> that <b>we</b> received <b>from our ancestors: The place of the Ark</b> of the Covenant <b>is not</b> included <b>in the measurement</b> of the Holy of Holies. Based on that measurement, the Ark should not have fit inside the hall. The Holy of Holies measured twenty cubits by twenty cubits (see I Kings 6), and a <i>baraita</i> states that there were ten cubits of space on either side of the Ark. Therefore, it was only through a miracle that the Ark fit in the Holy of Holies. <b>And Rabbenai said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> It was <b>through a miracle</b> that the <b>cherubs</b> that Solomon placed in the Holy of Holies <b>would stand.</b> Their wingspan was twenty cubits, and since the length of the chamber was the same, there was no room for the bodies of the cherubs. There were additional miracles performed in the Temple.

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: The <i>tanna</i> <b>counts miracles that</b> were performed <b>outside</b> the Sanctuary and were visible to all, but he <b>does not count miracles that</b> were performed <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary and were not visible to all. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, the shewbread is also a miracle</b> performed on the table <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary and is not visible to all, yet the miracle that the bread’s heat did not dissipate was listed among the miracles. The Gemara answers: <b>The shewbread was a miracle</b> performed <b>outside, as Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written:</b> “Place them <b>on the pure table</b> before the Lord in two rows, six to a row” (Leviticus 24:6)? From the emphasis that the Torah places on the fact that the table was ritually <b>pure,</b> it can be learned <b>by inference that it indicates that it</b> could become <b>impure</b> as well.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC