
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught:</b> The Sages took the High Priest to the House of Avtinas, where the incense was prepared, <b>to teach him</b> the method of <b>taking handfuls</b> of incense, which is a difficult and complex skill. <b>Rav Pappa said: The High Priest had two chambers. One</b> was <b>the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber and one</b> was <b>the Chamber of the House of Avtinas. One</b> of them was <b>in the north</b> of the courtyard, <b>and one</b> was <b>in the south.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>One</b> was in <b>the north, as we learned</b> in the mishna: <b>There were six chambers in the</b> Israelite <b>courtyard, three in the north and three in the south.</b>

### Part 2
The chambers <b>in the south</b> were <b>the Chamber of the Salt, the Chamber of the <i>Parva</i>,</b> and <b>the Chamber of the Rinsers.</b> The Gemara explains the function performed in each chamber. <b>The Chamber of the Salt</b> was <b>where</b> the priests <b>would place the salt for the offering</b> in storage <b>The Chamber of the <i>Parva</i>,</b> the hides, was <b>where they salted the consecrated hides</b> that belonged to the priests, to prevent them from spoiling. <b>And on the roof</b> of that chamber <b>was the Hall of Immersion for the High Priest for Yom Kippur. The Chamber of the Rinsers</b> was <b>where they would rinse the innards of consecrated</b> animals, which were not taken up to the altar while dirty or with undigested food remaining in them. <b>From there a circular staircase ascended to the roof of the Chamber of the <i>Parva</i>.</b>

### Part 3
The <b>three</b> chambers <b>in the north</b> of the courtyard were <b>the Chamber of the Wood, the Chamber of the Exile,</b> and <b>the Chamber of Hewn Stone.</b> With regard to <b>the Chamber of the Wood, Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> who is the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>mishnayot</i> in tractate <i>Middot</i> in which this mishna appears, <b>said: I forgot what</b> purpose that chamber <b>would serve. Abba Shaul says: The High Priest’s chamber was behind the two</b> chambers, the Chamber of the Exile and the Chamber of Hewn Stone, <b>and the roofs of</b> all <b>three of them were level.</b> As the three were attached, they shared a roof.

### Part 4
In <b>the Chamber of the Exile there was the well</b> excavated by those returning from <b>exile,</b> for which the chamber was named, <b>and the wheel</b> with which water was drawn <b>was positioned over it. And from there,</b> they would <b>supply water for</b> use <b>in the entire</b> Temple <b>courtyard</b> for washing and rinsing. In <b>the Chamber of Hewn Stone, there</b> the great <b>Sanhedrin of Israel convened and judged</b> whether <b>the priests</b> were fit for service. A priest <b>in whom a disqualification was detected</b> due to a blemish or lineage <b>would wear black and would wrap himself in black</b> in a display of sorrow and mourning <b>and would emerge</b> from the Temple <b>and go</b> on <b>his way,</b> because he was not fit for service as a priest. <b>And</b> any priest <b>in whom a disqualification was not found would wear white and wrap himself in white</b> in a display of joy <b>and would enter and serve with his fellow priests.</b>

### Part 5
In any event, it was taught that there was a chamber of the High Priest in the north of the courtyard, and there is proof that he also had <b>one</b> chamber <b>in the south</b> of the courtyard, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Seven gates were in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard, three in the north and three in the south and one in the east.</b> The gates <b>in the south</b> were <b>the Gate of Fire; second to it</b> was <b>the Gate of the Offering; third to it</b> was <b>the Gate of the Water.</b> The gate <b>that was in the east</b> was called the <b>Gate of Nicanor, and two chambers were there</b> next to the Gate of Nicanor, <b>one to its right and one to its left. One</b> was <b>the Chamber of Pineḥas the Dresser,</b> where the priestly vestments were stored, <b>and one</b> was <b>the Chamber of the Preparers of the Griddle-Cake Offering,</b> where the daily griddle-cake offering was prepared on behalf of the High Priest.

### Part 6
The gates <b>that were in the north:</b> The first was <b>the Gate of the Spark,</b> which was <b>a portico building,</b> meaning it had a roof but was not completely closed on every side. <b>And</b> there was <b>a second story built atop it, and there</b> the honor guard of the Temple stood, with <b>the priests guarding from above</b> and the <b>Levites from below. Inside of</b> this gate was <b>the rampart,</b> and an opening led from the gate to the rampart. <b>Second to</b> this gate was <b>the Gate of the Offering; third to it was the Gate of the Hall of the Hearth.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The High Priest would</b> perform <b>five immersions and ten sanctifications</b> of his hands and feet <b>on that day,</b> Yom Kippur. <b>And each of these</b> was performed <b>in the sacred</b> area of the courtyard, <b>on the roof of the Hall of the <i>Parva</i>, except for this</b> first immersion, <b>which was</b> performed <b>in the non-sacred</b> area outside the courtyard. The first immersion was not unique to Yom Kippur but was performed every day by any priest entering the Temple. That immersion was performed <b>on the roof of the Gate of the Water,</b> and that gate <b>was alongside his chamber.</b> Apparently, the High Priest had a chamber next to the Gate of the Water, which was in the south of the courtyard.

### Part 8
The High Priest had use of two chambers, <b>but we do not know whether the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber was in the north and the Chamber of the House of Avtinas was in the south, or the Chamber of the House of Avtinas was in the north and the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber was in the south. And,</b> however, <b>it is reasonable</b> to say that <b>the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber was in the south</b> and the High Priest slept there.

### Part 9
<b>What is the reason</b> for that assumption? Because if that is the case, the High Priest <b>arises early</b> every morning of the seven days of sequestering <b>and he covers his legs,</b> a euphemism for defecating, <b>and immerses</b> alongside his chamber, which was in the south. <b>And</b> then he <b>walks to the north</b> of the courtyard to the second chamber, which is the Chamber of the House of Avtinas, <b>and learns</b> there <b>the</b> method of <b>taking handfuls. And</b> then <b>he comes to the Temple and performs the service for the entire day. Toward the evening they sprinkle</b> purification water <b>upon him, and he then walks</b> back <b>to the south and immerses</b> again alongside his chamber <b>and rests</b> in his chamber.

### Part 10
<b>As, if you say</b> that the <b>Chamber of <i>Parhedrin</i></b> was <b>in the north,</b> this would mean that the High Priest would be forced to exert himself and walk significant distances. According to this understanding, <b>he arises early, and he covers his legs.</b> However, since it was taught in the <i>baraita</i> that the place of his immersion was in the south, <b>he</b> then <b>walks to the south and immerses. And</b> then <b>he learns</b> the method of <b>taking handfuls. And</b> then <b>he comes to the Temple and performs the service for the entire day. Toward the evening they sprinkle</b> purification water <b>upon him, and he then walks</b> back <b>to the south and immerses, and</b> then <b>he needs to walk back to the north and rest. Do we impose</b> upon <b>him to that extent?</b> Rather, it is reasonable to say that the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber, the High Priest’s private chamber, was in the south, which would limit the distance that he needed to walk.

### Part 11
The Gemara rejects this reasoning: <b>Why not</b> impose upon him? On the contrary, <b>we impose upon him</b> even <b>more,</b> so <b>that if he is a Sadducee, he will retire.</b> As he is not a God-fearing person, he would prefer to walk away rather than subject himself to that added exertion. That is a desirable result, ridding the High Priesthood of a Sadducee.

### Part 12
<b>Or, alternatively,</b> there is even value in imposing on a God-fearing Pharisee High Priest, as it <b>so that he will not become haughty</b> in his lofty position. Since he is occupied in performing his task, he does not have leisure to be impressed with his elevated status. <b>As, if you do not say</b> that it is an intentional attempt to impose upon him, <b>let us establish both of</b> the chambers of the High Priest <b>next to one another; or, alternatively, one</b> chamber would be <b>sufficient for him.</b> From the fact that neither of these alternatives is adopted, it is apparently an intentional attempt to impose upon him, and there is no proof as to the location of either of the chambers of the High Priest.

### Part 13
§ It was taught in the mishna that the Elders <b>said to him: My Master, High Priest.</b> We are agents of the court, and you are our agent and the agent of the court. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that this is a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, as Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: These priests</b> who sacrifice the offerings <b>are the agents of the Merciful One.</b> They are not agents representing the Jewish people but are agents representing God, as He commanded them to perform the service. Proof is cited for this opinion: <b>As, if you say they are our agents,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC