
### Part 1
it is <b>a mitzva to brush</b> the drops of urine from one’s legs so that they cannot be seen. Since one rubs it with his hands, his hands require sanctification as well. The Gemara comments: This <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ami, as Rabbi Ami said: It is prohibited for a man to go out with the drops</b> of urine <b>that are on his legs, because he appears as one whose penis has been severed.</b> A man with that condition is incapable of fathering children. People who see urine on his legs might suspect that he is suffering from that condition <b>and spread rumors about his children that they are <i>mamzerim</i>.</b> Therefore, one must be certain to brush the drops of urine from his legs.

### Part 2
Apropos the above discussion the Gemara cites that <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> For one with <b>excrement in its place,</b> in the anus, <b>it is prohibited to recite <i>Shema</i></b> until he removes it. <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> it is excrement <b>that is visible,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that he cannot recite <i>Shema</i>, as there is excrement on his skin. <b>If</b> it is excrement <b>that is not visible,</b> and it is inside his body, how can Rav Pappa rule that he may not recite <i>Shema</i>? <b>The Torah was not given to the ministering angels,</b> and one’s body cannot be totally free of excrement. The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to prohibit the recitation of <i>Shema</i> only in a situation <b>where</b> when <b>he is sitting it is visible,</b> and when <b>he is standing it is not visible.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: If so, in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> that <b>different from excrement on his flesh? As it was stated</b> in a case where one has <b>excrement on his flesh or that his hands were</b> placed <b>into a bathroom</b> that <b>Rav Huna said:</b> It is nevertheless <b>permitted to recite <i>Shema</i>. And Rav Ḥisda said:</b> It is <b>prohibited to recite <i>Shema</i></b> in those cases. The Gemara rejects this: The situations are not comparable. There is no dispute that excrement <b>in its place</b> is more severe, as in the anus <b>the filth is great</b> because it is new and malodorous. <b>And</b> if it is <b>not in its place, its filth is not great,</b> as it is dried and less malodorous. It is with regard to that situation that there is an amoraic dispute.

### Part 4
The Gemara proceeds to discuss a related topic. <b>The Sages taught a <i>halakha</i> with regard to a meal</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person</b> who <b>exits</b> a meal <b>to urinate washes one</b> of <b>his hands,</b> the one that he used to brush off drops of urine, <b>and enters</b> to resume the meal. If one left, <b>spoke with another, and lingered</b> outside, he <b>washes both of his hands and enters</b> to resume the meal. Presumably, during the lengthy conversation he was distracted from maintaining the cleanliness of his hands, requiring him to wash his hands again. <b>And when one washes</b> his hands for the meal he should <b>not wash</b> them <b>outside and then enter, due to</b> the concern that doing so will arouse <b>suspicion</b> that he did not wash his hands. <b>Rather, he enters and sits in his place and washes both his hands, and returns the jug</b> of water <b>to</b> pass among <b>the guests</b> and ask if anyone requires water, to make certain that everyone is aware that he washed his hands.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: We said</b> this principle with regard to making certain that one washes his hands in public <b>only</b> when he enters <b>to drink; however,</b> if he enters and intends <b>to eat</b> he may even <b>wash</b> his hands <b>outside and enter.</b> Why is this so? It is because <b>it is well known that he is fastidious</b> and would not handle food without cleaning urine and the like off his hands. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: And I</b> can <b>even</b> wash my hands outside when I intend only <b>to drink,</b> because <b>they know that I am fastidious</b> and that I certainly washed my hands before I entered to eat.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person does not enter the</b> Temple <b>courtyard for the</b> Temple <b>service, even</b> if he is <b>pure, until he immerses. Five immersions and ten sanctifications</b> the <b>High Priest immerses and sanctifies</b> his hands and feet, respectively, <b>on the day</b> of Yom Kippur. <b>And all</b> of these immersions and sanctifications take place <b>in the sacred</b> area, the Temple courtyard, <b>on</b> the roof of the <b>Hall of <i>Parva</i>, except for this</b> first immersion <b>alone.</b> As that immersion is not unique to Yom Kippur, it may be performed outside the courtyard. <b>They spread a sheet of fine linen between him and the people</b> in the interest of modesty, and then the High Priest immersed and <b>sanctified his hands and feet.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>They asked ben Zoma</b> with regard to <b>this immersion: Why</b> is it a requirement for anyone who enters to perform the Temple service? <b>He said to them: Just as one who moves from</b> service in one <b>sacred</b> area <b>to</b> service in another <b>sacred</b> area, i.e., the High Priest on Yom Kippur, who moves from one service to another in the Temple courtyard and the Sanctuary; and likewise one who moves <b>from</b> service in <b>an area that</b> one who enters while impure <b>is punished by <i>karet</i>,</b> the courtyard, <b>to</b> service in another <b>area that</b> one who enters impure <b>is punished by <i>karet</i>,</b> the Sanctuary or the Holy of Holies, <b>requires immersion;</b> so too, with regard to <b>one who moves from a non-sacred</b> area <b>to a sacred</b> area, <b>and from a place that</b> one who enters while impure <b>is not punished by <i>karet</i> to a place that</b> one who enters while impure <b>is punished by <i>karet</i>, is it not right that he require immersion?</b> This first immersion was instituted for purposes of sanctity rather than purity.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says: It is an ancillary immersion,</b> which is not a mitzva, instituted <b>so that one will remember any old impurity that he</b> contracted <b>and withdraw.</b> In the course of immersion, he will remember if he was exposed to a source of seven-day impurity and will refrain from serving in the Temple.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle <b>do</b> ben Zoma and Rabbi Yehuda, who provided two different rationales for the immersion, <b>disagree?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC