
### Part 1
<b>who chews on barley of <i>teruma</i></b> that has not been ground or baked <b>pays the principal and not</b> an extra <b>fifth.</b> The reason is that it states <b>“eats”</b> (Leviticus 22:14), <b>which excludes one who harms</b> himself. Consuming raw barley is considered self-harm, not eating.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Sheizvi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In the case of <b>a non-priest who swallowed plums of <i>teruma</i></b> whole <b>and vomited them out,</b> whereupon <b>another</b> person <b>ate them, the first</b> one <b>pays the principal plus a fifth.</b> When the first one benefited from the plums, he acquired them and must therefore pay for them, and <b>the second</b> one must pay their worth to the first one. Since they are only fit for fuel after the first one vomited them out, the second person is considered to have damaged their value as fuel. Therefore, he <b>pays only the price of wood,</b> i.e., fuel, <b>to the first</b> person.

### Part 3
§ It was taught in the mishna that <b>food and drink do not combine.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> this? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This <i>halakha</i> <b>is taught as a dispute, and</b> the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua. As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua stated a general principle: Any</b> item <b>that</b> is <b>identical</b> to another item in <b>its</b> type of <b>ritual impurity,</b> e.g., impurity that lasts only until evening, <b>and its measure</b> for impurity, e.g., an olive-bulk, <b>combines</b> with the other item to reach one measure to render other items impure. Therefore, two half olive-bulk pieces of two corpses or of two animal carcasses, or two half lentil-bulk pieces from two creeping animals all combine to render other items impure.

### Part 4
However, if one item is identical to another in <b>its ritual impurity but not its measure,</b> e.g., half a lentil-bulk of a creeping animal and half an olive-bulk of an animal carcass, which both impart impurity until nightfall; <b>or if its measure</b> is identical <b>but not its</b> type of <b>ritual impurity,</b> e.g., half an olive-bulk from a corpse, which imparts impurity for seven days, and half an olive-bulk from an animal carcass, which imparts impurity until nightfall; and all the more so, when <b>neither its ritual impurity nor its measure</b> are identical, then the items <b>do not combine.</b> Here, too, although both eating and drinking are prohibited on their own, they do not combine because they do not have the same measure that imparts impurity.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Naḥman said: Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, until now we have</b> heard <b>the Rabbis say there</b> that items with different measures combine <b>only with respect to ritual impurity. Since the</b> phenomenon <b>of ritual impurity is one concept,</b> different types combine. <b>But here,</b> in the case of Yom Kippur, the measure that determines liability is set <b>due to settling the mind, and this</b> combination of eating and drinking together <b>does not settle the mind.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And similarly, Reish Lakish said:</b> This question of whether food and drink combine to reach a measure that determines liability on Yom Kippur <b>is taught as a dispute.</b> The approach brought in the mishna that states that they do not combine is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehoshua, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua stated a general principle</b> with regard to whether items with different types of impurity and measures combine, as Rav Ḥisda explained above. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rav Naḥman: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with <b>the</b> opinion of <b>the Rabbis, until now we have</b> heard <b>the Rabbis say there</b> that items with different measures combine <b>only with regard to ritual impurity. But here,</b> in the case of Yom Kippur, the measure that determines liability is set <b>due to settling the mind, and this</b> combination of eating and drinking together <b>does not</b> settle the mind.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one ate and drank</b> unwittingly <b>within one lapse of awareness,</b> e.g., he forgot that it is Yom Kippur, <b>he is liable</b> to bring <b>only one sin-offering.</b> However, if <b>he ate and performed labor</b> unwittingly, <b>he is liable to bring two sin-offerings,</b> as by doing so he violated two separate prohibitions. If <b>he ate foods that are not fit for eating, or drank liquids that are not fit for drinking, or drank</b> fish <b>brine or</b> the briny <b>liquid</b> in which fish are pickled, <b>he is exempt,</b> as that is not the typical manner of eating or drinking.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Reish Lakish said: Why is there no warning stated about affliction;</b> why did the Torah not state explicitly that it is prohibited to eat and drink on Yom Kippur? It is <b>because it was not possible</b> to write it that way. The Gemara explains: <b>How could</b> the Merciful One <b>write it? Let the Merciful One write: One shall not eat</b> on Yom Kippur. The term eat prohibits <b>eating the amount of an olive-bulk,</b> whereas on Yom Kippur the actual prohibited measure is a large date-bulk. <b>Let the Merciful One write: Do not be afflicted.</b> That indicates the opposite of affliction, and would <b>mean: Get up and eat.</b> Therefore, it is written: “For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted on that same day, he shall be cut off from his people” (Leviticus 23:29).

### Part 9
<b>Rav Hoshaya strongly objects to this: Let the Merciful One write</b> it in this manner: <b>Guard yourself lest you not be afflicted.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>If so, there would be</b> too <b>many negative mitzvot,</b> as the following are all expressions of prohibition: Guard, lest, and not. One would then say that there are three prohibitions against eating.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Beivai bar Abaye strongly objects to this: Let the Merciful One write: Guard yourself in the mitzva of affliction.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>If so,</b> there is a principle: If the words <b>guard yourself</b> are written <b>about a prohibition,</b> it is considered to be <b>a prohibition;</b> if the words <b>guard yourself</b> are written <b>about a positive mitzva,</b> it is considered to be <b>a positive mitzva.</b> Had the Torah written it that way, one would understand that there is a positive mitzva of affliction, but there is no element of prohibition. <b>Rav Ashi strongly objects to this: Let the Merciful One write: Do not stray from afflicting yourself,</b> which would imply a negative mitzva. The Gemara says: Indeed, this is <b>difficult.</b> The Gemara concedes that it could have been written in this manner.

### Part 11
§ With regard to the prohibitions against eating and labor, the Gemara says: <b>And a <i>tanna</i> cites</b> the prohibitions relating to affliction on Yom Kippur <b>from here:</b> It is stated: <b>“And you shall afflict your souls, you shall do no manner of labor”</b> (Numbers 29:7). The Gemara considers: One <b>might</b> have thought that performing labor during the <b>extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor,</b> added before Yom Kippur actually begins, <b>is punishable</b> by <i>karet</i>. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And whatsoever soul it be that does any manner of labor on that same day”</b> (Leviticus 23:30), which teaches that performing labor <b>on that very day is punishable by <i>karet</i>, but</b> labor performed during <b>the extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor is not punishable by <i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought that performing labor during the <b>extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor is not punishable by <i>karet</i>,</b> but not afflicting oneself during the <b>extension</b> of the period <b>of affliction is punishable by <i>karet</i>.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “For whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted on that same day, he shall be cut off</b> from his people” (Leviticus 23:29), which teaches that not afflicting oneself <b>on that very day</b> is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>, but</b> not afflicting oneself during <b>the extension</b> of the period <b>of affliction is not punishable by <i>karet</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> one who performs labor during the extension would <b>not be included in the punishment</b> of <i>karet</i>, <b>but he would be warned against</b> performing labor during the <b>extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor</b> with a prohibition incurring the punishment of lashes; therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall do no manner of labor on that same day”</b> (Leviticus 23:28). That teaches that <b>he is warned</b> not to perform labor on <b>that very day,</b> but <b>he is not warned against</b> performing labor during the <b>extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor,</b> and therefore he is not liable to receive lashes for doing so.

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: One <b>might</b> have thought: <b>He would not be warned with regard to</b> performing labor during the <b>extension</b> of the period of prohibition <b>of labor</b> that it is a prohibition that incurs lashes; <b>but he would be warned with regard to</b> not being in a state of affliction during the <b>extension</b> of the period <b>of affliction</b> that it is a prohibition that incurs lashes. However, that is incorrect, <b>and</b> it is learned from <b>a logical derivation</b> that it is not so: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>labor, whose</b> prohibition <b>is observed on</b> both <b><i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals, one is not warned about</b> the extension added to the day, <b>is it not logical that</b> with regard to <b>affliction, which is not observed on <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals, he should not be warned about</b> or liable to receive lashes for the extension?

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> comments: <b>But the warning</b> about lashes <b>during the very day itself we have not learned. From where</b> is it derived? The Torah <b>need not state the punishment</b> of <i>karet</i> for performing <b>labor, since one can learn it</b> by logical derivation <b>from</b> the punishment of not being in a state of <b>affliction,</b> as follows: <b>Just as</b> the requirement of <b>affliction, which is not observed on <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals, is punishable by <i>karet</i></b> on Yom Kippur, with regard to the prohibition of <b>labor, which is observed on</b> all <b><i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals,</b> is it <b>not all the more so?</b> If so, <b>why</b> is the punishment for labor <b>stated</b> explicitly? <b>It is available to compare and learn a verbal analogy from it: A punishment</b> with regard to <b>affliction is stated, and a punishment</b> with regard to <b>labor is stated. Just as</b> with regard to <b>labor one is punished only if he was warned</b> first with a negative mitzva, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>affliction, one is punished only if he was warned.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara rejects this: <b>This</b> comparison can <b>be refuted.</b> How so? <b>Whereas affliction</b> has <b>no permitted</b> exceptions <b>from its general</b> prohibition, as the mitzva to afflict oneself applies to all the Jewish people, what can <b>you say with regard to labor, which</b> has <b>permitted</b> exceptions <b>from its general</b> prohibition? It is permitted to perform the Temple services on Yom Kippur, which include prohibited labors, e.g., slaughtering animals and offering incense. Consequently, there is no proof that the mitzva of affliction is more lenient than the prohibition of labor.

### Part 17
<b>Rather,</b> say as follows: The Torah need <b>not say the punishment for</b> not being in a state of <b>affliction, since one can learn it from</b> the punishment for performing <b>labor</b> through an <i>a fortiori</i> inference. How so? <b>Just as labor, for which</b> exceptions <b>from the general</b> prohibition <b>are permitted,</b> e.g., performing the Temple service on Yom Kippur, and yet labor <b>is punishable by <i>karet</i>,</b> with regard to not being in a state of <b>affliction, which has no permitted</b> exceptions <b>from its general</b> prohibition, is it <b>not all the more so</b> that one who does not afflict himself should be liable to receive <i>karet</i>? If so, <b>why is it</b> nevertheless <b>stated? It is available to compare and learn a verbal analogy: Punishment is stated with regard to affliction, and punishment is stated with regard to labor. Just as for labor</b> the Torah <b>punished and warned, so too, for affliction</b> the Torah <b>punished and warned.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara rejects this: This comparison <b>can be refuted,</b> and one might say the opposite: <b>Whereas</b> the prohibition of <b>labor is observed on <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals,</b> can <b>you say</b> the same <b>about affliction, which is not observed on <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals?</b>

### Part 19
<b>Ravina said:</b> We did not properly understand the teaching of this <i>baraita</i>, as <b>this <i>tanna</i> derived</b> a verbal analogy from the words “on that <b>same</b> day” (Leviticus 23:29) stated with regard to affliction, and “on that <b>same</b> day” (Leviticus 23:28) stated with regard to labor. The Gemara comments: We must say that <b>it is available,</b> meaning that in both places, the phrase “on that same day” is unnecessary within its own context and comes only to teach this verbal analogy; <b>as, if it were not available, it could be refuted, as we refuted it</b> above.

### Part 20
The Gemara responds: <b>No, it is certainly available,</b> and we may learn from it, as <b>five verses are written</b> with regard to the prohibition of <b>labor</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>One</b> to teach <b>a warning</b> with regard to the prohibition of labor <b>on the day</b> of Yom Kippur itself; <b>and one for a warning</b> with regard to labor <b>on the night</b> of Yom Kippur; <b>and one for the punishment</b> of <i>karet</i> for performing labor <b>on the day; and one for the punishment</b> for performing labor <b>at night; and one</b> verse <b>to be available to derive</b> the requirement of <b>affliction from</b> the prohibition of <b>labor, both during the day and night,</b> using a verbal analogy.

### Part 21
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> an alternative verbal analogy for the derivation: <b>“Affliction” is stated here,</b> with regard to Yom Kippur, <b>and “affliction” is stated later,</b> with regard to a man who rapes a woman: “Because he has afflicted his neighbor’s wife” (Deuteronomy 22:24). <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of rape, the Torah <b>did not punish unless there was</b> prior <b>warning, so too here,</b> in the case of Yom Kippur, the Torah <b>did not punish unless there was</b> prior <b>warning. Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> a different proof: <b>Derive</b> a verbal analogy from the words <b>“Shabbat of solemn rest”</b> (Leviticus 16:31) written with regard to Yom Kippur <b>from</b> the words “Shabbat of solemn rest” (Exodus 31:15, 32:5; Leviticus 23:3) written with regard to the weekly Shabbat, which commemorates the <b>Shabbat of Creation. Just as there,</b> in the case of Shabbat, the Torah <b>did not punish unless there was</b> prior <b>warning, so too here,</b> in the case of Yom Kippur, the Torah <b>did not punish unless there was</b> prior <b>warning.</b>

### Part 22
<b>Rav Pappa said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC