
### Part 1
that <b>a <i>koy</i> is its own species,</b> and the uncertainty pertains not only to whether it is a wild or domestic animal, but also to whether it even can fit into one of those two categories. <b>For if you do not say so</b> and maintain that it might be its own species, how can we understand that which <b>Rav Idi bar Avin said,</b> that <b>also</b> the word <b>“all”</b> stated in the verse: “All blood you may not eat, whether of birds or of beasts” (Leviticus 7:26), comes <b>to include</b> the <b><i>koy</i>.</b> Now, if you say that the <b><i>koy</i> is case of uncertainty, is a verse necessary to include an uncertainty? Rather,</b> the <i>koy</i> is obviously its own <b>species,</b> and therefore <b>it is different</b> and needs a special verse to include it. <b>Here too,</b> in the case of the forbidden fat, we could say that the <i>koy</i> is its own <b>species,</b> and therefore it <b>is different.</b> Consequently, Reish Lakish’s opinion cannot be rejected.

### Part 2
§ After clarifying the wording of the mishna, the Gemara brings a halakhic midrash to analyze the mishna’s laws. <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states: “And this shall be a statute to you forever: In the seventh month on the tenth day of the month <b>you shall afflict your souls”</b> (Leviticus 16:29). I <b>might</b> have thought that one should <b>sit in the sun or in the cold to suffer</b> and afflict his soul; therefore <b>the</b> continuation of <b>the verse states: “And you shall not do any labor,</b> the home-born, or the stranger that lives among you” (Leviticus 16:29). This teaches that <b>just as</b> prohibited <b>labor is</b> a mitzva that requires one to <b>sit and do nothing,</b> as one is commanded to refrain from action, <b>so too, affliction</b> of one’s <b>soul is also</b> a mitzva requiring one to <b>sit and do nothing.</b> One is not commanded to be proactive in order to afflict his soul. Rather, one must refrain from specified actions such as eating and drinking.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And say that</b> it means that <b>when</b> one <b>sits in the sun and it is</b> too <b>hot for him, we do not say to him: Get up and sit in the shade.</b> Or, if one <b>sits in the shade and it is</b> too <b>cold for him, we do not say to him: Get up and sit in the sun.</b> These are also cases of affliction involving sitting and doing nothing. The Gemara rejects this: It must be <b>similar</b> to the prohibition of <b>labor. Just as</b> with regard to prohibited <b>labor you did not distinguish</b> between situations, since the prohibition is independent of one’s personal circumstance, <b>so too, you do not distinguish</b> with regard to <b>affliction,</b> which is not affected by one’s circumstance.

### Part 4
<b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that as the verse states: <b>“You shall afflict your souls”</b> (Leviticus 16:29), I <b>might</b> have thought that <b>one</b> must <b>sit in the sun or the cold and be uncomfortable;</b> therefore, <b>the</b> continuation of <b>the verse states: “And you shall not do any labor”</b> (Leviticus 16:29). <b>Just as</b> prohibited <b>labor is something</b> that <b>incurs</b> <i>karet</i> <b>in other circumstances,</b> like Shabbat, <b>so too, affliction</b> relates to acts that <b>in other circumstances incur</b> <i>karet</i>. <b>And what is that</b> circumstance? <b>That is</b> referring to <b><i>piggul</i> and <i>notar</i>,</b> which lead to <i>karet</i> if eaten, and which therefore may not be eaten on Yom Kippur.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I will include</b> the categories of <b><i>piggul</i> and <i>notar</i>, for which</b> one is punished <b>with <i>karet</i></b> if eaten during the year, <b>but I will not include untithed produce, which does not</b> cause one to incur the punishment <b>of <i>karet</i></b> if eaten. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “You shall afflict”</b> (Leviticus 16:29), and it also states: <b>“And you shall afflict your souls”</b> (Leviticus 16:31). The Torah comes to <b>include</b> another affliction of a serious eating prohibition, i.e. untithed produce.

### Part 6
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I will include untithed produce,</b> for which one receives <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven; <b>but I will not include an</b> unslaughtered <b>animal carcass,</b> which, although it is prohibited for consumption, one who eats it <b>is not</b> punishable by <b>death</b> at the hands of Heaven. Therefore, <b>the verse states “you shall afflict”</b> and also <b>“and you shall afflict your souls.”</b> The Torah <b>includes</b> foods that are associated with a prohibition even if one who eats them is not punishable by death.

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I will include an</b> unslaughtered <b>animal carcass, which</b> is prohibited by <b>a negative mitzva, but I will not include non-sacred,</b> regular food, <b>which is not</b> prohibited by <b>a negative mitzva.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> both <b>“you shall afflict”</b> and <b>“and you shall afflict your souls.”</b> Although non-sacred food is not prohibited in general, the Torah <b>includes</b> it in the prohibition of eating on Yom Kippur.

### Part 8
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>I will include non-sacred food, which is not</b> associated with any positive mitzva to <b>arise</b> and <b>eat,</b> i.e., there is no obligation to eat non-sacred food; <b>but I will not include <i>teruma</i>, which</b> one is required to <b>arise</b> and <b>eat,</b> as priests are commanded to eat <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, <b>the verse states “you shall afflict”</b> and <b>“and you shall afflict your souls.”</b> The Torah <b>includes</b> <i>teruma</i> as well in the foods one is prohibited to eat on Yom Kippur. <b>I will include <i>teruma</i>, which is not</b> subject to the command: <b>“You shall not leave over”</b> (Leviticus 22:30), since <i>teruma</i> need not be consumed within a specific time, <b>but I will not include sacred food,</b> which is subject to the command <b>“you shall not leave over”;</b> it is prohibited to leave the meat uneaten after a certain amount of time. Therefore, <b>the verse states “you shall afflict”</b> and <b>“and you shall afflict your souls,”</b> to <b>include</b> the category of sacred food in the prohibition of eating on Yom Kippur. Consequently, the Gemara has demonstrated that it is prohibited to eat any type of food on Yom Kippur.

### Part 9
<b>And if it is your wish to say</b> something to challenge this reasoning, the Gemara brings an additional proof: <b>Surely,</b> the verse <b>states</b> with regard to one who violates Yom Kippur: <b>“I will destroy that soul</b> from among his people” (Leviticus 23:30). Therefore, <b>affliction</b> is something <b>that destroys a soul. And what is that? That is</b> refraining from <b>eating and drinking,</b> since someone who does not eat and drink at all will die. The Torah is not referring to other afflictions that do not lead to death. These are the words of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: <b>What is</b> meant by: <b>And if it is your wish to say?</b> What flaw did the first proof have? The Gemara explains: <b>And if you say the verse is discussing</b> relations with <b>those with whom relations are forbidden,</b> avoidance of which is also called affliction, and it is not discussing eating and drinking, <b>the verse states: I will destroy that soul,</b> meaning <b>an affliction that can cause death. And what is that? That is</b> refraining from <b>eating and drinking.</b>

### Part 11
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> the following concerning the nature of Yom Kippur: The word <b>affliction is stated here</b> with regard to Yom Kippur, <b>and</b> the word <b>affliction is stated further on</b> in a different place, concerning the Jews in the desert: “And He afflicted you and caused you to hunger” (Deuteronomy 8:3). <b>Just as further on</b> the meaning of <b>affliction</b> is <b>hunger, so too, here,</b> the meaning of the word <b>affliction</b> is <b>hunger.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And let us derive it</b> not from the verse that indicates affliction of hunger but from the verse where Laban warns Jacob: <b>“If you shall afflict my daughters”</b> (Genesis 31:50), which is referring not to hunger but to marital relations. The Gemara answers: <b>We derive affliction</b> commanded to <b>the public</b> on Yom Kippur <b>from affliction</b> relating to <b>the public,</b> i.e., the Jewish people in the desert, <b>and we do not derive affliction</b> of <b>the public from affliction</b> of <b>an individual,</b> as in the case of Jacob’s wives.

### Part 13
The Gemara continues to challenge the view of Rabbi Yishmael: <b>And let us derive</b> it <b>from affliction</b> stated with regard to <b>Egypt, as it is written: “And He saw our affliction”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:7). <b>We say that</b> this verse is referring to <b>abstinence from conjugal relations.</b> The Egyptians prevented the Jewish people from having relations. This affliction is an example of public affliction that is not abstention from eating or drinking. <b>Rather,</b> the prohibition to eat or drink on Yom Kippur should not be learned as stated previously, but as follows: <b>We derive affliction by the hand of God from affliction by the hand of God,</b> i.e., affliction caused directly by God or through His mitzvot; <b>and we do not derive affliction by the hand of God from affliction by the hand of man.</b>

### Part 14
§ Apropos the verse: “And he afflicted you and caused you to hunger, and fed you with manna” (Deuteronomy 8:3), the Gemara expounds related verses. The Torah states: <b>“Who feeds you manna in the desert</b> which your fathers did not know, <b>in order to afflict you”</b> (Deuteronomy 8:16). What affliction was there in eating the manna? <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> disagreed on the matter. <b>One said: There is no comparison between one who has bread in his basket and one who does not have bread in his basket.</b> The affliction in eating the manna lay in there being no leftover food for the next day. Each day the people worried that they might not have any food to eat the next day. <b>And one said: There is no comparison between one who sees</b> the food <b>and eats</b> it <b>and one who does not see</b> the food <b>and eats</b> it. Though the manna could taste like anything, it always looked the same and did not look as it tasted. Being unable to see the food that they tasted was an affliction.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Yosef said: From here</b> there is an <b>allusion</b> to the idea <b>that blind</b> people <b>eat but are not</b> fully <b>satisfied</b> when they eat because they cannot see their food. Seeing the food contributes to the enjoyment of eating. <b>Abaye said: Therefore,</b> from what we have just learned, <b>one who has a meal should eat it only during daytime,</b> when there is light to see the food that is being eaten. <b>Rabbi Zeira said: What is the verse</b> that alludes to this? <b>“Better is the seeing of the eyes than the wandering of the desire”</b> (Ecclesiastes 6:9). On the same verse, <b>Reish Lakish said: The sight of a woman is better than the actual act</b> of relations, <b>as it is stated: “Better is the seeing of the eyes than the wandering of the desire.”</b>

### Part 16
§ Apropos the dispute between Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi, the Gemara continues with another dispute they had with regard to the correct interpretation of a verse. It is stated: “Do not look upon the wine when it is red, <b>when it gives its color in the cup, when it glides down smoothly [<i>bemeisharim</i>]”</b> (Proverbs 23:31). <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> disagreed. <b>One said: Whoever casts</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC