
### Part 1
<b>matters that are written in</b> the context of <b>this topic</b> of inauguration in the book of Exodus invalidate the inauguration. However, with regard to <b>matters that are not written in that context,</b> but are written in the portion of the inauguration in Leviticus, <b>from where do we derive</b> that they invalidate the inauguration?

### Part 2
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> One <b>derives a</b> verbal analogy between the word opening that appears in the two portions of the inauguration. It is written in the command concerning the inauguration: “The <b>opening</b> of the Tent of Meeting” (Exodus 29:32), and in its fulfillment it is written: “The <b>opening</b> of the Tent of Meeting” (Leviticus 8:31). Failure to perform the matters written in both portions invalidates the inauguration.<br><b>Rav Mesharshiyya said:</b> The verbal analogy is unnecessary, as the conclusion can be derived directly from the verse written with regard to the implementation of the inauguration: <b>“And keep the charge of the Lord,</b> that you not die, for so I am commanded” (Leviticus 8:35). The emphasis on this being the charge of the Lord comes to teach that failure to perform all the details mentioned in the implementation of the command <b>invalidates</b> the inauguration. <br><b>Rav Ashi says:</b> The phrase: <b>For so I am commanded,</b> is the source from which it is derived that all the details written in both portions <b>invalidate</b> the inauguration.

### Part 3
Apropos that phrase, the Gemara cites a related halakhic midrash. <b>The Sages taught:</b> In the context of the implementation of the inauguration, three variations of the phrase appear: <b>“For so I am commanded”</b> (Leviticus 8:35); <b>“as I commanded”</b> (Leviticus 10:18); and <b>“as God has commanded”</b> (Leviticus 10:15). What does this repetition teach? From the phrase: <b>“For so I am commanded,”</b> it is derived that even in a state of <b>acute mourning,</b> on the first day after the death of a relative, one must <b>eat</b> the offering. God stated the verse: <b>“As I commanded,” at the time of the incident</b> just after the deaths of Nadav and Avihu, when Aaron and his sons were in a state of acute mourning. And when Moses states: <b>“As God commanded,”</b> he is saying: The command is from God <b>and</b> it is <b>not from my</b> own initiative that <b>I am saying</b> it.

### Part 4
Apropos the matters mentioned that are not explicit in the portion, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Trousers</b> are one of the priestly vestments worn during the inauguration, but they <b>are not written in the</b> Torah <b>portion. When</b> the verse <b>says: “And this is the matter that you shall do for them to sanctify them for</b> My <b>service”</b> (Exodus 29:1), the superfluous word: And, which appears at the beginning of the verse, comes to add to that which was written previously and <b>to include trousers and the tenth of an ephah</b> offered by a priest on the day that he begins his service.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, trousers</b> can be derived, as the verse <b>is written</b> in the context <b>of the matter of</b> priestly <b>garments</b> detailed adjacent to the portion of the inauguration. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>the tenth of an ephah, from where do we</b> derive that there is an obligation to offer it during the inauguration? The Gemara answers: It is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the word <b>this</b> that appears in one verse and the word <b>this</b> that appears in another. It is written: <b>“This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer to the Lord</b> in the day when he is anointed, <b>a tenth of an ephah”</b> (Leviticus 6:13). And in the verse cited above in the context of the inauguration it says: “And this is the matter that you shall do for them,” which teaches that there is an obligation to offer a tenth of an ephah during the inauguration.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: From where</b> is it derived <b>that even</b> failure to <b>read the</b> Torah <b>portion</b> of the inauguration <b>invalidates</b> the inauguration? <b>The verse states: “And Moses said to the assembly: This is the matter [<i>davar</i>] that God has commanded</b> to be done” (Leviticus 8:5), teaching that <b>even</b> failure to perform the <b>recitation [<i>dibbur</i>]</b> of the Torah portion to the people <b>invalidates</b> the inauguration.

### Part 7
§ Apropos the inauguration of the priests, the Gemara asks: <b>How,</b> i.e., in what order, did Moses <b>dress</b> Aaron and his sons in the priestly vestments? The Gemara wonders: <b>In what order did he dress them?</b> That is an irrelevant question, as <b>what was, was.</b> The order in which Moses dressed the priests has no practical ramifications. <b>Rather,</b> the question must be: <b>How</b> will Moses <b>dress</b> the priests <b>in the future,</b> following the resurrection of the dead, when the Temple service will be restored? The Gemara rejects this question as well: <b>In the future, too, when Aaron and his sons will come and Moses</b> will be <b>with them,</b> he will know the proper sequence, and there is no point to raising the question.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the question is: <b>How</b> did Moses <b>dress them?</b> The Gemara seeks <b>to explain the verses</b> on this topic, as they appear somewhat contradictory. The Gemara responds: <b>The sons of Rabbi Ḥiyya and Rabbi Yoḥanan disagree with regard to</b> this matter. <b>One said:</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron</b> first <b>and afterward</b> Moses dressed <b>his sons; and one said:</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron and his sons simultaneously,</b> i.e., consecutively from one to the next, without interruption, to avoid changing the order prescribed in the verses.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said:</b> With regard to the <b>tunic and mitre everyone agrees that</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron and afterward his sons, as both in</b> the portion of <b>the command</b> concerning the inauguration <b>and in</b> the portion of <b>the implementation,</b> mention of <b>Aaron precedes</b> mention of his sons. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>with regard to the belt.</b> The Gemara elaborates. The <b>one who said:</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron and afterward his sons</b> derives it from that <b>which is written: “And he girded him with the belt”</b> (Leviticus 8:7), <b>and then it is written: “And he girded them with belts”</b> (Leviticus 8:13). Moses first dressed Aaron in all of the garments, including the belt, and then Moses dressed Aaron’s sons. <b>And</b> the <b>one who said:</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron and his sons, simultaneously</b> derives it from that <b>which is</b> subsequently <b>written: “And gird them</b> with belts, Aaron and his sons” (Exodus 29:9), indicating that Moses girded them all with belts simultaneously. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to the one who says:</b> Moses dressed <b>Aaron and his sons simultaneously, isn’t it written: He girded him with the belt, and then it is written: He girded them with belts,</b> clearly indicating that he dressed Aaron and then his sons?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC