### Part 1
<b>out of order and he was answered in order.</b> He should have asked first whether Saul would come down, and afterward what the people of Keilah would do. <b>And once he realized that he had asked out of order he went back and asked in order, as it is stated</b> immediately afterward: <b>“Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And God said: They will deliver you”</b> (I Samuel 23:12).

### Part 2
<b>But if the matter</b> is urgent and <b>requires</b> asking <b>two</b> questions simultaneously, there being no time to follow the standard protocol, one may ask both questions simultaneously and <b>he is answered</b> with regard to the <b>two</b> questions together, <b>as it is stated: “And David asked of God, saying: Shall I pursue after this troop? Will I overtake them? And He answered him: Pursue, for you will surely overtake them, and will surely rescue”</b> (I Samuel 30:8).

### Part 3
The Gemara notes the reliability of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>: <b>Even though a decree of a prophet can be retracted,</b> as sometimes a dire prophecy is stated as a warning and does not come true, <b>a decree of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> cannot be retracted. As it is stated: “By the judgment of the <i>Urim</i>”</b> (Numbers 27:21). The use of the term judgment suggests that the decree is as final as a judicial decision.

### Part 4
<b>Why is it called <i>Urim VeTummim</i>? <i>Urim</i>,</b> which is based on the word <i>or</i>, light, is so called because <b>it illuminates</b> and explains <b>its words. <i>Tummim</i>,</b> which is based on the word <i>tam</i>, completed, is because <b>it fulfills its words,</b> which always come true.

### Part 5
<b>And if you say: In the</b> battles following the incidents in <b>Gibeah of Benjamin</b> (Judges 19–20), <b>why did</b> the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>not fulfill</b> its words? The Jewish People consulted the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> three times with regard to their decision to attack the tribe of Benjamin, and each time they were instructed to go to battle. However, the first two times they were defeated and only on the third attempt were they successful. Is this not proof that the <i>UrimVeTummim</i> does not always fulfill its words?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: The first two times <b>they did not check</b> with the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>whether they would be victorious or be defeated</b> but only inquired how and whether they should go to battle. Had they asked, they indeed would have been told that they would not succeed. <b>But on the last time, when they did check</b> and inquire whether they would be successful, the <i>UrimVeTummim</i> <b>agreed</b> with them that they should go to battle and that they would succeed, <b>as it is stated: “And Pinehas, the son of Elazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days, saying: Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And God said: Go up, for tomorrow I will deliver him into your hand”</b> (Judges 20:28).

### Part 7
<b>How is it done?</b> How does the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> provide an answer? The names of the twelve tribes were engraved upon the stones of the breastplate. These letters allowed for the answer to be received. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The letters of the answer <b>protrude,</b> and the priest then combines those letters to form words in order to ascertain the message. <b>Reish Lakish says:</b> The letters rearrange themselves and <b>join</b> together to form words.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: How was it possible to receive an answer to every question? <b>But</b> the letter <b><i>tzadi</i> is not written</b> within the names of the twelve tribes engraved on the breastplate’s stones. <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yitzḥak said:</b> The names <b>Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were</b> also <b>written there.</b> The name <i>Yitzḥak</i>, Isaac, contains the letter <i>tzadi</i>. The Gemara asks again: <b>But surely</b> the letter <b><i>tet</i> was not written</b> on the breastplate, since it is not found in the names of the Patriarchs nor in the names of the twelve tribes. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: <i>Shivtei Yeshurun</i>,</b> the tribes of Jeshurun, <b>was</b> also <b>written there.</b> The word <i>shivtei</i>, tribes, contains the letter <i>tet</i>. In this way the entire alphabet was represented.

### Part 9
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Any priest who does not speak with Divine Spirit and upon whom the Divine Presence does not rest is not consulted</b> to inquire of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>. <b>As Zadok inquired</b> of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>and it was effective for him,</b> and he received an answer; but <b>Ebiathar</b> inquired <b>and it was not effective for him,</b> and he did not receive an answer. <b>As it is stated: “But Ebiathar went up until all the people had finished”</b> (II Samuel 15:24), which is taken to mean that he was removed from the High Priesthood since the Divine Spirit had departed from him.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: If it is true that the letters of the breastplate protrude or even join together to form the answer, why does the High Priest need the Divine Spirit and Divine Presence to be with him? And if he has the Divine Spirit and Divine Presence with him, why does he need the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>? The Gemara answers: The Divine Spirit <b>assisted the</b> <i>Urim VeTummim</i>. In other words, the letters formed the answer only if the High Priest himself was worthy, but his divine inspiration was not great enough to provide an answer without them.

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>And</b> the High Priest <b>may be consulted</b> for the decision of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>only on behalf of the king,</b> or on behalf of the president of the court, or on behalf of one whom the community needs. <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>the verse states: “And he shall stand before Elazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the <i>Urim</i></b> before God; by his mouth they shall go out, and by his mouth they shall come in, both he and all the children of Israel with him, even all the congregation” (Numbers 27:21). Each phrase describes a different circumstance in which the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> may be consulted: <b>“He”; this is</b> a reference <b>to a king,</b> as “he” refers to Joshua, who had the status of a king. <b>“All the children of Israel with him”; this is</b> a reference to <b>the priest anointed for war,</b> as all of the Jewish people follow him to war according to his instruction. <b>“Even all the congregation”; this is</b> a reference to <b>the Sanhedrin,</b> who are the heads of the Jewish people.

### Part 12
end of chapter

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> On <b>Yom Kippur,</b> the day on which there is a mitzva by Torah law to afflict oneself, it is <b>prohibited</b> to engage <b>in eating and in drinking, and in bathing, and in smearing</b> oil on one’s body, <b>and in wearing shoes, and in conjugal relations.</b> However, <b>the king,</b> in deference to his eminence, and a new <b>bride</b> within thirty days of her marriage, who wishes to look especially attractive at the beginning of her relationship with her husband, may <b>wash their faces</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>A woman after childbirth,</b> who is suffering, may <b>wear shoes</b> because going barefoot causes her pain. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. The Rabbis prohibit</b> these activities for a king, a new bride, and a woman after childbirth.

### Part 14
The mishna elaborates: <b>One who eats a large date-bulk</b> of food, equivalent to a date <b>and its pit, or who drinks a cheekful</b> of liquid on Yom Kippur is <b>liable</b> to receive the punishment of <i>karet</i> for failing to fulfill the mitzva to afflict oneself on Yom Kippur. <b>All foods</b> that one eats <b>join</b> together to constitute <b>a date-bulk; and all liquids</b> that one drinks <b>join</b> together to constitute <b>a cheekful.</b> However, if <b>one eats and drinks,</b> the food and beverage <b>do not join</b> together to constitute a measure that determines liability, as each is measured separately.

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara expresses surprise at the mishna’s terminology, which states that it is prohibited to eat and drink on Yom Kippur. Why does the mishna use the word <b>prohibited,</b> which indicates that these activities are only sinful? <b>It</b> is, after all, <b>punishable by <i>karet</i></b> if he eats, and the mishna should have used the more accurate word liable. <b>Rabbi Ila said, and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said:</b> This term is <b>needed only for a half-measure,</b> meaning that if one eats less than the amount that incurs the punishment of <i>karet</i>, he still violates a prohibition.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: This explanation <b>works out well according to</b> the <b>one who said</b> that <b>a half-measure is prohibited by Torah</b> law even though it does not incur a punishment. <b>But according to</b> the <b>one who says</b> that <b>a half-measure is permitted by Torah</b> law, and that it is the Sages who prohibit eating less than a full measure, <b>what is</b> there <b>to say</b> about the terminology?

### Part 17
The Gemara explains: <b>as it was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> debated the nature of <b>a half-measure</b> of a forbidden substance: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It is <b>prohibited by Torah</b> law, and the Torah prohibits even a minute amount of forbidden substance. <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> It is <b>permitted by Torah</b> law. <b>This</b> explanation works out <b>well</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan. However,</b> according to the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish, what can be said?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Reish Lakish concedes that</b> a half-measure is <b>prohibited</b> by <b>rabbinic</b> law. If so, Reish Lakish, too, will say that eating or drinking a half-measure is prohibited on Yom Kippur, by rabbinic law.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> if according to Reish Lakish there is a rabbinic prohibition to eat a half-measure, <b>one should not be liable to bring an offering</b> for breaking <b>an oath</b> to eat a half-measure of forbidden foods. <b>Why,</b> then, did we <b>learn</b> in a mishna otherwise: He who swore the following oath, <b>an oath that I will not eat, and</b> then <b>ate</b> unslaughtered <b>animal carcasses, <i>tereifot</i>, reptiles, or creeping animals,</b> he is <b>liable</b> to bring an offering for violating his oath. <b>Rabbi Shimon exempts</b> him.

### Part 19
<b>And we discussed it: Why</b> should he <b>be liable</b> for breaking an oath? <b>He was already sworn and obligated at Mount Sinai,</b> along with the rest of the Jewish people, not to eat these things. According to <i>halakha</i>, an oath does not take effect if it contradicts a previously existing oath. The second oath to not eat has no effect in terms of eating forbidden foods, so why should one be liable for breaking it? <b>Rav, and Shmuel, and Rabbi Yoḥanan say</b> with regard to this: Here we are dealing with a case where one <b>includes permitted foods with forbidden foods.</b> This means that had one sworn only not to eat unslaughtered <b>animal carcasses</b> or <i>tereifot</i> and then ate them, he would not be liable for breaking the oath because he was already sworn not to eat those foods. However, if one swore not to eat at all, his oath takes effect on permitted foods. Consequently, if he eats any food he is liable.

### Part 20
<b>And Reish Lakish said:</b> The only application of this mishna <b>you will find is</b> in a case where one <b>explicitly</b> says that he will not eat <b>a half-measure, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b> They say that when one swears that he will not eat, he prohibits himself only from eating a whole measure of food. If he eats a half-measure, he has not violated a prohibition. Therefore, in order for a half-measure to be prohibited, he needs to specify this in his oath. Or, you find it in the case of one who makes <b>no specification</b> at all of a half-measure,