
### Part 1
As the gate is twenty cubits high, and the immersion chamber above it is at least three additional cubits high, the water was twenty-three cubits above the ground of the courtyard. The Gemara asks: How could it be only twenty-three cubits higher? <b>Isn’t there the cubit of</b> the thickness of <b>the ceiling</b> over the gate <b>and the cubit of the</b> thickness of the <b>plaster</b> sealing of the ritual bath floor for a total of at least twenty-five cubits? The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>the Temple gates, since they were</b> constructed <b>of marble, they constructed them with minimal</b> thickness. Neither the thickness of the ceiling nor the thickness of the plaster was a cubit. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there that minimal</b> thickness of the ceiling and the plaster that would nevertheless total more than twenty-three cubits? The Gemara answers: Indeed; however, <b>since</b> the ceiling <b>was not</b> a whole <b>cubit he does not consider it</b> in his calculation.

### Part 2
§ We learned in the mishna: <b>They spread a sheet of fine linen</b> between the High Priest and the people in the interest of modesty. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> that they specifically used a sheet <b>of fine linen?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>as Rav Kahana said</b> with regard to a related issue: <b>So that he will be aware that the service of the day</b> of Yom Kippur is performed <b>in fine linen garments. Here, too,</b> a linen sheet was used <b>so that he will be aware that the service of the day</b> of Yom Kippur is performed <b>in fine linen garments.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The High Priest <b>removed</b> the white garments that he was wearing, <b>descended</b> to the ritual bath, <b>and immersed. He ascended and dried himself</b> with a towel. Then <b>they brought him</b> the <b>golden garments</b> of the High Priest, <b>and he dressed</b> in the garments, and <b>he sanctified his hands and his feet. They brought him the</b> sheep for <b>the daily</b> morning <b>offering, which he slaughtered</b> by cutting most of the way through the gullet and the windpipe. <b>And a different</b> priest <b>completed</b> the <b>slaughter on his behalf</b> so that the High Priest could receive the blood in a vessel and proceed with the order of the Yom Kippur service. As soon as the slaughter was completed, the High Priest <b>received the blood</b> in a vessel <b>and sprinkled it</b> on the altar.

### Part 4
<b>He entered</b> the Sanctuary <b>to burn the morning incense and to remove</b> the ashes from <b>the lamps</b> of the candelabrum; <b>and</b> he left the Sanctuary and returned to the courtyard <b>to sacrifice the head and the limbs</b> of the sheep sacrificed for the daily offering <b>and the</b> High Priest’s daily <b>griddle-cake</b> offering, <b>and the wine</b> libation of the daily offering. The Mishna comments: <b>The morning incense was burned between</b> the receiving and sprinkling of the <b>blood</b> and the burning <b>of the limbs;</b> and the <b>afternoon</b> incense was burned <b>between</b> the taking of the <b>limbs</b> up to the altar and the pouring of the <b>libations</b> that accompanied the offering.

### Part 5
With regard to the immersion, <b>if the High Priest was old</b> and found it difficult to immerse in cold water, <b>or</b> if he was <b>delicate [<i>istenis</i>], they</b> would <b>heat hot</b> water <b>for him</b> on Yom Kippur eve <b>and place</b> it <b>into the cold</b> water of the ritual bath <b>in order to temper its chill</b> so the High Priest could immerse without discomfort.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages said</b> this matter <b>before Rav Pappa: This</b> mishna is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, as, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, since he said:</b> The High Priest <b>performs two sanctifications</b> of his hands and his feet <b>upon</b> each <b>change of garments,</b> once before donning the garments and once after donning them, <b>here too,</b> in the mishna, <b>let him perform two sanctifications upon the change of garments.</b> However, the description in the mishna indicates that he removes his garments and does not sanctify his hands and feet.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Pappa said to them: Both</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis and</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> there is <b>one</b> sanctification <b>upon removal</b> of <b>sacred garments, and one</b> sanctification <b>upon donning</b> other sacred garments. <b>And here,</b> it is <b>with regard to this</b> issue that <b>they disagree.</b> It is written: <b>“And he shall remove</b> the linen garments that he put on when he entered the Sanctuary and leave them there. <b>And he shall wash</b> his flesh in water in a sacred place <b>and he shall put on</b> his garments” (Leviticus 16:23–24). <b>Rabbi Meir holds:</b> The Torah <b>juxtaposes removal</b> of garments <b>to donning</b> of garments for the following reason: <b>Just as</b> when <b>donning</b> the garments, <b>he dons the garments and afterward sanctifies</b> his hands and feet, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>removal</b> of the garments, <b>he removes</b> the garments <b>and afterward sanctifies</b> his hands and feet.

### Part 8
<b>And the Rabbis hold</b> that the Torah <b>juxtaposes removal</b> of garments <b>to donning</b> of garments for the following reason: <b>Just as</b> when <b>donning</b> the garments, <b>when he is dressed, he sanctifies</b> his hands and feet; <b>so too,</b> for <b>removal</b> of the garments, <b>he sanctifies</b> his hands and feet <b>when he is dressed.</b> Therefore, when he completes the service he sanctifies his hands and feet and only then removes the garments. However, the first time that the High Priest dons the priestly vestments on Yom Kippur he certainly does not require two sanctifications, since at that point he does not remove any other garments.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages said to Rav Pappa: And how can you say that</b> according to Rabbi Meir the first time that the High Priest dons the garments he does not require two sanctifications? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> as follows? <b>They spread a sheet of fine linen between him and the people, and he removed</b> his garments <b>and descended and immersed,</b> and <b>he ascended and dried himself. They brought him golden garments, and he donned</b> them, <b>and he sanctified his hands and his feet. Rabbi Meir says: He removed</b> his garments <b>and sanctified his hands and his feet and descended and immersed. He ascended and dried himself. They brought him golden garments and he donned</b> them <b>and sanctified his hands and his feet.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Meir maintains that there is a special sanctification prior to donning the garments. <b>He said to them: If it was taught, it was taught.</b> I will retract my opinion, which was based on logical analysis, in favor of an explicit <i>baraita</i> that contradicts that opinion.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> according to the approach of <b>Rabbi Meir, that is how you find</b> that possibility of

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC