
### Part 1
e.g., <b>a firstborn or</b> an animal <b>tithe,</b> the sanctity of which <b>takes effect</b> even <b>on a permanently blemished animal, and</b> this offering <b>cannot vacate</b> its sanctified status and assume <b>non-sacred</b> status for its wool <b>to be sheared and to be worked. Rather,</b> you must say that the <i>baraita</i> is <b>not teaching</b> a general <b>category of sacrifices,</b> but when it states: Offering, it is referring to a particular one.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And what is different</b> about the two statements, i.e., why does the <i>tanna</i> deal with a specific case in one area, but a general category in the other? The Gemara explains: <b>Substitution is one category,</b> as there is no difference between one case of substitution and another. By contrast, with regard to <b>sacrifices, there is a firstborn and there is</b> the animal <b>tithe,</b> whose <i>halakhot</i> differ from other offerings, and therefore one cannot establish a single general principle. Consequently, the <i>tanna</i> certainly is referring to a specific offering.

### Part 3
The Gemara continues the previous discussion: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rav Sheshet,</b> who explains that the offering in question is not the bull of the High Priest but his ram, <b>rather than establishing</b> and interpreting this <i>baraita</i> <b>as</b> referring to <b>the ram of Aaron, let him establish</b> that it deals <b>with the Paschal offering, which overrides Shabbat and ritual impurity and</b> one can <b>perform substitution</b> for it, <b>as</b> according to all opinions, it <b>is the offering of an individual.</b> The Gemara answers: Rav Sheshet <b>maintains</b> that one may <b>not slaughter the Paschal lamb on behalf of an individual,</b> but only for a group. This means that it is not an offering of an individual but, at the very least, that of partners. For this reason, one cannot perform substitution for a Paschal lamb.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> Rav Sheshet <b>establish</b> the <i>baraita</i> as referring <b>to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>,</b> which is slaughtered by an individual. The Gemara answers: <b>Does</b> the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>override ritual impurity?</b> Since this offering does not override ritual impurity, it cannot be the offering referred to in the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 5
§ <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to Rava: And</b> according to the <b><i>tanna</i></b> of the aforementioned <i>baraita</i>, concerning the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Ya’akov, <b>what is different</b> with regard to <b>the Paschal offering, that he calls it the offering</b> of <b>an individual? And what is different</b> with regard to the <b>Festival peace-offering,</b> which is eaten with the Paschal offering, <b>that he calls it a communal offering? If</b> this distinction is <b>because</b> the Festival peace-offering <b>is brought by a multitude,</b> i.e., the entire nation brings it, <b>the Paschal offering is also brought by a multitude,</b> not as an individual offering. Rava replied: <b>There is the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, which is not brought by a multitude,</b> and therefore the <i>tanna</i> does not call the Paschal offering a communal offering.

### Part 6
<b>He said to him: If so,</b> that the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> is a communal offering, <b>it should override Shabbat and ritual impurity. He said to him: Yes,</b> as the opinion of this <i>tanna</i> is <b>in accordance with the one who said</b> that the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>overrides</b> ritual impurity. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The second <i>Pesaḥ</i> overrides Shabbat, but it does not override ritual impurity. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It <b>even overrides ritual impurity.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of the first <i>tanna</i>?</b> The first <i>tanna</i> could have <b>said to you</b> that one brings a second <i>Pesaḥ</i> solely <b>because ritual impurity overrode his</b> obligation to sacrifice the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>, i.e., he did not sacrifice the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> because he was impure at that time. <b>And</b> should <b>he</b> now <b>perform</b> the <b>second <i>Pesaḥ</i> in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity?</b>

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda</b> could have <b>said to you</b> that, with regard to the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>the verse states: “According to all the statute of the Paschal offering they shall keep it”</b> (Numbers 9:12), which indicates that it should <b>even</b> be brought <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity,</b> unlike the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>. As for the claim of the first <i>tanna</i>, that the whole reason for the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> is due to ritual impurity, Rabbi Yehuda could respond: <b>The Torah sought</b> an opportunity <b>for</b> one who was impure at the time of the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> <b>to perform it in</b> a state of <b>ritual purity;</b> if <b>he did not merit</b> to perform it in purity, <b>he should</b> nevertheless <b>perform it</b> even <b>in</b> a state of <b>ritual impurity.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC