
### Part 1
<b>cork on Yom Kippur?</b> Is it considered a shoe, and therefore it may not be worn on Yom Kippur, or not? <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Naḥmani stood on his feet</b> to testify <b>and said: I saw that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi went out on Yom Kippur in cork sandals, and I said to him: What</b> is the law <b>on a communal fast</b> that is decreed in a time of drought, when shoes are similarly prohibited? Are reed sandals permitted? <b>He said to me:</b> It is <b>no different,</b> and such sandals are permitted even on a communal fast day. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: I saw Rabbi Elazar from Nineveh go out in cork sandals on a communal fast day, and I said to him: What</b> is the law <b>on Yom Kippur? He said to me:</b> It is <b>no different,</b> and it is permitted. The Gemara reports: <b>Rav Yehuda went out</b> on Yom Kippur <b>in reed sandals. Abaye went out in</b> sandals made of <b>palm fiber. Rava went out in</b> sandals braided with <b>reeds.</b> None of these sandals are considered to be shoes. <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna wrapped a scarf around his feet and went out.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rami bar Ḥama raised an objection:</b> We learned that <b>an amputee</b> may <b>go out with his</b> wooden <b>prosthetic leg</b> on Shabbat, since it is like a shoe; <b>these are the words of Rabbi Meir. But Rabbi Yosei prohibits it. And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in that regard</b> as an addendum to that mishna: <b>And they agree that it is prohibited to go out wearing it on Yom Kippur.</b> As this indicates that even wooden shoes are prohibited, the materials worn by the aforementioned <i>amora’im</i> should also be prohibited. <b>Abaye said: There,</b> in the case of Yom Kippur, it is prohibited because <b>there are rags</b> in the prosthesis. The prohibition is not due to the shoes but <b>due</b> to the <b>pleasure</b> of the comfort, which is prohibited on Yom Kippur.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said to him: And if</b> the prosthetic leg <b>is not a garment,</b> meaning that it is not a shoe, do the <b>rags make it into a garment?</b> Only shoes are forbidden, not other garments. <b>And furthermore, any</b> other kind of <b>pleasure that is not</b> the pleasure of wearing <b>shoes, is it prohibited on Yom Kippur?</b> Only certain afflictions are mandated on Yom Kippur; activities that are not specifically restricted by those afflictions are permitted. <b>And Rabba bar Rav Huna would wrap a scarf on his feet and go out,</b> demonstrating that the comfort provided by rags is permitted on Yom Kippur. <b>Furthermore,</b> the continuation of the <i>baraita</i> contradicts your explanation that the prohibition is due to the comfort provided by the rags. <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it teaches in the latter clause: If</b> the prosthetic leg <b>has a receptacle</b> designed <b>for rags it</b> is susceptible to <b>ritual impurity</b> like all wooden utensils which have receptacles, <b>it may be inferred that in the first clause we are not dealing with</b> a prosthetic leg that <b>has</b> a hollow space designed for <b>rags.</b> Abaye’s position is thereby rejected.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rava said: Actually, according to everyone,</b> a prosthetic leg <b>is</b> considered to be <b>a shoe, and with regard to Shabbat this is what they disagree about: One Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei <b>holds that we decree</b> a prohibition of wearing a prosthetic leg on Shabbat <b>lest</b> the leg <b>slip off and one come to carry it four cubits</b> in the public domain; <b>and one Sage,</b> Rabbi Meir, <b>holds that we do not decree</b> such a rule.

### Part 5
§ <b>The Sages taught: Young children are permitted</b> to perform <b>all of</b> the prohibited activities on Yom Kippur, <b>except for wearing shoes.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>wearing shoes?</b> It is <b>because</b> observers who see a child wearing shoes <b>will say</b> that <b>adults did this for him,</b> i.e., put them on for him, since he cannot do it for himself. But if that is the reason, with regard to <b>those</b> other prohibitions <b>also,</b> like bathing and smearing oil, <b>they will say</b> that <b>adults did this for him,</b> and children should be prohibited from those activities as well. The Gemara explains: With regard to bathing and smearing oil, <b>they</b> could <b>say that they did this for him yesterday,</b> since one cannot be certain when the child was bathed.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: If so, we could <b>say</b> this with regard to <b>shoes as well. They</b> could <b>say that they did this for him yesterday.</b> The Gemara answers: In the case of <b>shoes, it is impossible</b> to say an adult <b>did it for him yesterday,</b> since the child would not have worn shoes at night. <b>As Shmuel said: He who desires a taste of death should put on shoes and go to sleep.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> the mishna <b>is teaching</b> that <b>they are permitted</b> to wear shoes <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b> If so, it is permitted for an adult to perform these acts for a child even on the day of Yom Kippur, and the observer will not think that the adult has done anything wrong. <b>Rather,</b> we must explain the mishna as follows: <b>The Sages decreed</b> against performing <b>those</b> actions <b>that are not</b> necessary <b>for</b> the child’s <b>growth,</b> but <b>the Sages did not decree</b> against performing <b>those</b> actions <b>that are</b> necessary <b>for</b> the child’s <b>growth.</b> As <b>Abaye said:</b> My <b>mother told me: A child’s growth</b> requires <b>hot water and oil</b> for smearing. When <b>he grows a little,</b> he must eat <b>egg with <i>kutaḥa</i>,</b> a pickled dip made with milk. <b>When he grows a little</b> more, he must have <b>vessels to break,</b> since he will enjoy breaking them. This is like <b>Rabba</b> who <b>bought cracked ceramic vessels for his children, and they broke them</b> for their enjoyment.

### Part 8
§ We learned in the mishna that according to Rabbi Eliezer, <b>the king and the bride</b> may <b>wash their faces</b> on Yom Kippur. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the mishna?</b> The Gemara answers: It is the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Teradyon, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The king and the bride</b> may <b>not wash their faces</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Teradyon says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: A king and a bride</b> may <b>wash their faces.</b> The Rabbis said: <b>A new mother</b> may <b>not wear shoes</b> on Yom Kippur. <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Teradyon says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer: A new mother</b> may <b>wear shoes.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: According to Rabbi Eliezer’s opinion, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>the king</b> may wear shoes? <b>Because it is written: “Your eyes shall see the king in his beauty”</b> (Isaiah 33:17). A king should always look regal before his nation. <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>a bride</b> may wash her face? <b>So that she should not</b> appear <b>repulsive to her husband.</b> Since it is only the beginning of their marriage, her husband may be disgusted at seeing her otherwise. <b>Rav said to Rabbi Ḥiyya: For how long</b> after her wedding is a woman considered <b>a bride? He said to him: As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If she becomes a mourner, <b>we do not prevent the bride from wearing perfumes</b> during <b>the entire</b> first <b>thirty days</b> of her marriage. This shows that for the first thirty days, her appearance is most critical.

### Part 10
<b>A new mother</b> may <b>wear shoes.</b> What is the reason for this? <b>Due to the cold</b> there is concern that she will become ill, as she is weak from the birth.

### Part 11
<b>Shmuel said: If</b> a man is worried about walking barefoot on Yom Kippur <b>due to the danger of scorpions, he is permitted</b> to wear shoes, since one need not put himself in danger.

### Part 12
§ We learned in the mishna: On Yom Kippur, <b>one who eats</b> food the <b>volume of a large date</b> is liable. <b>Rav Pappa asked:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC