
### Part 1
The Gemara expresses wonder at Rabbi Zeira’s equation of these two issues: <b>But isn’t there</b> the burning of <b>the limbs and the fats?</b> The Gemara answers: That is not difficult, because the burning of the limbs and the fats <b>is the end of the daytime service.</b> The Gemara asks further: <b>But isn’t there the removal of the ashes?</b> The Gemara rejects that argument: Removing the ashes is <b>the start of the daytime service,</b> as <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If a priest <b>sanctified his hands</b> at night by washing them <b>for the removal of the ashes, the next day,</b> i.e., after daybreak, <b>he need not sanctify</b> his hands again, <b>as he already sanctified</b> them <b>at the start of the service.</b> Rabbi Zeira’s equation between services that are incomplete by themselves and services for which a non-priest does not incur the death penalty therefore remains intact. <b>If so,</b> the question that he asked concerning Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement remains <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement must be revised, and one must posit that <b>when it was stated, this is how it was stated: Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A non-priest who arranges the two logs is liable</b> to receive the death penalty, <b>since it is a service that is complete,</b> i.e., it is not followed and completed by a subsequent service. Although the burning of the limbs upon the altar follows the placement of the logs, that is considered to be an independent act, not the completion of the service of placing the logs. This is because the placing of the logs is done while still night, while the burning of the limbs cannot be done until daybreak.

### Part 3
<b>Rava strongly objects to this: However, if</b> that is <b>so,</b> the service of placing the two logs <b>should require a lottery.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise at Rava’s comment: <b>And doesn’t it require a lottery? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Whoever was privileged</b> to perform the <b>removal of the ashes</b> is <b>also privileged</b> to perform the <b>arrangement of the two logs?</b> There was in fact a lottery for arranging the two logs.

### Part 4
Rather, <b>this is what</b> Rava actually <b>said:</b> If placing the logs is considered a complete service and is therefore a task important enough to warrant the death penalty for a non-priest who performs it, <b>they</b> should <b>hold a</b> separate <b>lottery for it by itself.</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>as we said</b> at the beginning of the chapter, that the task of placing the logs was added to the lottery for the removal of ashes as an incentive for the priests to rise before dawn (Rabbeinu Ḥananel).

### Part 5
Based on Rava’s comments, the Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that</b> any service that is <b>a complete service and</b> for which <b>a non-priest</b> would be <b>liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty requires a lottery,</b> but if <b>a non-priest</b> would <b>not</b> be <b>liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty it would not require a lottery? But isn’t there slaughtering,</b> which may be performed by non-priest and yet requires a lottery? The Gemara rejects this point: <b>Slaughtering is different,</b> because <b>it is the beginning of the daytime service,</b> which gives it added importance.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks further on Rava’s statement: <b>Is that to say that a service that is complete requires a lottery,</b> whereas <b>a service which is followed by a</b> subsequent <b>service</b> that completes it <b>does not require a lottery? But isn’t there</b> the burning of <b>the limbs and the fats?</b> The Gemara answers: That is not difficult because the burning of the limbs and the fats <b>is the end of the daytime service.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t there the removal of the ashes?</b> The Gemara answers: A lottery was established for that service only <b>due to the incident that occurred</b> when the priests came to danger.

### Part 7
As explained above, the reason Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that the arrangement of the logs is a complete service, and is not considered a prelude to the burning of limbs, is because the former is a nighttime service and the latter is a daytime service. <b>Mar Zutra, and some say Rav Ashi, said: We too have learned</b> in a mishna that the arrangement of the two logs is a nighttime service. As we learned: <b>The appointed</b> priest <b>said to them: Go out and see if the time for slaughtering has arrived, whereas</b> the mishna <b>did not teach:</b> See whether <b>the time for arranging the two logs</b> has arrived. This shows that arranging the logs may be done while it is still night; it is therefore not considered to be connected to, and complemented by, the placing of the limbs the following day.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this proof: The reason the mishna mentions slaughtering is that it prefers to <b>teach</b> this statement with regard to <b>that which has no rectification</b> if it is done at night, such as slaughtering the offering, which is rendered irreparably invalid if performed before daybreak. <b>It does not</b> want to <b>teach</b> it with regard to <b>something that has rectification</b> if done at night, such as arranging the two logs, which can always be removed and replaced properly. However, it is possible that the proper time for arranging the logs is daytime, and therefore it may be regarded as a service that is completed by the subsequent burning of limbs on the altar.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC