
### Part 1
<b>a gatehouse,</b> used to guard the entrance to a courtyard, <b>a portico [<i>akhsadra</i>],</b> an open porch, <b>and a balcony</b> serving as a corridor to several residences. Therefore, <b>the verse states: House; just as a house</b> is a place that <b>is designated for residence</b> and is obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>, so too all similar structures are obligated. This is to the <b>exclusion of those</b> structures <b>that are not designated for residence</b> but for other purposes, which are exempt from the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 2
I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I include</b> in the obligation of <i>mezuza</i> <b>even a bathroom, and a tannery, and a bathhouse, and a</b> ritual bath <b>for immersion.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: House; just as a house</b> is a place <b>that is designed to honor</b> people who enter it, <b>so too, all</b> places <b>that are designed to honor</b> those who enter are obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>, <b>excluding those</b> structures <b>that are not designed to honor.</b>

### Part 3
I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I include</b> in the obligation of <i>mezuza</i> <b>even</b> the <b>Temple Mount and</b> its <b>chambers and courtyards.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: House; just as a house</b> is a place <b>that is non-sacred, so too any</b> place <b>that is non-sacred</b> is obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>, <b>excluding those</b> places <b>that are sacred.</b> For the purposes of this discussion, the <i>baraita</i> teaches that there are Sages who hold that barns and storehouses whose use is standard require a <i>mezuza</i>, contrary to the opinion of Rav Yehuda that everyone agrees that these structures are exempt. Consequently, the <i>baraita</i> is a <b>conclusive refutation</b> of his opinion and support for the contention of Rav Kahana that this matter is the subject of a tannaitic debate.

### Part 4
§ <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rava: Six gates are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>:</b> The gate of a <b>storehouse for hay,</b> and of a <b>cattle barn, and</b> a <b>woodshed, and a storehouse, and</b> a <b>Median gate,</b> which is a dome, lacking two doorposts and a lintel, <b>and an unroofed gate,</b> and <b>a gate that is not ten</b> handbreadths <b>high.</b> Rava <b>said to him: You began</b> your statement <b>with six</b> gates that do not require a <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and you concluded with seven.</b>

### Part 5
Rava <b>said to him:</b> The obligation to affix a <i>mezuza</i> to a <b>Median gate is</b> subject to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the gateway of <b>a dome,</b> i.e., an arched gateway, <b>Rabbi Meir obligates</b> it <b>in</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>, and the Rabbis exempt</b> it. <b>And they agree that if, at the foot</b> of the entrance, <b>there are</b> doorposts <b>ten</b> handbreadths high before the arch of the dome begins narrowing the width of the entrance, it is <b>obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i></b> since the sides form a usual doorway. <b>Abaye said:</b> However, <b>everyone agrees</b> that if the entire opening is only <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>high and at the foot</b> of its entrance <b>there are</b> doorposts <b>not</b> even <b>three</b> handbreadths high, <b>it is nothing.</b> It is not considered an entrance and is exempt from the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>. <b>Alternatively,</b> if <b>at the foot</b> of its entrance <b>there are</b> doorposts <b>three</b> handbreadths high, but the entrance <b>is not ten</b> handbreadths <b>high, it is nothing,</b> as it is not considered a viable entrance.

### Part 6
<b>They disagree only</b> with regard to a case where the entrance is <b>ten</b> handbreadths high, <b>and at the foot</b> of the entrance <b>there are</b> doorposts <b>three</b> handbreadths high, <b>but</b> at <b>no</b> point is <b>the width</b> of the opening <b>four</b> handbreadths. However, the space in the dome alongside the entrance <b>is</b> wide <b>enough to</b> theoretically <b>carve out</b> space to <b>complete</b> a width of <b>four</b> handbreadths. <b>Rabbi Meir holds</b> that in all cases where a certain minimum area is required for a specific <i>halakha</i> to take effect and the existing area is smaller, if circumstances would theoretically allow one to carve out and create an area of the requisite size, its legal status is as if <b>one carves out</b> the space <b>to complete</b> it. Therefore, the opening is considered wide enough to require a <i>mezuza</i>. <b>And the Rabbis hold: One does not carve out</b> the space <b>to complete</b> it. Since the width of the opening is not actually four handbreadths, it is exempt from the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 7
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A synagogue, a woman’s house,</b> and <b>a house</b> jointly owned by <b>partners</b> are all <b>obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious;</b> why would these structures be exempt? <b>Lest you say</b> that it is written: <b>“Your house,”</b> in the masculine, <b>and not her house; “Your house,”</b> in the singular, <b>and not their house,</b> excluding a jointly owned house. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that those houses are obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i> like all others.

### Part 8
<b>And say</b> it is <b>indeed so</b> that a woman’s house and a jointly owned house are exempt. The Gemara rejects this possibility: Immediately following the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i> is the reward for its fulfillment, as <b>the verse states: “So that your days be numerous, as well as the days of your sons”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:21). If these structures were exempt from the mitzva, the question would arise: Do <b>these</b> men and individuals <b>require</b> long <b>life, and these,</b> meaning women and partners, <b>do not require</b> long <b>life?</b> The mitzva of <i>mezuza</i> clearly applies to all of them.

### Part 9
The Gemara then asks: <b>Rather, why do I</b> need the emphasis of the verse: <b>Your house,</b> if every house is obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>? The Gemara answers: This could be understood <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava, as Rava said:</b> Your house is interpreted to mean that the <i>mezuza</i> is placed in <b>the way that you enter</b> the house. <b>And when a person lifts</b> his foot to begin walking, <b>he lifts his right foot first.</b> Therefore, the <i>mezuza</i> is affixed on the right side of the doorway.

### Part 10
§ Apropos the <i>baraita</i> just cited, the Gemara cites a related <i>baraita</i> that addresses a different topic. <b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>A synagogue, a house</b> jointly owned by <b>partners, and a woman’s house become impure with</b> the impurity of <b>leprosy</b> of the house, like all other houses. The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious;</b> why wouldn’t they become impure? The Gemara explains: <b>Lest you say</b> that it is written with regard to leprosy: <b>“And the one whom the house is his will come”</b> (Leviticus 14:35), which could be interpreted: <b>His and not hers; his and not theirs,</b> to the exclusion of a house owned by a woman or by partners. Therefore, <b>it teaches us</b> that these houses are also included in this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 11
<b>And say</b> it is <b>indeed so</b> that a woman’s house and a jointly owned house are excluded from the impurity of leprosy. The Gemara responds that <b>the verse states: “In a house of the land of your possession”</b> (Leviticus 14:34). The word your is written in the plural form to teach that all houses in Eretz Yisrael are subject to this impurity. The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, why do I</b> need the emphasis of the term: <b>His,</b> if every house is subject to the impurity of leprosy? The Gemara answers that the term does not teach a <i>halakha</i> but reveals why a house might be afflicted with leprosy. The house belonging to <b>one who dedicates his house to himself</b> alone, <b>who refuses to lend his vessels</b> to others <b>and says that he does not have</b> them, will be punished. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, publicizes his</b> possessions for all to see <b>when</b> he is forced to <b>empty</b> them from <b>his house</b> due to leprosy. <b>This excludes</b> one <b>who lends his vessels to others;</b> his house is not afflicted with leprosy.

### Part 12
The Gemara raises another question: <b>And</b> with regard to a <b>synagogue, does it become impure with</b> the impurity of <b>leprosy? But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought <b>that synagogues and study halls become impure with</b> the impurity of <b>leprosy.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: And the one whom the house is his will come;</b> this is referring to a house <b>that is designated for him, excluding those</b> houses <b>that are not designated for him</b> but are public property.

### Part 13
The Gemara responds: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as it is the subject of a tannaitic dispute. <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that a synagogue can become impure with the impurity of leprosy, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir; that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that a synagogue cannot become impure with the impurity of leprosy, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A synagogue in which there is a residence for the synagogue attendant is obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>,</b> as it is a dwelling. With regard to <b>a synagogue in which there is no residence, Rabbi Meir obligates</b> it in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>, <b>and the Rabbis exempt</b> it. Rabbi Meir deems a synagogue like a residence with regard to both a <i>mezuza</i> and its susceptibility to leprosy.

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead a different resolution to the contradiction between the <i>baraitot</i> with regard to the synagogue. Both <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, and</b> it is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that it can become impure, is referring to a synagogue <b>in which there is a place of residence; that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which states that it cannot become impure, is referring to a synagogue <b>in which there is not a place of residence.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead yet a different resolution to the contradiction between the <i>baraitot</i>: Both <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i> are referring to synagogues <b>in which there is not a place of residence,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC