
### Part 1
<b>And what</b> is the meaning of <b>four or five;</b> i.e., when does the High Priest take four loaves and when does he take five? According <b>to the Rabbis, who say:</b> The priestly watch that is <b>incoming</b> on Shabbat <b>takes six</b> of the loaves, <b>and</b> the <b>outgoing</b> watch <b>takes six, and</b> the incoming watch receives <b>no</b> greater portion as <b>payment for closing the doors,</b> it is <b>from twelve</b> loaves that the High Priest <b>must divide</b> and take his share, but he receives <b>half</b> of the loaves <b>less one,</b> meaning that <b>he takes five.</b> According to the Rabbis, the High Priest receives less than half; however, since it is inappropriate to give him a piece of a loaf, less than half is five whole loaves.

### Part 2
According <b>to Rabbi Yehuda, who said:</b> The priestly watch that is <b>incoming</b> on Shabbat <b>takes seven</b> of the loaves, <b>two</b> of which <b>are payment for closing the doors;</b> and the <b>outgoing</b> watch <b>takes five</b> loaves, it is <b>from ten</b> that <b>he must divide</b> the loaves. Those two of the twelve loaves are a separate payment and are not factored into the tally of those designated for distribution. <b>Subtract one from half</b> of that total, as subtracting less than one loaf would lead to a situation where the High Priest receives a piece of a loaf, which is inappropriate. <b>And</b> therefore, the High Priest <b>takes four.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rava said</b> that the <i>baraita</i> should be explained differently. The <b>entire</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and he holds</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> that only ten loaves are divided. <b>Rather, what</b> then is the meaning of the statement that the High Priest takes <b>four</b> loaves? According to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>doesn’t he need to take five?</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>halakha</i> that the High Priest takes four loaves is in a case <b>where there is a watch that is detained.</b>When the start of a Festival occurs on a Sunday night and one of the priestly watches was forced to arrive before Shabbat to ensure that they would arrive in time for the Festival; or, alternatively, if the Festival ended on a Thursday and one of the priestly watches was detained until the conclusion of Shabbat and only then departed, that priestly watch takes two loaves. <b>That</b> <i>halakha</i> that the High Priest takes five loaves is in a case <b>where there is not a watch that is detained,</b> and the shewbread in divided only between the watch that concludes its service that Shabbat and the watch that begins its service that Shabbat.

### Part 5
<b>If there is a watch that is detained,</b> that detained watch takes two loaves, and the outgoing watch takes two loaves as payment for closing the doors. Therefore, it is <b>from eight</b> that the High Priest <b>must divide</b> the loaves, and he <b>takes four. If there is not a watch that is detained,</b> it is <b>from ten</b> that <b>he must divide</b> the loaves and the High Priest <b>takes five.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> that even the middle statement of the <i>baraita</i> is attributed to Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and it is referring to a watch that is detained, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the last clause in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The High Priest <b>always</b> takes <b>five</b> loaves? That statement indicates that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi disagrees with the middle clause, while according to Rava’s interpretation Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi concedes that in certain circumstances the High Priest takes only four loaves. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>difficult</b> to reconcile Rava’s interpretation with the language of the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The Sages <b>provided</b> the High Priest <b>with Elders</b> selected <b>from the Elders of the court, and they</b> would <b>read before him the order</b> of the service <b>of the day</b> of Yom Kippur. <b>And they</b> would <b>say to him: My Master, High Priest. Read</b> the order of the service <b>with your own mouth,</b> as <b>perhaps you forgot</b> this reading <b>or perhaps you did not learn</b> to read. <b>On Yom Kippur eve</b> in the <b>morning,</b> the Elders <b>stand him at</b> the <b>eastern gate</b> of the courtyard <b>and pass before him bulls and rams and sheep so that he will be familiar</b> with the animals <b>and</b> grow <b>accustomed to the service,</b> as these were the animals sacrificed on Yom Kippur. Throughout <b>all the seven days</b> that the High Priest was in the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber, <b>they would not withhold from him</b> any <b>food or drink</b> that he desired. However, <b>on Yom Kippur eve at nightfall, they would not allow him to eat a great deal because food induces sleep</b> and they did not allow him to sleep, as will be explained.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara wonders about the depiction in the mishna of the Elders questioning the High Priest as to whether he forgot this reading or perhaps did not learn to read. <b>Granted, perhaps he forgot,</b> that is <b>fine,</b> as it is conceivable that he is not accustomed to reading the Torah and might have forgotten this portion. <b>However,</b> is it conceivable that <b>perhaps</b> the High Priest <b>did not learn</b> to read? <b>Do we appoint</b> a High Priest <b>of that sort</b> who never learned the Bible?

### Part 9
<b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is stated: <b>“And the priest who is greater than his brethren”</b> (Leviticus 21:10); this teaches <b>that he</b> must <b>be greater than his</b> priestly <b>brethren in strength, in beauty, in wisdom, and in wealth. <i>Aḥerim</i> say:</b> Wealth is not a prerequisite for selecting a High Priest, but <b>from where</b> is it derived <b>that if he does not have</b> property of his own <b>that his brethren the priests elevate him</b> and render him wealthy from their own property? <b>The verse states: “And the priest who is greater [<i>haggadol</i>] than his brethren”; elevate him [<i>gaddelehu</i>] from</b> the property <b>of his brethren.</b> In any event, there is a consensus that wisdom is a prerequisite for his selection.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> that lists wisdom among the attributes of the High Priest is referring to <b>the First Temple,</b> where this <i>halakha</i> was observed and the High Priests possessed those attributes listed. <b>Here,</b> the mishna is referring to <b>the Second Temple,</b> where this <i>halakha</i> was not observed, so a situation where the High Priest was not well-versed in the Bible was conceivable. <b>As Rav Asi said:</b> The wealthy <b>Marta, daughter of Baitos, brought a half-<i>se’a</i> of dinars in to King Yannai for</b> the fact <b>that he appointed Yehoshua ben Gamla as High Priest.</b> This is an example of the appointment of High Priests by means of bribery and gifts. Since that was the practice, a totally ignorant High Priest could have been appointed.

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>On Yom Kippur eve</b> in the <b>morning,</b> the elders pass different animals before the High Priest. A <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Even goats</b> were brought before him. The Gemara asks: <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not teach</b> that <b>goats</b> were among the animals that passed before the High Priest? The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> goats <b>come</b> as atonement <b>for sins,</b> passing them before the High Priest will evoke transgressions and he will <b>become distraught.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, a bull</b> should be not be passed before him, <b>as it too comes</b> to atone <b>for sin.</b> The Gemara answers that there is a difference in the case of <b>a bull, since</b> it is to atone <b>for his</b> sins <b>and for</b> the sins of <b>his brethren the priests that it comes; among his brethren the priests, if there is a person who has a</b> sinful <b>matter,</b> the High Priest <b>would know</b> about it <b>and</b> lead <b>him back to</b> the path of righteousness <b>through repentance.</b> Therefore, passing a bull before the High Priest will not render him distraught, as it will merely remind him of his responsibility toward his priestly brethren. On the other hand, <b>with regard to the entire Jewish people, he does not know</b> of their sinful matters and is unable to facilitate their repentance. Passing goats before the High Priest will evoke their sins as well as his inability to correct the situation, leaving him distraught.

### Part 13
Apropos the High Priest being privy to the sinful behavior of his fellow priests, <b>Ravina said</b> that <b>this</b> explains the folk saying <b>that people say: If</b> the beloved <b>son of your</b> beloved <b>sister becomes a policeman [<i>dayyala</i>], see</b> to it that <b>in the marketplace you do not pass before him.</b> Be wary of him because he knows your sins.

### Part 14
§ We learned in the mishna: Throughout <b>all the seven days</b> that the High Priest was in the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber, <b>they would not withhold</b> from him any food or drink that he desired. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Nekosa says:</b> On Yom Kippur eve <b>they feed him fine flour and eggs in order to loosen his</b> bowels, so that he will not need to relieve himself on Yom Kippur. <b>They said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda ben Nekosa: In feeding him those foods, <b>all the more so that you bring him to a state of arousal.</b> Feeding him those foods is antithetical to the efforts to prevent the High Priest from becoming impure, as they are liable to cause him to experience a seminal emission.

### Part 15
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Sumakhos said in the name of Rabbi Meir: One does not feed him</b> foods represented by the acrostic: <b><i>Alef</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i>; and some say</b> that one does <b>not</b> feed him foods represented by the acrostic: <b><i>Alef</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i>; and some say neither</b> does one feed him <b>white wine.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>Not <i>alef</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i></b> means <b>neither <i>etrog</i>, nor eggs [<i>beitzim</i>], nor old wine [<i>yayin</i>]. And some say: Not <i>alef</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i></b> means <b>neither <i>etrog</i>, nor eggs [<i>beitzim</i>], nor fatty meat [<i>basar</i>], nor old wine [<i>yayin</i>]. And some say neither</b> does one feed him <b>white wine because white wine brings</b> a <b>man to</b> the <b>impurity</b> of a seminal emission.

### Part 16
Similarly, <b>the Sages taught:</b> If a man experienced an emission that could render him <b>a <i>zav</i>, one attributes</b> the emission not to his being a <i>zav</i> but perhaps to a different cause, e.g., <b>to food, or to all kinds of food,</b> i.e., he may have eaten too much food, which could have caused the emission. <b>Elazar ben Pineḥas says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira:</b> During the days that a <i>zav</i> is examining himself to determine whether or not he is impure, <b>one feeds him neither</b> foods represented by the acrostic: <b><i>Ḥet</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i>, nor</b> foods represented by the acrostic: <b><i>Gimmel</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>mem</i>, nor any</b> food <b>items that</b> might <b>bring him to impurity</b> caused by an emission. The Gemara explains: <b>Not <i>ḥet</i>, <i>gimmel</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i></b> means <b>neither milk [<i>ḥalav</i>], nor cheese [<i>gevina</i>], nor egg [<i>beitza</i>], nor wine [<i>yayin</i>]. And not <i>gimmel</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>mem</i></b> means <b>neither soup of pounded beans [<i>mei gerisin</i>], nor fatty meat [<i>basar</i>], nor</b> small <b>fish</b> pickled <b>in brine [<i>muryas</i>].</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara asks about the phrase: <b>Nor any</b> food <b>items that</b> might <b>bring him to impurity; what does it</b> come <b>to include? It</b> comes <b>to include that which the Sages taught: Five</b> food <b>items bring</b> a <b>man to</b> a state of <b>impurity</b> due to emission. <b>And these are: Garlic,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC