
### Part 1
This is <b>because</b> Yoḥanan the High Priest <b>sent</b> emissaries <b>throughout all the</b> areas located within the <b>borders of</b> <i>Eretz <b>Yisrael</b></i> to assess the situation <b>and saw that</b> the people <b>were separating only <i>teruma gedola</i></b> and were neglecting to separate tithes. Therefore, he issued a decree that anyone who purchases produce from an <i>am ha’aretz</i> must be concerned about the possibility that it was not tithed and is required to tithe it. Since even an <i>am ha’aretz</i> separates <i>teruma gedola</i>, the bakers who purchased grain from them were not required to do so.

### Part 2
And granted, bakers need not separate <b>first tithe and poor man’s tithe</b> due to the principle: <b>The burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b> Neither first tithe, given to Levites, nor poor man’s tithe, given to the poor, is sacred. It is merely the property of the Levite and the pauper, respectively. Since with regard to doubtfully tithed produce, by definition, there is no certainty that one is actually required to tithe it, if the Levite or the pauper should seek to take possession of the gifts, they must first prove that in fact the produce was not tithed. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>second tithe,</b> why are the bakers exempt? <b>Let them separate</b> second-tithe from the produce, <b>take it up</b> to Jerusalem, <b>and eat it in Jerusalem,</b> which is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to anyone else who purchases doubtfully tithed produce.

### Part 3
<b>Ulla said:</b> It is <b>because these <i>parhedrin</i>,</b> government appointees, <b>beat</b> the bakers throughout the <b>entire twelve months</b> of their tenure <b>and tell them: Sell</b> your baked goods <b>cheaply, sell</b> them <b>cheaply.</b> Since the officers insist that the bakers refrain from raising their prices, <b>the Sages did not</b> further <b>burden them</b> with the exertion of separating second tithe from a large quantity of grain and taking it to Jerusalem, as they would be unable to raise their prices to cover the cost of the lost grain and the trip to Jerusalem. Since the presumptive status of the grain is that it was tithed, and the obligation to tithe doubtfully tithed produce is a stringency, the Sages exempted the baker from the obligation to do so. <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>parhedrin</i>?</b> These are royal <b>appointees [<i>pursei</i>]</b> charged with performance of different tasks.

### Part 4
§ Apropos the Second Temple period, when High Priests were frequently replaced, the Gemara cites that <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The fear of the Lord prolongs days, but the years of the wicked will be shortened”</b> (Proverbs 10:27)? <b>The fear of the Lord prolongs days; that</b> is a reference to the <b>First Temple, which stood</b> for <b>four hundred and ten years and in</b> which <b>only eighteen High Priests served,</b> as is written in the lists of the genealogy of the priests in the Bible.

### Part 5
<b>But the years of the wicked will be shortened; that</b> is a reference to the <b>Second Temple, which stood</b> for <b>four hundred and twenty years and in</b> which <b>over three hundred High Priests served.</b> In calculating the tenures of the High Priests, <b>deduct from</b> the figure of four hundred and twenty years <b>forty years that Shimon HaTzaddik served, and eighty</b> years <b>that Yoḥanan the High Priest served, ten</b> years <b>that Yishmael ben Pavi served, and some say eleven</b> years <b>that Rabbi Elazar ben Ḥarsum served.</b> These men were all righteous and were privileged to serve extended terms. After deducting those one hundred and thirty or one hundred and forty-one years, <b>go out and calculate from this</b> point <b>forward</b> and conclude: <b>Each and every one</b> of the remaining High Priests <b>did not complete his year</b> in office, as the number of remaining High Priests is greater than the number of years remaining.

### Part 6
§ Apropos the sins of the High Priests in the Second Temple, the Gemara cites that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Torta said: Due to what</b> reason <b>was</b> the Tabernacle in <b>Shiloh destroyed</b> in the time of the prophet Samuel? It was destroyed <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that there were two matters</b> that existed <b>in</b> the Tabernacle: <b>Forbidden sexual relations and degradation</b> of <b>consecrated items.</b> There were <b>forbidden sexual relations, as it is written: “Now Eli was very old and he heard what his sons were doing to all of Israel, how they lay with the women who did service at the opening of the Tent of Meeting”</b> (I Samuel 2:22). <b>And although Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Anyone who says that the sons of Eli sinned</b> by engaging in forbidden sexual relations <b>is nothing other than mistaken,</b> even according to the alternative interpretation of the verse that it was <b>due to</b> the fact

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC