
### Part 1
<b>When</b> this question with regard to the measure of liquid <b>was asked,</b> it was not asked about an average-sized person, for whom a mouthful is smaller than a quarter-<i>log</i>. Rather, <b>the question was asked</b> even <b>about Og, king of Bashan,</b> in which case, <b>it is Beit Shammai</b> who are <b>stringent,</b> for Og’s cheekful is much more than a quarter-<i>log</i>.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to this</b> <i>halakha</i> with regard to the measure for liability for drinking: <b>What is different</b> with regard to <b>eating,</b> in <b>that all people</b> have the same measure, the <b>volume of a large date; and what is different</b> with regard to <b>drinking, where each and every</b> person is liable <b>according to his own measure,</b> i.e., every individual’s measure depends on the size of his own mouth? <b>Abaye said to him: The Sages have</b> an accepted <b>tradition</b> with regard to <b>the volume of the large date, that</b> eating <b>this</b> amount <b>settles his mind,</b> but <b>less than this</b> amount <b>does not settle</b> his mind. However, with regard to <b>drinking, his mind is settled with</b> the amount of <b>his own</b> cheekful, <b>but his mind is not settled</b> with the cheekful <b>of his fellow</b> who is smaller than him.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to this</b> for a different reason: <b>Is everyone</b> of average size satisfied <b>with</b> eating <b>the volume of a large date, and</b> even <b>Og, king of Bashan,</b> is also satisfied <b>with the volume of a large date?</b> If not, there should also be relative measures for eating. <b>Abaye said to him: The Sages have</b> an accepted <b>tradition that this</b> amount <b>settles his mind,</b> but <b>less than this</b> amount <b>does not settle his mind. However, everyone</b> of average size has his mind <b>greatly</b> settled, whereas <b>Og, king of Bashan,</b> has his mind only <b>a little</b> settled. But even so, this measure settles the mind of any person and relieves his affliction.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to this</b> further: If it is on account of settling one’s mind, the following question can be raised: If one ate <b>fatty meat,</b> his mind would be settled with the <b>volume of a large date,</b> but if he ate edible <b>grapevine shoots,</b> would his mind similarly settled <b>with the volume of a large date? Abaye said to him: The Sages have</b> an accepted <b>tradition that with this</b> measure <b>one’s mind is settled,</b> but <b>with less than</b> measure <b>his mind is not settled. However,</b> with <b>fatty meat,</b> his mind is <b>greatly</b> settled; if one ate the same measure of <b>grapevine shoots,</b> his mind is only <b>a little</b> settled.

### Part 5
<b>Rava strongly objects to this:</b> For all prohibitions of eating, the measure that determines liability is the volume <b>of an olive-bulk</b> consumed <b>within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf of bread.</b> All forbidden food eaten within that period combines to the measure of an olive-bulk. However, one who eats an olive-bulk over a longer period is exempt. Yet, on Yom Kippur one who eats the <b>volume of a large date,</b> which is a larger measure, is culpable if this amount is eaten <b>within</b> the time it would take <b>to eat a half-loaf of bread.</b> This appears to be a leniency, since one must eat a larger measure in the same time period of time. Why is there not a longer period of time for liability on Yom Kippur, to reflect the larger measure? <b>Abaye said to him: The Sages have</b> an accepted <b>tradition that</b> one who eats within <b>this</b> duration of time, <b>his mind is settled; but</b> one who eats within <b>a longer</b> duration of time, <b>his mind is not settled,</b> and he remains in a state of affliction.

### Part 6
<b>Rava strongly objects to this:</b> The measure for liability for eating on Yom Kippur is the <b>volume of a large date</b> consumed <b>within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf of bread;</b> but the measure for eating impure foods that render one ritually impure is <b>half of a half-loaf,</b> which is two egg-bulks, a much larger volume, and this must also be consumed <b>within</b> the time it takes <b>to eat a half-loaf of bread Rav Pappa said to him:</b> Do not raise a challenge from here. <b>Leave</b> aside <b>ritual impurity of the body</b> contracted through consuming impure foods <b>because that is not by Torah law</b> but by rabbinic law. The Sages were lenient in this matter. If one does not consume that amount of impure food within this time period, he is not rendered impure.

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges this: <b>But did Rav Pappa</b> actually <b>say that</b> the rendering of ritual impurity of the body through the consumption of impure foods is by rabbinic law? <b>But</b> he appears to say the opposite in another statement: <b>Isn’t it written:</b> “You shall not make yourselves detestable with any creeping thing that creeps, <b>neither shall you make yourselves impure with them, that you should be impure thereby”</b> (Leviticus 11:43). <b>And Rav Pappa said: From here,</b> from the Torah’s usage of the word “impure” with regard to the prohibition of eating, we learn that <b>ritual impurity of the body is by Torah law.</b> The Gemara answers: Rav Pappa did not mean that the law is actually Torah law. The law is indeed <b>rabbinic</b> law, <b>and the verse</b> brought as proof <b>is a mere support.</b>

### Part 8
§ We learned in the mishna: <b>All</b> types of <b>foods</b> combine to form a measure of liability with regard to eating on Yom Kippur. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> If one <b>ate meat and</b> the <b>salt</b> that was on it, these <b>combine</b> to make the volume of a large date. <b>Although</b> consuming salt alone <b>is not</b> considered <b>eating, since people do eat</b> meat with salt together, <b>they combine</b> into one measure. Similarly, <b>Reish Lakish said: Brine on a vegetable combines</b> with the vegetable to make the <b>volume of a large date</b> with regard to the prohibition of eating <b>on Yom Kippur.</b> The Gemara expresses surprise at this: <b>It</b> is <b>obvious.</b> Why should the brine not combine with the vegetable, considering that it is itself food? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that brine is <b>a beverage,</b> and food and drinks do not combine, <b>it teaches us</b> that <b>any item that prepares food</b> for eating <b>is</b> considered <b>a food.</b>

### Part 9
§ <b>Reish Lakish said: One who eats</b> in <b>an excessive manner on Yom Kippur,</b> to the degree that he forces himself to continue eating even when full <b>is exempt,</b> e.g., one who ate beyond being satiated on Yom Kippur eve and then ate something else as soon as the fast began. <b>What is the reason</b> for that? Because the Torah does not mention the prohibition of eating on Yom Kippur, but it <b>was written</b> “any soul which <b>shall not be afflicted</b> in that same day, he shall be cut off from his people” (Leviticus 23:29), <b>excluding one who harms</b> himself, e.g., one who does not enjoy his food at all.

### Part 10
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said</b> that <b>Reish Lakish said: A non-priest who ate <i>teruma</i> in an excessive manner pays the principal,</b> that which he took, <b>and does not pay the</b> additional <b>fifth,</b> which one who illegally eats <i>teruma</i> pays to the priest as a penalty. This is because it states about one who eats <i>teruma</i>: “And <b>if</b> a man <b>eat</b> of the sacred thing in error, then he shall add a fifth to it, and give the priest the sacred thing” (Leviticus 22:14). The word “eat” <b>excludes</b> one who is not eating but <b>harming</b> himself. He does, however, pay the principal, since he caused a loss to the priest. The fifth is only paid by one who eats normally, not excessively. Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A non-priest</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC