
### Part 1
<b>that the sequestering of this</b> High Priest prior to Yom Kippur is <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>sanctity,</b> i.e., to ensure that he appreciates the gravity of the occasion and to fill him with reverence in preparation for entering the Holy of Holies. <b>His brethren, the priests,</b> may <b>touch him,</b> as the objective of his sequestering is unrelated to any concern of impurity. In contrast, <b>the sequestering of that</b> priest who burns the heifer is <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>purity, and his brethren, the priests,</b> may <b>not touch him. In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this <i>baraita</i>? It is in accordance with the opinion of <b>either Rabbi Meir or Rabbi Yosei. As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy</b> High <b>Priest, isn’t there also this</b> difference between the two priests: One sprinkles purification waters on the priest who burns the heifer all seven days that he is sequestered, whereas one sprinkles purification waters on the High Priest before Yom Kippur only on the third and seventh days?

### Part 2
§ <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, strongly objects to</b> the opinion that one sprinkles purification waters on the priest who burns the heifer all seven days because those days may be the third or seventh day of his impurity. <b>Granted,</b> on the <b>first</b> day of the seven one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> it is <b>the third</b> day of his impurity; and on the <b>second</b> day of the seven one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> it is <b>the third</b> day of his impurity, if he became impure the day before he was sequestered. The same is true for the <b>third</b> day; one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> that is <b>the third</b> day of his impurity. By the same token, on the <b>fifth</b> day one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> that is <b>the seventh</b> day of his impurity if he became impure two days before he was sequestered. On the <b>sixth</b> day one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> that is <b>the seventh</b> day of his impurity if he became impure the day before he was sequestered. On the <b>seventh</b> day one sprinkles the water, as <b>perhaps</b> that is <b>the seventh</b> day of his impurity.

### Part 3
<b>However,</b> on the <b>fourth</b> day after he was sequestered, <b>why do I</b> require <b>sprinkling at all? Neither with regard to</b> the possibility that it may be the <b>third</b> day of his impurity <b>is there uncertainty,</b> since he has already been sequestered for three days, <b>nor with regard to</b> the possibility that it may be the <b>seventh</b> day of his impurity <b>is there uncertainty,</b> as even if it were, sprinkling would be useless because he did not have purification water sprinkled on him on the third day of his impurity. Nothing is accomplished by sprinkling the water on the priest on the fourth day.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to your reasoning, is there</b> ever <b>sprinkling</b> on the priest <b>all seven</b> days? <b>Don’t we maintain that sprinkling is</b> prohibited by <b>rabbinic decree</b> issued to enhance the character of Shabbat as a day of rest, <b>and</b> therefore, sprinkling <b>does not override Shabbat. Rather, what have you to say?</b> When it was instituted to sprinkle the water on the priest, it was for <b>seven</b> days <b>except for Shabbat. Here too,</b> say that sprinkling is performed for <b>seven</b> days <b>except for</b> the <b>fourth</b> day of sequestering.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said: Therefore,</b> with regard to <b>the High Priest on Yom Kippur,</b> where <b>the matter</b> of the beginning of the seven-day period <b>is not dependent on us; rather, the matter is dependent on the determination of the</b> first day of the new <b>month,</b> for that reason it is <b>required to remove</b> the High Priest from his home <b>on the third of Tishrei, and whenever the third of Tishrei occurs</b> on a weekday, <b>we remove him</b> from his house. Therefore, both on the fourth day of his sequestering and on Shabbat, no sprinkling is performed. <b>However,</b> with regard to the <b>priest who burns the heifer,</b> where <b>the matter</b> of the beginning of the seven-day period <b>is dependent on us, we remove him</b> from his home <b>on the fourth day of the week,</b> Wednesday, <b>so that the fourth day of his</b> sequestering <b>will occur on Shabbat.</b> In that way, sprinkling will not be performed only one day of the seven, as the day on which sprinkling is prohibited will coincide with the day on which sprinkling is unnecessary.

### Part 6
§ Having discussed the obligation to sequester the High Priest prior to Yom Kippur, the Gemara interprets the next matter in the mishna: The High Priest is removed from his house <b>to the Chamber of <i>Parhedrin</i>. It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> said: <b>And was it</b> called <b>the Chamber of <i>Parhedrin</i>,</b> the chamber for the annual royal appointees? <b>Wasn’t it</b> called <b>the Chamber of <i>Balvatei</i>,</b> the chamber for ministers and council heads?

### Part 7
<b>Rather, initially,</b> during the era of Shimon HaTzaddik and his colleagues, who were rewarded with long lives due to their righteousness, <b>they would call it the Chamber of <i>Balvatei</i>,</b> a term connoting significance, since it was a place designated for the High Priest. <b>However, because</b> people were <b>giving money</b> in order to be appointed <b>to the</b> High <b>Priesthood,</b> the position was filled by unworthy individuals. Due to their wickedness, they did not survive the year, and they were <b>replaced every twelve months like the <i>parhedrin</i> who are replaced every twelve months. Therefore, the chamber was called</b> disparagingly the Chamber of <b><i>Parhedrin</i>.</b> Since the High Priest was replaced every year, the new appointee would renovate the chamber to reflect his own more elaborate tastes.

### Part 8
Apropos the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber, the Gemara discusses a related <i>halakha</i>. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> in tractate <i>Demai</i>: With regard to doubtfully tithed produce, i.e., produce purchased from an <i>am ha’aretz</i> with regard to whom there is uncertainty whether or not he tithed the produce, <b>the Sages required bakers to separate only <i>teruma</i> of the tithe,</b> which is one one-hundredth of the produce that is given to the priests, and <b><i>ḥalla</i>,</b> separated from the dough and given to priests.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, <i>teruma gedola</i>,</b> which is equal to approximately one-fiftieth of the produce and is given to a priest, need <b>not</b> be separated from doubtfully-tithed produce, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC