
### Part 1
<b>Granted, if you say</b> that the Chamber of the Lambs <b>was</b> actually closer to the <b>southwest</b> corner, that is how Rav Huna <b>resolves</b> the contradiction between one mishna discussing <b>the shewbread</b> and the other mishna discussing <b>the shewbread. However, if you say</b> that the Chamber of the Lambs <b>was</b> in the <b>northwest</b> corner, <b>ultimately, what is the resolution</b> with regard to the <b>shewbread?</b> Even if you envision the path from the other direction, the Chamber of the Seals interposes between the Chamber of the Lambs and the chamber where the shewbread is prepared. <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from it</b> that the Chamber of the Lambs <b>was</b> indeed <b>in the southwest?</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 2
The Gemara questions the assertion that one <i>tanna</i> envisions the chambers as one coming via the left. <b>But didn’t the Master say: All turns that you turn should be only to the right,</b> which in certain cases is <b>to the east?</b> Here the turns are to the left. The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> restriction <b>applies only in</b> the course of performing <b>the</b> Temple <b>service; however, here, it is a mere reckoning,</b> and no priest actually proceeded that way from one chamber to the other.

### Part 3
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>As the High Priest sacrifices</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first and takes</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>How does</b> the High Priest <b>sacrifice</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first?</b> If the High Priest so desires, <b>he says: This burnt-offering, I am sacrificing,</b> or: <b>This meal-offering, I am sacrificing.</b> That is sufficient, and the High Priest does not participate in a lottery.

### Part 4
<b>How does</b> the High Priest <b>take</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first?</b> The High Priest <b>says: This sin-offering, I am eating,</b> or: <b>This guilt-offering, I am eating. And he</b> may even <b>take</b> one <b>loaf</b> of the <b>two loaves</b> offered on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>. He may take <b>four or five</b> of the twelve <b>shewbread loaves</b> that are distributed to the priests every Shabbat. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The High Priest <b>always</b> takes <b>five</b> of the twelve shewbread loaves, <b>as it is stated: “It shall be for Aaron and his sons</b> and they shall eat it in a sacred place” (Leviticus 24:9). From the fact that Aaron and his sons are listed separately, it is derived that <b>half</b> of the loaves were given <b>to Aaron,</b> or the High Priests who succeeded him, <b>and half</b> were given <b>to his sons.</b> Since, as explained below, only ten of the loaves were actually distributed, the High Priest received five.

### Part 5
<b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is itself difficult,</b> as it is self-contradictory. First <b>you said: He takes</b> one <b>loaf</b> of the <b>two loaves</b> offered on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>. <b>Whose</b> opinion is this? <b>It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said</b> that the High Priest <b>takes half. Say the middle clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> as follows: The High Priest takes <b>four or five</b> of the twelve <b>shewbread loaves; we have come to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that the High Priest <b>does not take half</b> but takes less than half. <b>Say the last clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> as follows: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that the High Priest <b>always</b> takes <b>five.</b> The Gemara asks: Is that to say that <b>the first clause and the last clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> are in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and the middle</b> clause is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis?</b> That conclusion is difficult.

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said: The first clause and the middle clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> are in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and in the case of the two loaves, <b>the Rabbis concede with regard to a piece</b> of a loaf <b>that it is inappropriate to give it to the High Priest.</b> According to the Rabbis, the High Priest should actually receive less than one loaf, as in their opinion he is entitled to less than half; however, since it is inappropriate to give him a piece of the loaf, he takes an entire loaf as his portion.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC