
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> Rav’s uncle and teacher, <b>came in,</b> whereupon Rav <b>returned to the beginning</b> of the portion and began to read it again. Afterward, <b>bar Kappara came in,</b> and Rav <b>returned to the beginning</b> of the portion out of respect for bar Kappara. Then <b>Rabbi Shimon, son of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>came in,</b> and <b>he returned</b> again <b>to the beginning</b> of the portion. Then, <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Ḥama came in,</b> and Rav <b>said</b> to himself: <b>Shall I go back</b> and read <b>so many times? He did not return</b> but continued from where he was. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina was offended</b> because Rav showed that he was less important than the others. <b>Rav went before</b> Rabbi Ḥanina <b>on Yom Kippur eve</b> every year for <b>thirteen</b> years to appease him, <b>but he would not be appeased.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>How could</b> Rav <b>act this way? Didn’t Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina say: Anyone who requests forgiveness from another should not ask more than three times?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rav is different,</b> since he was very pious and forced himself to act beyond the letter of the law. The Gemara asks: <b>And how could Rabbi Ḥanina act this way</b> and refuse to forgive Rav, though he asked many times? <b>Didn’t Rava say:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who suppresses his honor</b> and forgives someone for hurting him, God <b>pardons all his sins?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>Rather,</b> this is what happened: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina saw in a dream</b> that <b>Rav was being hung on a palm tree, and</b> he <b>learned</b> as a tradition that <b>anyone</b> about whom there is a dream in <b>which he was being hung on a palm tree will become the head</b> of a yeshiva. <b>He said: Learn from this that</b>providence has decreed that <b>he must eventually become the head</b> of the yeshiva. Therefore, <b>I will not be appeased, so that he will have to go and study Torah in Babylonia.</b> He was conscious of the principle that one kingdom cannot overlap with another, and he knew that once Rav was appointed leader, he, Rabbi Ḥanina, would have to abdicate his own position or die. Therefore, he delayed being appeased, so that Rav would go to Babylonia and be appointed there as head of the yeshiva. In this way, the dream would be fulfilled, as Rav would indeed be appointed as head of a yeshiva, but since he would be in Babylonia, Rabbi Ḥanina would not lose his own position.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> The main <b>mitzva of confession</b> is on <b>Yom Kippur eve when darkness</b> falls. <b>But the Sages said:</b> One should also <b>confess</b> on Yom Kippur eve <b>before he eats and drinks</b> at his last meal before the fast <b>lest he become confused at the meal,</b> due to the abundance of food and drink, and be unable to confess afterward. <b>And although one confessed before he ate and drank, he confesses</b> again <b>after he eats and drinks,</b> as <b>perhaps he committed some sin during the meal</b> itself. <b>And although one confessed</b> during <b>the evening prayer</b> on the night of Yom Kippur, <b>he</b> should <b>confess</b> again during <b>the morning prayer.</b> Likewise, although one confessed during the <b>morning prayer, he</b> should still <b>confess during</b> the <b>additional prayer.</b> Similarly, although one confessed <b>during</b> the <b>additional prayer, he</b> should also <b>confess during</b> the <b>afternoon prayer;</b> and although one confessed <b>during</b> the <b>afternoon prayer, he</b> should <b>confess</b> again <b>during</b> the <b>closing prayer [<i>ne’ila</i>].</b>

### Part 5
<b>And where</b> in the Yom Kippur prayers <b>does one say</b> the confession? <b>An individual</b> says it <b>after his</b> <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer, and the prayer leader says it in the middle</b> of the <i>Amida</i> prayer. The Gemara asks: <b>What does one say;</b> what is the liturgy of the confession? <b>Rav said:</b> One says the prayer that begins: <b>You know the mysteries of the universe,</b> in accordance with the standard liturgy. <b>And Shmuel said</b> that the prayer begins with: <b>From the depths of the heart. And Levi said</b> that it begins: <b>And in your Torah it is written, saying,</b> and one then recites the forgiveness achieved by Yom Kippur as stated in the Torah. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that it begins: <b>Master of the Universe.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said</b> that one says: <b>For our iniquities are too many to count and our sins are too great to number. Rav Hamnuna said:</b> This is the liturgy of the confession: <b>My God, before I was formed I was unworthy. Now that I have been formed, it is as if I had not been formed. I am dust while alive, how much more so when I am dead. See, I am before You like a vessel filled with shame and disgrace. May it be Your will that I may sin no more, and as for</b> the sins <b>I have committed before You, erase</b> them <b>in Your compassion, but not by suffering.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>This is the confession that Rava</b> used <b>all year</b> long; <b>and</b> it was the confession <b>that Rav Hamnuna Zuta</b> used <b>on Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Mar Zutra said: We said only</b> that one must follow all these versions <b>when he did not say</b> the words: <b>But we have sinned. However,</b> if <b>he said</b> the words: <b>But we have sinned, he need not</b> say <b>anything further</b> because that is the essential part of the confession. <b>As bar Hamdudei said: I was standing before Shmuel and he was sitting; and when the prayer leader reached</b> the words: <b>But we have sinned,</b> Shmuel <b>stood.</b> Bar Hamdudei <b>said: Learn from here that this is the main</b> part of <b>the confession,</b> and Shmuel stood up to emphasize the significance of these words.

### Part 8
§ <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there,</b> in tractate <i>Ta’anit</i>: <b>At three times in the year, priests raise their hands</b> to recite the priestly benediction <b>four times in</b> a single <b>day: In</b> the <b>morning prayer, in</b> the <b>additional prayer, in</b> the <b>afternoon prayer, and at</b> the <b>closing [<i>ne’ila</i>] of the gates. And these are</b> the <b>three times</b> in the year: <b>During</b> communal <b>fasts</b> for lack of rain, on which the <i>ne’ila</i> prayer is recited; <b>and during</b> non-priestly <b>watches [<i>ma’amadot</i>],</b> when the Israelite members of the guard parallel to the priestly watch come and read the account of Creation (see <i>Ta’anit</i> 26a); <b>and on Yom Kippur.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the closing of the gates,</b> i.e., the <i>ne</i>’<i>ila</i> prayer? <b>Rav said:</b> It is <b>an added prayer</b> of <i>Amida</i>. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> It is not a full prayer but only a confession that begins with the words: <b>What are we, what are our lives?</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to this from a <i>baraita</i>, as it was taught: On <b>the night of Yom Kippur, one prays seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> prayer <b>and confesses; during</b> the <b>morning prayer, one prays seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses; during</b> the <b>additional prayer, one prays seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses; during</b> the <b>afternoon prayer, one prays seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses;</b> and <b>during</b> the <b><i>ne’ila</i> prayer, one prays seven</b> blessings <b>and confesses.</b> This concurs with Rav’s opinion that <i>ne’ila</i> is an added prayer.

### Part 10
<b>This is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i></b> They all agree that <i>ne’ila</i> is an added prayer but disagree about the obligation to confess at the <i>ne’ila</i> prayer, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: At the end of <b>Yom Kippur, as darkness</b> falls, <b>one prays seven</b> blessings of the <i>Amida</i> <b>and confesses and ends with the confession;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: He prays seven</b> blessings of the <i>Amida</i>, <b>and if he wishes to end</b> his prayer <b>with a confession, he ends</b> it in this way. The Gemara says: If so, <b>this is a refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel,</b> since all agree that <i>ne’ila</i> is a complete prayer. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a</b> conclusive <b>refutation.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara relates: <b>Ulla bar Rav went down</b> to lead the <i>ne’ila</i> prayer <b>before Rava,</b> who was in the synagogue. <b>He opened</b> the prayer <b>with: You have chosen us, and he concluded with: What are we, what are our lives? And</b> Rava <b>praised him. Rav Huna, son of Rav Natan, said: And an individual says it after his</b> <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer.</b> The individual says the confession after his <i>Amida</i> prayer, not within the <i>Amida</i> prayer as the prayer leader does.

### Part 12
<b>Rav said: The <i>ne’ila</i> prayer exempts</b> one from <b>the evening prayer.</b> Since one recited an added prayer after the afternoon prayer, when darkness fell, it serves as the evening prayer. The Gemara comments that <b>Rav</b> conforms <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> above, <b>as he said: It is an added prayer, and since he has prayed it he needs no further</b> prayer in the evening.

### Part 13
The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>And did Rav</b> actually <b>say this? Didn’t Rav say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the statement of the one who says</b> that the <b>evening prayer is optional?</b> If it is optional, why would Rav use the term exempt?One is exempt even if he does not pray the closing prayer. The Gemara answers: <b>He said this in accordance with the statement of the one who says</b> that the evening prayer <b>is mandatory.</b> Even according to the opinion that maintains that the evening prayer is mandatory, if one recites <i>ne’ila</i>, he has fulfilled his obligation to recite the evening prayer.

### Part 14
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from that which we learned in a <i>baraita</i>: During the <b>evening</b> after <b>Yom Kippur, one prays seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> <b>and confesses;</b> during the <b>morning prayer,</b> one prays <b>seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> <b>and confesses;</b> during the <b>additional prayer,</b> one prays <b>seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> <b>and confesses; during <i>ne’ila</i> one prays seven</b> blessings in the <i>Amida</i> <b>and confesses;</b> and during <b>the evening prayer,</b> one prays <b>seven</b> blessings <b>in</b> an <b>abridged</b> version of the <b>eighteen</b> blessings of the weekday <i>Amida</i> prayer. One recites the first three blessings, the final three, and a middle blessing that includes an abbreviated form of the other weekday blessings. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Gamliel</b> says <b>in the name of his ancestors: One prays</b> the <b>full eighteen</b> blessings of the weekday <i>Amida</i> prayer as usual,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC