
### Part 1
<b>except for: “You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” (Exodus 20:6), about which the Torah states: “For God will not absolve him who takes His name in vain” (Exodus 20:6). The Gemara answers: It is not that this is the only negative mitzva that is not a minor transgression; rather, it is: <b>“You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” <b>and any</b> prohibition <b>similar to it,</b> meaning all severe prohibitions that carry punishment by a court.

### Part 2
The Gemara proposes: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from that which was taught: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> For <b>any</b> sin <b>from “You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” <b>and below,</b> i.e., prohibitions less severe than that, <b>repentance atones.</b> For any sin <b>from “You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” <b>and above, repentance suspends</b> punishment <b>and Yom Kippur atones.</b> The Gemara rejects this: This does not constitute proof either, since one could say that it is referring to: <b>“You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” <b>and anything similar to it.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from a different source that was taught: <b>Since it was stated at Horeb</b> with regard to <b>repentance: “Absolve,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> the transgression of: <b>“You shall not take</b> the name of the Lord, your God, in vain” is included <b>among them;</b> therefore, <b>the verses states: “Will not absolve”</b> (Exodus 20:6). One <b>might</b> have thought this is <b>also</b> true <b>for those who are liable</b> for violating <b>all other prohibitions;</b> therefore, <b>the verse states: “His name.”</b> God <b>does not absolve the one</b> who disrespects <b>His name, but He absolves those who are liable</b> for violating <b>all other prohibitions</b> and repent. This is proof that those who violate all other prohibitions are not comparable to one who violates: “You shall not take the name of the Lord, your God, in vain.”

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>This is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>For what does repentance atone?</b> It atones <b>for a positive</b> mitzva <b>and for a negative</b> mitzva that can be rectified <b>through a positive mitzva. And for what does repentance suspend</b> punishment <b>and Yom Kippur atone?</b> It is <b>for</b> sins punishable by <b><i>karet</i>, and for</b> sins punishable by the <b>death</b> penalty from the earthly <b>court, and for full-fledged negative</b> mitzvot. This indicates that there is a <i>tanna</i> who distinguishes between prohibitions that warrant lashes and those that do not. Therefore, there is a tannaitic dispute as to whether or not prohibitions that warrant punishment by the courts can be rectified by repentance alone.

### Part 5
§ Since the Gemara cited this <i>baraita</i>, it now clarifies part of it. <b>The Master said: Since it was stated at Horeb</b> with regard to repentance: <b>“Absolve.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this concept that repentance was mentioned there? The Gemara answers: <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: It is not possible to say “absolve”</b> (Exodus 34:7) about all transgressions, since <b>“will not absolve” is already stated</b> (Exodus 34:7). <b>And it is not possible to say “will not absolve,”</b> since <b>“absolve” is already stated. How so?</b> The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>absolves those who repent and does not absolve those who do not repent.</b> Therefore, both “repentance” and “absolve” were mentioned at Horeb.

### Part 6
Furthermore, with regard to the topic of repentance, <b>Rabbi Matya ben Ḥarash asked Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya</b> when Rabbi Elazar was <b>in Rome: Have you heard</b> the teaching that there are <b>four distinctions</b> in the process <b>of atonement that Rabbi Yishmael would derive? He said to him: They are</b> not four but <b>three</b> distinctions, <b>and repentance</b> is necessary <b>with each one.</b>

### Part 7
These are the categories: If <b>one violates a positive</b> mitzva <b>and repents, he is forgiven even before he moves</b> from his place, i.e. immediately, <b>as it is stated: “Return, you backsliding children,</b> I will heal your backsliding” (Jeremiah 3:22), implying that when one repents he is immediately forgiven.If <b>one violates a prohibition and repents, repentance suspends</b> his punishment <b>and Yom Kippur atones</b> for his sin, <b>as it is stated: “For on this day shall atonement be made for you,</b> to purify you <b>from all your sins”</b> (Leviticus 16:30). If <b>one commits</b> a transgression that warrants <b><i>karet</i> or</b> a sin punishable by <b>death</b> from the earthly <b>court and</b> then <b>repents, repentance and Yom Kippur suspend</b> his punishment, <b>and suffering absolves</b> and completes the atonement, <b>as it is stated: “Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with strokes”</b> (Psalms 89:33).

### Part 8
<b>But</b> in the case of <b>one who has</b> caused <b>desecration of</b> God’s <b>name, his repentance has no power to suspend</b> punishment, <b>nor does Yom Kippur</b> have power <b>to atone</b> for his sin, <b>nor does suffering</b> alone have power <b>to absolve</b> him. <b>Rather, all these suspend</b> punishment, <b>and death absolves</b> him, <b>as it is stated: “And the Lord of Hosts revealed Himself to my ears: This iniquity shall not be atoned for until you die”</b> (Isaiah 22:14).

### Part 9
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> that cause <b>desecration of</b> God’s <b>name? Rav said: For example,</b> in the case of someone like <b>me,</b> since I am an important public figure, <b>if I take meat from a butcher and do not give him money immediately,</b> people are likely to think that I did not mean to pay at all. They would consider me a thief and learn from my behavior that one is permitted to steal. <b>Abaye said: They taught this</b> statement of Rav <b>only in a place where they do not ask</b> for the money, where it is not customary for the butcher himself to come and collect payment from the customer. When the customer does not pay immediately, people may suspect him of theft. <b>But in a place where they ask</b> for the money from the customer some time later, <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with</b> doing this. Since everyone understands he is buying on credit, he is not desecrating God’s name.

### Part 10
<b>Ravina said:</b> My native <b>city</b> of <b>Meḥasya is a place where they ask</b> for and collect the money. The Gemara relates that <b>when Abaye bought meat from two partners, he would give the money to this one and the money to this one,</b> so that each would know that he had paid. <b>And afterward he would bring them together and perform the calculation</b> to see whether he was receive his change.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> What is an example of desecration of God’s name? <b>For example,</b> someone like <b>me, if</b> I would <b>walk four cubits without Torah and without phylacteries,</b> and the onlookers did not know that it is only on account of my body’s weakness, that would be a desecration of God’s name. <b>Yitzḥak from the school of Rabbi Yannai said: Any</b> case when <b>one’s friends are embarrassed on account of his reputation,</b> meaning his friends are embarrassed due to things they hear about him, <b>this is a desecration of</b> God’s <b>name. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> One creates a profanation of God’s name, <b>for example, when people say</b> about him: <b>May his Master forgive so-and-so</b> for the sins he has done.

### Part 12
<b>Abaye said: As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is stated: <b>“And you shall love the Lord your God”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:5), which means <b>that you shall make the name of Heaven beloved.</b> How should one do so? One should do so <b>in that he</b> should <b>read</b> Torah, <b>and learn</b> Mishna, <b>and serve Torah scholars, and he should be pleasant with people in his business transactions. What do people say about</b> such a person? <b>Fortunate is his father who taught him Torah, fortunate is his teacher who taught him Torah, woe to the people who have not studied Torah. So-and-so, who taught him Torah, see how pleasant are his ways, how proper are his deeds. The verse states about him</b> and others like him: <b>“You are My servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified”</b> (Isaiah 49:3).

### Part 13
<b>But one who reads</b> Torah, <b>and learns</b> Mishna, <b>and serves Torah scholars, but his business practices are not</b> done <b>faithfully, and he does not speak pleasantly with other people, what do people say about him? Woe to so-and-so who studied Torah, woe to his father who taught him Torah, woe to his teacher who taught him Torah. So-and-so who studied Torah, see how destructive are his deeds, and how ugly are his ways. About him</b> and others like him <b>the verse states</b> that the gentiles will say: <b>“Men said of them: These are the people of the Lord, yet they had to leave His land”</b> (Ezekiel 36:20). Through their sins and subsequent exile, such people have desecrated the name of God.

### Part 14
§ Further on the topic of repentance, <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina said: Great is repentance, as it brings healing to the world, as it is stated: “I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely”</b> (Hosea 14:5), which teaches that repentance from sin brings healing.

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina raised a contradiction</b> between two verses. <b>It is written</b> in one verse: <b>“Return, you backsliding children”</b> (Jeremiah 3:22), implying that <b>initially</b> when you sinned, it was only because <b>you were backsliding,</b> i.e., rebelling. It was merely an act of immaturity and foolishness and could be ignored as if it had never happened. <b>But it is written: “I will heal your backsliding”</b> (Jeremiah 3:22), implying that He will heal the sin from this point onward, and that they are still sinners. He resolved this contradiction, explaining that this is <b>not difficult: Here,</b> where everything is forgiven as if the Jewish people never sinned, it is referring to repentance <b>out of love; there,</b> where the sin is still remembered despite the forgiveness and repentance, it is referring to repentance <b>out of fear.</b>

### Part 16
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yehuda raised a contradiction</b> between two verses. <b>It is written: “Return, you backsliding children I will heal your backsliding”</b> (Jeremiah 3:22), implying that anyone can achieve healing, which is dependent only on repentance. But it also states: “Return, O backsliding children, says the Lord, <b>for I am a lord to you, and I will take you one from a city, and two from a family”</b> (Jeremiah 3:14), implying that repentance is available only to certain individuals. He resolved the contradiction and explained that this is <b>not difficult: Here,</b> it is referring to repentance <b>out of love or fear,</b> which few people achieve; <b>there,</b> it referring is repentance <b>through suffering,</b> as everyone has thoughts of repentance when they suffer. <b>Rabbi Levi said: Great is repentance, as it reaches the heavenly throne, as it is stated: “Return, Israel, to the Lord your God”</b> (Hosea 14:2). This implies that repentance literally reaches to God.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC