
### Part 1
<b>but to preserve a life,</b> e.g., if the priest can testify to the innocence of one who is sentenced to death, one removes him <b>even from on top of My altar,</b> even while he is sacrificing an offering. <b>Just as this</b> priest, about whom <b>there is uncertainty whether there is substance to his words</b> of testimony <b>or whether there is no substance to his words,</b> is taken from the Temple service in order to save a life, <b>and</b> Temple <b>service overrides Shabbat,</b> so too, <b><i>a fortiori</i>, saving a life overrides Shabbat. Rabbi Elazar</b> ben Azarya <b>answered and said: Just as</b> the mitzva <b>of circumcision, which</b> rectifies only <b>one of the 248 limbs of the body, overrides Shabbat,</b> so too, <b><i>a fortiori</i>,</b> saving <b>one’s whole body,</b> which is entirely involved in mitzvot, <b>overrides Shabbat.</b>

### Part 2
Other <i>tanna’im</i> debated this same issue. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says</b> that <b>it</b> is stated: “But <b>keep my <i>Shabbatot</i>”</b> (Exodus 31:13). One <b>might</b> have thought that this applies <b>to everyone</b> in all circumstances; therefore, <b>the verse states “but,”</b> a term that restricts and <b>qualifies.</b> It implies that there are circumstances where one must keep Shabbat and circumstances where one must desecrate it, i.e., to save a life. <b>Rabbi Yonatan ben Yosef says</b> that <b>it</b> is stated: <b>“For it is sacred to you”</b> (Exodus 31:14). This implies that Shabbat <b>is given into your hands, and you are not given to it</b> to die on account of Shabbat.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Menasya said:</b> It is stated: <b>“And the children of Israel shall keep Shabbat,</b> to observe Shabbat” (Exodus 31:16).<b>The Torah said: Desecrate one Shabbat on his behalf so he will observe many <i>Shabbatot</i>. Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: If I would</b> have been <b>there</b> among those Sages who debated this question, <b>I would have said</b> that <b>my proof is preferable to theirs,</b> as it states: “You shall keep My statutes and My ordinances, which a person shall do <b>and live by them”</b> (Leviticus 18:5), <b>and not that he</b> should <b>die by them.</b> In all circumstances, one must take care not to die as a result of fulfilling the mitzvot.

### Part 4
<b>Rava</b> commented on this: <b>All of these</b> arguments <b>have refutations except for</b> that <b>of Shmuel, which has no refutation.</b> The Gemara explains Rava’s claim: The proof brought <b>by Rabbi Yishmael</b> from the thief who breaks in could <b>perhaps</b> be refuted based on the principle <b>of Rava,</b> as <b>Rava said: What is the reason</b> for the <i>halakha</i> <b>about</b> the thief who <b>breaks in?</b> There is <b>a presumption</b> that while <b>a person</b> is being robbed he <b>does not restrain himself with respect to his money. And this</b> thief <b>knows that</b> the homeowner <b>will rise to oppose him</b> and <b>said</b> to himself from the start: <b>If he rises against me, I will kill him. And the Torah states:</b> If a person <b>comes to kill you, rise to kill him first. We found</b> a source for saving a life that is in <b>certain</b> danger, but <b>from where do we</b> derive that even in a case where there is <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether a life is in danger one may desecrate Shabbat? Consequently, Rabbi Yishmael’s argument is refuted.

### Part 5
The proof <b>of Rabbi Akiva</b> can <b>also</b> be refuted. He brought the case of removing a priest from altar service in order to have him testify on another’s behalf, since his testimony might acquit the accused and save him from execution. But <b>perhaps</b> that <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Abaye, as Abaye said:</b> If the accused says he has a witness in his favor, <b>we send a pair of rabbis</b> on <b>his</b> behalf <b>to determine if his words</b> of testimony have <b>substance.</b> These rabbis would first check that the testimony of the priest is substantive before removing him from the altar. If so, <b>we</b> have <b>found</b> that one interrupts the Temple service to save a life from <b>certain</b> danger, but <b>from where do we</b> derive that one interrupts the Temple service when the likelihood of saving life is <b>uncertain?</b>

### Part 6
<b>And for all</b> the other arguments as well, <b>we</b> have <b>found</b> proofs for saving a life from <b>certain</b> danger. But for cases of uncertainty, <b>from where do we</b> derive this? For this reason, all the arguments are refuted. However, the proof <b>that Shmuel</b> brought from the verse: “And live by them,” which teaches that one should not even put a life in possible danger to observe mitzvot, <b>there is certainly no refutation. Ravina said, and some say it was Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak</b> who said with regard to this superior proof of Shmuel: <b>One spicy pepper is better than a whole basket of squash,</b> since its flavor is more powerful than all the others.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A sin-offering,</b> which atones for unwitting performance of transgressions punishable by <i>karet</i>, and <b>a definite guilt-offering,</b> which is brought for robbery and misuse of consecrated items, <b>atone</b> for those sins. <b>Death and Yom Kippur atone</b> for sins when accompanied <b>by repentance. Repentance</b> itself <b>atones for minor transgressions, for</b> both <b>positive</b> mitzvot <b>and negative</b> mitzvot. <b>And</b> repentance places punishment <b>for severe</b> transgressions <b>in abeyance until Yom Kippur comes and</b> completely <b>atones</b> for the transgression. With regard to <b>one who says: I will sin and</b> then <b>I will repent, I will sin and I will repent,</b> Heaven <b>does not provide him the opportunity to repent,</b> and he will remain a sinner all his days. With regard to one who says: <b>I will sin and Yom Kippur</b> will <b>atone</b> for my sins, <b>Yom Kippur does not atone</b> for his sins. Furthermore, for <b>transgressions between a person and God, Yom Kippur atones;</b> however, for <b>transgressions between a person and another, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases</b> the <b>other</b> person.

### Part 8
Similarly, <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya taught</b> that point from the verse: <b>“From all your sins you shall be cleansed before the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 16:30). For <b>transgressions between a person and God, Yom Kippur atones;</b> however, for <b>transgressions between a person and another, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases</b> the <b>other</b> person. In conclusion, <b>Rabbi Akiva said: How fortunate are you, Israel; before Whom are you purified, and Who purifies you?</b> It is <b>your Father in Heaven, as it is stated: “And I will sprinkle purifying water upon you, and you shall be purified”</b> (Ezekiel 36:25). <b>And it says: “The ritual bath of Israel is God”</b> (Jeremiah 17:13). <b>Just as a ritual bath purifies the impure, so too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, purifies Israel.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna says that a definite guilt-offering atones for sins. The Gemara analyzes this: With regard to <b>a definite guilt-offering, yes,</b> it does atone for sins. This implies that <b>an uncertain guilt-offering</b> does <b>not.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t atonement written with regard to it?</b> Why, then, doesn’t it atone? The Gemara answers: <b>Those,</b> the sin-offerings and definite guilt-offerings, <b>facilitate complete atonement,</b> but <b>an uncertain guilt-offering does not facilitate complete atonement.</b> Instead, this offering provides temporary atonement for an individual, to protect him from punishment until he becomes aware of his sin and brings the appropriate offering.

### Part 10
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is this distinction: <b>Nothing else facilitates the atonement of those</b> sin-offerings and definite guilt-offerings, whereas something <b>else does facilitate the atonement of the uncertain guilt-offering, as we learned</b> in a mishna: If <b>Yom Kippur passed, those who are obligated to bring sin-offerings and definite guilt-offerings are</b> still <b>obligated</b> to bring their offerings; however, those obligated to bring <b>uncertain guilt-offerings are exempt</b> because Yom Kippur atoned for them.

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna that <b>death and Yom Kippur atone</b> for sins when accompanied <b>by repentance.</b> The Gemara analyzes this: <b>With repentance, yes,</b> they do atone for sins; <b>but by themselves,</b> without repentance, <b>they do not. Let us say</b> that the mishna is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that <b>for all transgressions in the Torah, whether one repented or did not repent, Yom Kippur atones,</b> with the <b>exception</b> of <b>rejecting the yoke</b> of Torah and mitzvot; and denying the Holy One, Blessed be He; <b>and interpreting the Torah falsely; and violating the covenant of the flesh,</b> i.e., circumcision. In these cases, <b>if one repents Yom Kippur atones</b> for his sin, <b>and if one does not repent Yom Kippur does not atone</b> for his sin.

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this: This is no proof; <b>even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, the mishna can be understood as follows: <b>Repentance</b> still <b>requires Yom Kippur</b> in order to complete the atonement, whereas <b>Yom Kippur does not require repentance</b> but atones even without it.

### Part 13
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>Repentance</b> itself <b>atones for minor transgressions, for</b> both <b>a positive</b> mitzva <b>and for a negative</b> mitzva. The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>Now</b> that it was stated that repentance <b>atones for a negative</b> mitzva, which is severe and warrants lashes, is it <b>necessary</b> to also teach that it atones <b>for a positive</b> mitzva, which is more lenient? <b>Rav Yehuda said: This is</b> what <b>it said,</b> i.e., the mishna should be understood as follows: Repentance atones <b>for a positive</b> mitzva <b>and for a negative</b> mitzva whose violation <b>can be rectified by a positive</b> mitzva. One is not punished by a court for violating a prohibition for which the Torah prescribes a positive act as a corrective measure and which thereby has the same <i>halakha</i> as a positive mitzva.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> does repentance <b>not</b> atone <b>for a full-fledged negative</b> mitzva? The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a separate source: It was taught that <b>these are minor</b> transgressions: <b>A positive</b> mitzva <b>and a negative</b> mitzva,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC