
### Part 1
<b>retroactively that the bill of divorce of this</b> second woman <b>is not a</b> valid <b>bill of divorce,</b> since the first wife died. In that case, it turns out retroactively that <b>he performed</b> part of <b>the service with two houses,</b> married to two wives. <b>Rather,</b> it is a case <b>where</b> the High Priest <b>said to</b> the second wife: <b>This is your bill of divorce on condition that your counterpart dies.</b> The Gemara asks: In this case, too, <b>perhaps her counterpart</b> will <b>die and the bill of divorce of this</b> second woman <b>is</b> a valid <b>bill of divorce, and</b> he will <b>remain without a house</b> at all.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> this is a case where <b>he divorces both of them</b> provisionally, with a different stipulation to each woman. <b>To one, he says: This is your bill of divorce on condition that your counterpart will not die. And to</b> the other <b>one, he says: This is your bill of divorce on condition that you will not enter the synagogue</b> on Yom Kippur, cognizant of the fact that she can easily fulfill that condition and thereby effect her divorce. The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps her counterpart</b> will <b>not die,</b> fulfilling the condition and effecting the divorce of one wife; <b>and she will not enter the synagogue,</b> fulfilling the condition and effecting the divorce of the other wife. In that case <b>the bill of divorce of both</b> women <b>is a</b> valid <b>bill of divorce and he remains without a wife.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> it is a case where <b>to one</b> of the women, the High Priest <b>says: This is your bill of divorce on condition that your counterpart does not die. And to</b> the other <b>one</b> of the women <b>he says: This is your bill of divorce on condition that I will enter the synagogue. If this</b> wife <b>dies, that</b> other <b>one is alive; and if that</b> other one <b>dies, this</b> one <b>is alive. What is there to say</b> in refuting this possibility? <b>Perhaps her counterpart will die in the middle of the service,</b> and it will turn out retroactively that <b>he performed</b> part of <b>the service with two houses,</b> married to two wives. <b>If he sees that she seeks,</b> i.e., she is about <b>to die, he</b> will then <b>preemptively enter the synagogue, rendering the bill of divorce of</b> the dying wife <b>a</b> valid <b>bill of divorce retroactively.</b> He will then be married to only one woman. In that way, a second wife can be designated for the High Priest without him being married to two women on Yom Kippur.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Asi, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Avira, strongly objects to</b> that conclusion: <b>However, if</b> that is <b>so,</b> that from the term: His house, in the singular, one derives one wife and not two, then <b>two widows of a brother who died without a child [<i>yevamot</i>] who come from one house,</b> i.e., they were married to the same man, should <b>not be</b> obligated <b>to</b> marry his brother in <b>levirate marriage.</b> In addressing levirate marriage, the Torah says: “So shall it be done to the man that does not build his brother’s house” (Deuteronomy 25:9). One may derive from this: One house, i.e., wife, and not two. The Gemara responds that when the Torah says: “Then <b>his <i>yevama</i></b> shall go up to the gate” (Deuteronomy 25:7), “and <b>his <i>yevama</i></b> will draw nigh to him” (Deuteronomy 25:9), twice, it comes to <b>include</b> a situation where the deceased had two wives; in that case one of them is required to marry his brother in levirate marriage.

### Part 5
<b>Ravina, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Sherevya, strongly objects to this:</b> It was stated above that a woman betrothed to the High Priest is not considered his house, i.e., his wife. <b>However, if</b> that is <b>so, a betrothed</b> woman whose betrothed passed away should <b>not be</b> obligated <b>to</b> marry his brother in <b>levirate marriage,</b> since the term: House, appears in that context as well. In practice, that is not the <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara answers that the Torah says: “The wife of the dead shall not be married <b>outside</b> to one not of his kin” (Deuteronomy 25:5). The superfluous term: Outside, comes <b>to include the betrothed woman.</b> Although she is technically still outside the family, the brother of the deceased must either marry her in levirate marriage or perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 6
§ Apropos the death of the wife of the High Priest, the Gemara cites an additional <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Sages taught: A High Priest sacrifices</b> offerings when he is an <b>acute mourner,</b> on the day of a relative’s death, but <b>does not eat</b> from those offerings. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: The entire day.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>The entire day?</b> Rava said: This phrase <b>is necessary only to bring him from his house.</b> Not only is it permitted for the High Priest to serve in the Temple when he is an acute mourner, but it is a mitzva to bring him from his house to serve in the Temple for the entire day to help ease his pain.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said to him: Now,</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, we remove</b> the High Priest from the Temple when he is an acute mourner, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a common priest <b>was standing and sacrificing</b> an offering <b>on top of the altar and heard that</b> a relative <b>of his died, he leaves his service</b> in the middle <b>and exits</b> the Temple; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei says: He completes</b> the service and then leaves. Rabbi Yehuda rules stringently in the case of a priest who is an acute mourner sacrificing an offering. Even though the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a common priest, it is reasonable to say that the same is true with regard to a High Priest as well. Rabbi Yehuda says that a High Priest who becomes an acute mourner exits the Temple, <b>and you say we bring</b> the High Priest who is an acute mourner <b>from his house</b> to serve?

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The initial interpretation must be rejected. <b>What</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>The entire day?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC