
### Part 1
<b>Of his own will, he goes to die; and he does not fulfill the will of his household, and he goes empty-handed to his household; and if only his entrance would be like his exit. And when he saw a line of people [<i>ambuha</i>]</b> following <b>after him</b> out of respect for him, <b>he said: “Though his excellency ascends to the heavens, and his head reaches to the clouds, yet he shall perish forever like his own dung; they who have seen him will say: Where is he?”</b> (Job 20:6–7). This teaches that when one achieves power, it can lead to his downfall. <b>When they would carry Rav Zutra on their shoulders during the Shabbat of the Festival</b> when he taught, <b>he would recite</b> the following to avoid becoming arrogant: <b>“For power is not forever, and does the crown endure for all generations?”</b> (Proverbs 27:24).

### Part 2
§ It was further taught: <b>“It is not good to respect the person of the wicked”</b> (Proverbs 18:5), meaning, <b>it is not good for wicked people when they are respected in this world</b> and are not punished their sins. For example, <b>it</b> was <b>not good for Ahab to be respected in this world, as it is stated: “Because he humbled himself before Me, I will not bring the evil in his days”</b> (I Kings 21:29), and Ahab thereby lost his share in the World-to-Come.

### Part 3
The opposite is also true. The complete verse states: “It is not good to respect the person of the wicked, <b>to turn aside the righteous in judgment”</b> (Proverbs 18:5), meaning: <b>It is good for the righteous when they are not respected in this world</b> and are punished in this world for their sins. For example, <b>it</b> was <b>good for Moses that he was not respected in this world, as it is stated: “Because you did not believe in Me, to sanctify Me”</b> (Numbers 20:12). The Gemara analyzes this: <b>Had you believed in Me, your time still would not have come to depart the world.</b>

### Part 4
They said: <b>Fortunate are the righteous</b> because <b>not only do they</b> accumulate <b>merit</b> for themselves, <b>but they</b> accumulate <b>merit for their children and their children’s children until the end of all generations; as there were several sons of Aaron who</b> essentially <b>deserved to be burned like Nadav and Avihu, as it is stated:</b> “The sons of Aaron <b>who were left”</b> (Leviticus 10:16), implying that others were left as well although they deserved to be burned with their brothers. <b>But the merit of their father protected them,</b> and they and their descendants were priests for all time.

### Part 5
On the other hand: <b>Woe to the wicked,</b> as <b>not only do they render themselves liable, but they also render their children and children’s children liable until the end of all generations.</b> For example, <b>Canaan had many children</b> who <b>deserved to be ordained</b> as rabbis and instructors of the public due to their great stature in Torah study, <b>like Tavi, the servant of Rabban Gamliel,</b> who was famous for his wisdom; <b>but their father’s liability caused them</b> to remain as slaves.

### Part 6
Furthermore: <b>Whoever</b> accumulates <b>merit for the public will not have sin come to his hand,</b> and God protects him from failing; <b>but whoever causes the public to sin has almost no ability to repent.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>whoever</b> accumulates <b>merit for the public will not have sin come to his hand?</b> It is <b>so that he will not be in Gehenna while his students are in the Garden of Eden, as it is stated: “For You will not abandon my soul to the nether-world; neither will You suffer Your godly one to see the pit”</b> (Psalms 16:10). On the other hand, <b>whoever causes the public to sin has almost no ability to repent,</b> so that <b>he will not be in the Garden of Eden while his students are in Gehenna, as it is stated: “A man who is laden with the blood of any person shall hasten his steps to the pit; none will support him”</b> (Proverbs 28:17). Since he oppressed others and caused them to sin, he shall have no escape.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara returns to interpreting the mishna. It states there that <b>one who says: I will sin and I will repent, I will sin and I will repent,</b> is not given the opportunity to repent.The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the mishna <b>to say twice: I will sin and I will repent, I will sin and repent?</b> The Gemara explains that this is <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rav Huna</b> said that <b>Rav said,</b> as <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said: Once a person commits a transgression and repeats it, it becomes permitted to him.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>Can it enter your mind that it becomes permitted to him? Rather,</b> say that <b>it becomes to him as</b> though it were <b>permitted.</b> Consequently, the sinner who repeats his sin has difficulty abandoning his sin, and the repetition of his sin is reflected in the repetition of the phrase.

### Part 8
It is stated in the mishna that if one says: <b>I will sin and Yom Kippur</b> will <b>atone</b> for my sins, <b>Yom Kippur does not atone</b> for his sins. The Gemara comments: <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Yom Kippur atones for all transgressions of the Torah, whether one repented or did not repent.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>it is different</b> when it is <b>on the basis</b> of being permitted to sin. Even Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi agrees that Yom Kippur does not atone for the transgressions one commits only because he knows that Yom Kippur will atone for them.

### Part 9
§ It was taught in the mishna: Yom Kippur atones for <b>sins committed against God</b> but does not atone for sins committed against another person. <b>Rav Yosef bar Ḥavu raised a contradiction before Rabbi Abbahu:</b> The mishna states that <b>Yom Kippur does not atone for sins committed against a fellow person, but isn’t it written: “If one man sin against another, God [<i>Elohim</i>] shall judge him [<i>ufilelo</i>]”</b> (I Samuel 2:25). The word <i>ufilelo</i>, which may also refer to prayer, implies that if he prays, God will grant the sinner forgiveness. He answered him: <b>Who is <i>Elohim</i></b> mentioned in the verse? It is referring to <b>a judge [<i>elohim</i>]</b> and not to God, and the word <i>ufilelo</i> in the verse indicates judgment. Atonement occurs only after justice has been done toward the injured party by means of a court ruling.

### Part 10
Rav Yosef bar Ḥavu said to him: <b>If so, say</b> the following with regard to <b>the latter clause</b> of the verse: <b>“But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat [<i>yitpallel</i>] for him?”</b> (I Samuel 2:25). This is difficult, since it has been established that the root <i>pll</i> is interpreted in this verse as indicating judgment, and therefore the latter clause of the verse implies that if one sins toward God there is no one to judge him. Rabbi Abbahu answered him: <b>This is</b> what the verse <b>is saying: If one man sins against another, God [<i>Elohim</i>] shall forgive him [<i>ufilelo</i>];</b> if the sinner appeases the person against whom he has sinned, he will be forgiven. <b>But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat [<i>yitpallel</i>] for him? Repentance and good deeds.</b> The root <i>pll</i> is to be interpreted as indicating forgiveness rather than judgment.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: One who angers his friend, even</b> only <b>verbally, must appease him,as it is stated: “My son, if you have become a guarantor for your neighbor, if you have struck your hands for a stranger, you are snared by the words of your mouth…Do this now, my son, and deliver yourself, seeing you have come into the hand of your neighbor. Go, humble yourself [<i>hitrapes</i>] and urge [<i>rehav</i>] your neighbor”</b> (Proverbs 6:1–3). This should be understood as follows: <b>If you have money</b> that you owe him, <b>open the palm of [<i>hater pisat</i>]</b> your <b>hand to</b> your neighbor and pay the money that you owe; <b>and if not,</b> if you have sinned against him verbally, <b>increase [<i>harbe</i>] friends for him,</b> i.e., send many people as your messengers to ask him for forgiveness.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: And one must appease the</b> one he has insulted <b>with three rows of three people, as it is stated: “He comes [<i>yashor</i>] before men, and says: I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not”</b> (Job 33:27). Rav Ḥisda interprets the word <i>yashor</i> as related to the word <i>shura</i>, row. The verse mentions sin three times: I have sinned, and perverted, and it profited me not. This implies that one should make three rows before the person from whom he is asking forgiveness.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Anyone who asks forgiveness of his friend should not ask more than three times, as it is stated: “Please, please forgive</b> the transgression of your brothers and their sin, for they did evil to you. <b>And now, please</b> forgive” (Genesis 50:17). The verse uses the word please three times, which shows that one need not ask more than three times, after which the insulted friend must be appeased and forgive. <b>And if</b> the insulted friend <b>dies</b> before he can be appeased, <b>one brings ten people, and stands them at the grave</b> of the insulted friend, <b>and says</b> in front of them: <b>I have sinned against the Lord, the God of Israel, and against so-and-so whom I wounded.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya</b> insulted <b>Rabbi Abba,</b> causing the latter to <b>have a complaint against him.</b> Rabbi Yirmeya <b>went and sat at the threshold</b> of <b>Rabbi Abba’s</b> house to beg him for forgiveness. <b>When</b> Rabbi Abba’s <b>maid poured out the</b> dirty <b>water</b> from the house, <b>the stream of water landed on</b> Rabbi Yirmeya’s <b>head. He said</b> about himself: <b>They have made me into a trash heap,</b> as they are pouring dirty water on me. <b>He recited</b> this verse <b>about himself: “Who lifts up the needy out of the trash heap”</b> (Psalms 113:7). <b>Rabbi Abba heard</b> what happened <b>and went out to greet him.</b> Rabbi Abba <b>said to him: Now I must go out to appease you</b> for this insult, <b>as it is written: “Go, humble yourself [<i>hitrapes</i>] and urge your neighbor”</b> (Proverbs 6:3).

### Part 15
It is related that <b>when Rabbi Zeira had a complaint against a person</b> who insulted him, <b>he would</b> pace <b>back and forth before him and present himself, so that</b> the person <b>could come and appease him.</b> Rabbi Zeira made himself available so that it would be easy for the other person to apologize to him.

### Part 16
It is further related that <b>Rav had a complaint against a certain butcher</b> who insulted him.<b>The butcher did not come before him</b> to apologize. <b>On Yom Kippur eve,</b> Rav <b>said: I will go</b> and <b>appease him. He met</b> his student <b>Rav Huna,</b> who <b>said to him: Where is my Master going? He said to him:</b> I am going <b>to appease so-and-so.</b> Rav Huna called Rav by his name and <b>said: Abba is going to kill a person,</b> for surely that person’s end will not be good. Rav <b>went and stood by him.</b> He found the butcher <b>sitting and splitting the head</b> of an animal. The butcher <b>raised his eyes and saw him. He said</b> to him: <b>Are you Abba? Go, I have nothing</b> to say <b>to you. While he was splitting the head, one of the bones</b> of the head <b>flew out and struck him in the throat and killed him,</b> thereby fulfilling Rav Huna’s prediction.

### Part 17
The Gemara further relates: <b>Rav was reciting the</b> Torah <b>portion before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC