
### Part 1
<b>from the scent of water it will blossom and put forth branches like a plant”</b> (Job 14:8–9). If the figurative trunk of one’s family is drying up through lack of Torah, he should plant himself in a place of water, i.e., a family of scholars, water being a metaphor for Torah. This will ensure that his children will blossom into Torah scholars.

### Part 2
§ It was taught in the mishna: The people escort the High Priest to his house. <b>And he would make a feast for his loved ones. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There was an incident involving one High Priest who exited the Holy Temple and everyone followed him. When they saw Shemaya and Avtalyon,</b> the heads of the Sanhedrin, walking along, in deference to them <b>they left</b> the High Priest <b>by himself and walked after Shemaya and Avtalyon.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Eventually, Shemaya and Avtalyon came to take leave of the High Priest</b> before returning to their homes. Envious of the attention they received, <b>he</b> angrily <b>said to them: Let the descendants of</b> the gentile <b>nations come in peace.</b> Shemaya and Avtalyon descended from converts, and he scornfully drew attention to that fact. <b>They said to him: Let the descendants of the</b> gentile <b>nations come in peace, who perform the acts of Aaron,</b> who loved and pursued peace; <b>and let not a descendant of Aaron come in peace, who does not perform the acts of Aaron</b> and who speaks condescendingly to descendants of converts.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Throughout the year <b>the High Priest serves in eight garments, and the common priest</b> serves <b>in four: In a tunic and trousers and a mitre and a belt. The High Priest adds</b> another four garments <b>beyond</b> those worn by the common priest: <b>A breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a frontplate.</b> When dressed <b>in these</b> eight garments, the High Priest may <b>be consulted for</b> the decision of the <b><i>Urim VeTummim</i>. And he may be consulted</b> for the decision of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i> <b>only on behalf of the king, or on behalf of the president of the court, or on behalf of one whom the community needs.</b> Individual inquiries are not posed to the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to those <b>items</b> of the priestly vestments about which <b>it is stated</b> they must be made with <b>linen [<i>shesh</i>], their threads</b> are spun <b>six-fold,</b> as suggested by the use of the term <i>shesh</i>, which also means six. When the Torah states that certain items are <b>twined,</b> it means their threads are spun <b>eight</b>-<b>fold.</b>Threads used to weave the <b>robe</b> were spun from <b>twelve</b> strands. The threads of the <b>curtain</b> were spun from <b>twenty-four</b> strands. The threads used to weave the <b>breastplate and ephod</b> were spun from <b>twenty-eight</b> strands.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: That <b>the threads</b> made from <i>shesh</i> are spun <b>six-fold, from where do we</b> derive this? <b>The verse states: “And they made the tunics of linen</b> [<b><i>shesh</i></b>] of woven work for Aaron and for his sons. <b>And the mitre of linen, and the adorning mitres of linen, and the linen [<i>bad</i>] trousers of twined linen”</b> (Exodus 39:27–28). <b>Five mentions</b> of the word linen are <b>written;</b> four times as “<i>shesh</i>” and an additional instance of “<i>bad</i>,” both meaning linen. <b>One</b> mention is stated <b>for that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>itself,</b> to teach <b>that they should be</b> made of <b>linen. And one</b> mention is written to teach <b>that the threads should be</b> spun <b>six-fold,</b> <i>shesh</i> being interpreted as six. <b>And one</b> mention teaches that the six strands <b>should be spun together</b> into one. <b>And one</b> mention teaches that this also applies <b>to the other garments,</b> even though the term <b><i>shesh</i> is not stated</b> with regard to them. <b>And one</b> mention teaches that this requirement is <b>indispensable</b> and that garments not made this way are invalid.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> may it <b>be inferred that this</b> term <b><i>shesh</i></b> means <b>linen? Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: As the verse</b> also <b>states: “<i>Bad</i>,”</b> and uses it interchangeably with <i>shesh</i>. And <i>bad</i> refers to <b>something which sprouts from the ground stalk by stalk [<i>bad bad</i>],</b> each one by itself. This is a fitting description of flax, the plant used to produce linen, as opposed to other plants, such as cotton, whose fibers grow meshed together. The Gemara asks: <b>And say</b> that it refers to <b>wool,</b> since when it grows from the animal, each hair grows separately. The Gemara answers: <b>Wool splits,</b> with each hair dividing into several hairs, so it does not fully fit the description of sprouting stalk by stalk. The Gemara asks: But <b>flax also splits</b> into individual hairs. The Gemara answers: <b>Flax,</b> unlike wool, <b>splits</b> only <b>when beaten.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Ravina said:</b> We have a proof for the matter <b>from here:</b> The verse states: <b>“They shall have linen</b> [<b><i>pishtim</i></b>] <b>mitres upon their heads, and linen trousers upon their loins”</b> (Ezekiel 44:18). The term <i>pishtim</i> used in Ezekiel certainly refers to linen; therefore, it is clear that the terms <i>shesh</i> and <i>bad</i>, used in the Torah for the same garments, also refer to linen.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said to him: But before Ezekiel came, who said</b> this <i>halakha</i>? How was it known? Ravina retorted: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> the same question could be asked with regard to <b>that which Rav Ḥisda said</b> concerning the disqualification of an uncircumcised priest from serving in the Temple: <b>This matter we did not learn from the Torah of Moses our teacher,</b> as it is not written explicitly in the Torah; rather, <b>we learned it from the words of Ezekiel ben Buzi,</b> as the verse states: <b>“No foreigner, uncircumcised of heart or uncircumcised of flesh, shall enter into My sanctuary”</b> (Ezekiel 44:9). One could ask here as well: <b>Before Ezekiel came, who said</b> this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rather,</b> perforce, <b>they learned it as a tradition and</b> then <b>Ezekiel came and supported it with a verse. Here, too, they learned it as a tradition and</b> then <b>Ezekiel came and supported it with a verse.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara continues to explain the <i>baraita</i>. That the use of the term <b>twined</b> implies that the thread should be spun from <b>eight</b> strands, <b>from where do we</b> derive this? <b>As it is written: “And they made upon the skirts of the robe pomegranates of sky-blue, and purple, and scarlet, twined”</b> (Exodus 39:24); <b>and derive</b> a verbal analogy from the term <b>“twined”</b> used in this verse and the term <b>“twined” from</b> the verse about <b>the curtain: Just as there,</b> with regard to the curtain, there are <b>twenty-four</b> strands, as will be explained, <b>so too here,</b> there are <b>twenty-four</b> strands in total. And since each pomegranate is made of three colors, sky-blue, purple, and scarlet, it must be <b>that each one of them was</b> spun from <b>eight</b> strands.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges this derivation: <b>Let us derive</b> the number of strands instead <b>from</b> the <b>breastplate and ephod</b> and say: <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the breastplate and ephod, there are <b>twenty-eight</b> strands, <b>so too, here</b> there are <b>twenty-eight</b> strands. The Gemara answers: It is preferable to <b>derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>an item,</b> i.e., the pomegranates, <b>with regard to which</b> the use of <b>gold</b> threads <b>is not stated, from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>an item,</b> i.e., the curtain, <b>with regard to which</b> the use of <b>gold</b> threads <b>is</b> also <b>not stated.</b> This would come <b>to exclude</b> the possibility of deriving them from the <b>breastplate and ephod, with regard to which</b> the use of <b>gold</b> threads <b>is stated.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>On the contrary,</b> it should be preferable to <b>derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of one <b>garment from</b> another <b>garment,</b> i.e., the <i>halakhot</i> of the robe from the <i>halakhot</i> of the breastplate and ephod. This would come <b>to exclude</b> the possibility of deriving them from the <b>curtain, which is a tent,</b> i.e., part of the Temple building, and not a garment. The Gemara accepts that the derivation is flawed.

### Part 12
<b>Rather,</b> the need for thread of eight strands <b>is derived from the belt,</b> which had twenty-four threads in total, <b>and a garment and an item with regard to which</b> the use of <b>gold</b> thread <b>is not stated,</b> i.e., the pomegranates, <b>are derived</b> from <b>a garment and an item with regard to which</b> the use of <b>gold</b> thread <b>is not stated. And an item with no gold,</b> such as the pomegranates and robe, <b>is not derived from an item that has gold in it,</b> such as the breastplate and ephod.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Mari said</b> another reason not to derive the number of strands in a pomegranate from the breastplate and ephod: “Like the work of the ephod <b>you shall make it”</b> (Exodus 28:15) <b>is written</b> with regard to the breastplate to indicate that <b>you shall make it,</b> i.e., the breastplate, like the ephod, which indicates that <b>for this,</b> i.e., the breastplate, you shall use thread of twenty-eight strands, <b>and not for anything else.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> another reason that there could not be twenty-eight strands in a pomegranate: <b>“And you shall make</b> pomegranates of sky-blue, and of purple, and of scarlet” (Exodus 28:33) <b>is written</b> to indicate <b>that all the makings of it must be equal,</b> i.e., that each color thread should be made from the same number of strands. However, if there are twenty-eight strands in total, the three threads, each of a different color, cannot be made with an equal number of strands, as <b>how should we do</b> it? <b>Let us make three</b> colored threads <b>of ten</b> strands <b>each;</b> then <b>they are thirty</b> strands in total, which is too many. <b>Let us make two</b> colored threads <b>of nine</b> strands <b>and one of ten;</b> but <b>the verse states: “And you shall make,”</b> to indicate <b>that all the makings of it must be equal.</b> Perforce, the threads used for the pomegranates and the robe must be derived from an item woven from threads of a number of strands divisible by three, such as the curtain.

### Part 15
The Gemara continues to explain the <i>baraita</i>: That the <b>robe</b> must be woven from threads spun from <b>twelve</b> strands, <b>from where do we</b> derive this? <b>As it is written: “And you shall make the robe of the ephod</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC