
### Part 1
<b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>the frontplate, which has only one mention</b> of God’s name, <b>the Torah said:</b> “It shall <b>be always upon his forehead,”</b> teaching that <b>that he should not be distracted from it,</b> with regard to <b>phylacteries, which have numerous mentions</b> of God’s name in their four passages from the Torah, <b>all the more so</b> one may not be distracted from them.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Shimon, who says</b> that the verse: “It shall be always upon his forehead,” teaches that the frontplate <b>effects acceptance</b> even when it is not on the High Priest’s forehead, <b>isn’t it</b> also <b>written: “On his forehead…and shall gain forgiveness”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> verse <b>comes to establish the place</b> where the High Priest should position the frontplate, not to indicate that it effects acceptance only when it is on his forehead.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yehuda, from where does he</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>to establish</b> the frontplate’s <b>place</b> on the High Priest’s forehead? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it</b> from that which is written: <b>“On his forehead.”</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Shimon, too, let him derive</b> the placement of the frontplate from: <b>“On his forehead.”</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Yes, it is indeed so;</b> that is Rabbi Shimon’s source.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Rather,</b> if so, with regard to the verse: <b>“On his forehead…and shall gain forgiveness,” what</b> does Rabbi Shimon <b>do with</b> that verse? The Gemara responds that Rabbi Shimon could have <b>said to you:</b> The frontplate that is intact and <b>fit for</b> placement on <b>the</b> High Priest’s <b>forehead effects acceptance;</b> that <b>which is not fit for</b> placement on <b>the</b> High Priest’s <b>forehead does not effect acceptance.</b> This comes <b>to exclude</b> a case where <b>the frontplate broke,</b> in <b>which</b> case <b>it does not effect acceptance.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according <b>to Rabbi Yehuda, from where does he</b> derive the ruling that in a case where <b>the frontplate broke</b> it does not effect acceptance? The Gemara responds: <b>He derives it</b> from the fact that the Torah did not say <b>forehead,</b> and instead said <b>his forehead,</b> teaching that it must be fit for the forehead of the High Priest. <b>And Rabbi Shimon does not learn</b> anything from the difference between <b>forehead</b> and <b>his forehead.</b>

### Part 6
§ The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the dispute between <b>these <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon, who disagree with regard to a case of impurity involving the public, <b>is like</b> the dispute between <b>those <i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Both</b> in <b>this</b> case of a High Priest prior to Yom Kippur <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case of a priest prior to burning the red heifer, on <b>all seven</b> days of his sequestering <b>one sprinkles upon him</b> purification water mixed with ashes from <b>all the</b> previous red heifer <b>sin-offerings that were</b> safeguarded <b>there</b> in the Temple. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b> Since these priests may have become impure with impurity imparted by a corpse at any point prior to their sequestering, one sprinkles the water upon them during all seven days, as there is no certainty which are the third and seventh days. <br><b>Rabbi Yosei says: One sprinkles</b> the water <b>upon him only on the third and seventh</b> days, not on all seven, as sprinkling upon him twice is sufficient to purify him. <br><b>Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy</b> High <b>Priest, says:</b> With regard to <b>the priest who burns the heifer, one sprinkles</b> the water <b>upon him all seven</b> days. However, with regard to the <b>High Priest on Yom Kippur, one sprinkles</b> the water <b>upon him only on the third and seventh</b> days.

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What,</b> is it <b>not with regard to this</b> point that <b>they disagree? Rabbi Meir holds:</b> The prohibition against performing the Temple service in a state of <b>impurity is overridden</b> in cases involving <b>the public.</b> Therefore, one sprinkles the water upon the priest all seven days to ensure purification. <b>And Rabbi Yosei holds:</b> The prohibition against performing the Temple service in a state of <b>impurity is permitted</b> in cases involving <b>the public.</b> Therefore, it may be sufficient to sprinkle the water on the third and the seventh days.

### Part 8
This suggestion surprises the Gemara: <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> the opinion of Rabbi Yosei in that manner? <b>If Rabbi Yosei holds</b> that impurity imparted by a corpse <b>is permitted in</b> cases involving <b>the public, why do I</b> need <b>sprinkling at all? Rather,</b> it must be that <b>everyone,</b> i.e., both <i>tanna’im</i>, <b>holds that impurity</b> imparted by a corpse <b>is overridden in</b> cases involving <b>the public,</b> and that is why sprinkling is necessary.

### Part 9
<b>And here</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree with regard to this</b> matter. <b>Rabbi Meir holds: We say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva.</b> Beginning with the moment that an impure person is eligible for immersion, whenever he immerses, even if he delays doing so, he is purified. Nevertheless, it is a mitzva to immerse as soon as one is eligible. It is similarly a mitzva to have the purification waters sprinkled as soon as the priest is eligible. Since there is concern that perhaps the High Priest became impure during the three days prior to his sequestering, there is an obligation to sprinkle him each day beginning with day one, since that might be the third day of his impurity. <b>And Rabbi Yosei holds: We do not say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva,</b> and the same is true with regard to sprinkling. Therefore, sprinkling on the third and seventh days of his sequestering is sufficient, despite their not necessarily being the third and seventh days of his impurity.

### Part 10
<b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Yosei hold</b> that <b>we do not say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva? Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who had a</b> sacred <b>name</b> of God <b>written on his flesh, he</b> may <b>neither bathe, nor smear oil</b> on his flesh, <b>nor stand in a place of filth. If an immersion</b> by means of which he fulfills a <b>mitzva happened</b> to present itself <b>to him, he wraps a reed over</b> God’s name <b>and</b> then <b>descends and immerses,</b> allowing the water to penetrate so that there will be no interposition between him and the water. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Actually, <b>he descends and immerses in his</b> usual <b>manner,</b> and he need not wrap a reed over the name, <b>provided that he does not rub</b> the spot and erase the name.

### Part 11
<b>And we maintain that it is with regard to</b> the issue of whether <b>immersion at the</b> appointed <b>time</b> is <b>a mitzva that they disagree. The first <i>tanna</i> holds: We do not say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva.</b> Therefore, one must wait to immerse until he procures a reed with which to cover God’s name, even if it means delaying the immersion. <b>And Rabbi Yosei holds: We say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva.</b> Therefore, one must not delay the immersion until he procures a reed but must immerse immediately. The dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yosei was not based on whether or not immersion on time is a mitzva. <b>Rather,</b> it must be <b>that everyone</b> agrees that according <b>to these <i>tanna’im</i> we say that immersion at its</b> appointed <b>time is a mitzva.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And here they disagree with regard to this</b> matter. <b>Rabbi Meir holds: We equate sprinkling with immersion;</b> just as immersion at its appointed time is a mitzva, so too, sprinkling at its appointed time is a mitzva. <b>And Rabbi Yosei holds: We do not equate sprinkling with immersion;</b> although immersion at its appointed time is a mitzva, sprinkling at its appointed time is not.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> with regard to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy</b> High <b>Priest,</b> why does he distinguish between sprinkling purification water on the High Priest before Yom Kippur and doing so to the priest before he burns the red heifer? <b>If he equates sprinkling with immersion,</b> then one should sprinkle purification water all seven days <b>even</b> on <b>the</b> High <b>Priest</b> prior to Yom Kippur. <b>If he does not equate sprinkling with immersion,</b> then <b>even</b> on <b>the priest who burns the</b> red <b>heifer</b> one would <b>also not</b> sprinkle purification waters all seven days.

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually, Rabbi Ḥanina, the deputy</b> High <b>Priest, does not equate</b> sprinkling with immersion, and fundamentally, one need not sprinkle purification water all seven days in either case. <b>And</b> with regard to the <b>priest who burns the heifer,</b> the Sages <b>merely</b> established <b>a higher standard.</b> This is one of the many stringencies that the Sages instituted with regard to the priest who burns the heifer in an attempt to underscore that the ritual must be performed in purity.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>With whose</b> opinion, among the <i>tanna’im</i> cited above, <b>does</b> the following <i>baraita</i> <b>that the Sages taught, correspond? The only</b> difference <b>between the priest who burns the heifer and the High Priest</b> performing the service <b>on Yom Kippur is</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC