
### Part 1
<b>in the future, will bubble from under the threshold of the Temple. From this</b> point <b>forward,</b> the spring <b>will grow in strength and rise until it reaches the opening of David’s house,</b> i.e., his grave, which is outside of Jerusalem. <b>When it reaches the opening of David’s house, it will become a flowing river in which <i>zavim</i> and <i>zavot</i>, menstruating women, and women after childbirth will bathe</b> to purify themselves. <b>As it is stated: “On that day there shall be a fountain opened for the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for purification and for sprinkling”</b> (Zechariah 13:1).

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yosef said: From here, there is an allusion that a menstruating woman must</b> be able to <b>sit up to her neck in water,</b> i.e., that this is the appropriate depth for waters of a ritual bath to purify. The Gemara comments: <b>But the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with his</b> opinion. Rather, the depth of the water is irrelevant. As long as the water can cover an entire adult body, the ritual bath is kosher.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara investigates the permissibility of crossing water in order to fulfill a mitzva: It works out <b>well</b> that on <b>Yom Kippur</b> it is permitted because <b>there are no shoes,</b> and there is no problem going through water barefoot. However, on <b>Shabbat, when there are shoes, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Is one permitted to cross water wearing shoes? Is there a concern that his shoe might come off and he may pick it up, thereby violating the prohibition of carrying out? <b>Neḥemya, the son-in-law of the <i>Nasi</i>, said: I saw Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi come to a pool of water</b> that they had to cross on Shabbat, <b>and they crossed it while wearing</b> their shoes without removing them first.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: It works out <b>well</b> that <b>shoes</b> are permitted, since one can tie them tightly, but <b>what is there to say</b> about <b>sandals?</b> Since they do not fit tightly on the foot, they might come off in the water. <b>Rav Riḥumi said: I saw Ravina cross</b> a river while <b>wearing</b> sandals on his feet. <b>Rav Ashi said: If he is</b> wearing <b>sandals,</b> he should <b>not</b> cross the water <b><i>ab initio</i>,</b> lest the sandal fall off his foot and he violate the prohibition of carrying on Shabbat by picking it up.

### Part 5
Incidental to this, the Gemara reports: <b>The Exilarch came to</b> deliver a lecture in <b>Rav Natan’s study hall in Hagronya. Rafram and all the Sages came to the lecture,</b> but <b>Ravina did not come. The next day,</b> when he came, <b>Rafram wanted to remove</b> any anger towards <b>Ravina from the mind</b> of <b>the Exilarch,</b> for missing the lecture. Rafram therefore asked Ravina: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the Master did not come to the lecture? He said to him: My foot hurt.</b> He said to him: <b>You should have put shoes on.</b> Ravina answered him: <b>It was the back of the foot</b> that hurt, so wearing shoes would have been hard for me.

### Part 6
Rafram said to Ravina: <b>You should have worn sandals,</b> which leave the heel exposed. <b>He said to him: There was a pool of water on the way</b> that I would have had to cross. <b>He said to him: You should have crossed it wearing</b> the sandals. <b>He said to him: Does the Master not hold</b> with that which <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> One should <b>not</b> wear <b>sandals</b> when crossing a river on Shabbat, <b><i>ab initio</i>?</b> From this conversation, the Exilarch understood that Ravina meant no disrespect in not attending the lecture.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara continues to discuss the laws of Yom Kippur: <b>Yehuda bar Gerogarot taught: It is prohibited to sit on</b> damp <b>clay on Yom Kippur. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> This prohibition applies only when the <b>clay</b> is <b>dripping wet,</b> when one feels its wetness when touching it. <b>Abaye said</b> in clarification: It must be <b>dripping wet enough to make something else wet. Rav Yehuda said:</b> One is <b>permitted to cool off with fruit</b> on Yom Kippur, and it is not considered bathing. Similarly, when <b>Rav Yehuda</b> suffered from the heat on Yom Kippur he <b>cooled off</b> by putting <b>a squash</b> on himself.

### Part 8
<b>Rabba cooled off by</b> placing <b>a baby [<i>yanuka</i>]</b> next to him, because a baby’s body is cold. <b>Rava cooled off with a silver cup. Rav Pappa said:</b> If the <b>silver cup</b> is <b>full, it is prohibited;</b> however, if it is <b>not full, it is permitted.</b> With regard to <b>a ceramic</b> cup, both <b>this and that are prohibited, since</b> the water <b>seeps through</b> the cup, causing a violation of the prohibition of bathing. <b>Rav</b> Ashi <b>said: A silver cup that is not full is also prohibited because it can slip [<i>mizderiv</i>]</b> from his hand and spill.

### Part 9
<b>Ze’eira bar Ḥama,</b> the <b>host</b> of the home where <b>Rabbi Ami, and Rabbi Asi, and Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, and all the Sages of Caesarea</b> stayed, <b>said to Rav Yosef, son of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: Son of a lion, come, I will tell you</b> about <b>a wonderful custom that your father used to perform. He had a cloth that</b> he would prepare <b>on the day before Yom Kippur by soaking it in water and</b> wringing it out, <b>making it</b> almost <b>like a dried cloth. And the next day he wiped his face, hands, and feet with it.</b> On <b>the day before the Ninth of Av,</b> on which the prohibition of bathing is by rabbinic law and not Torah law, he would <b>soak the</b> cloth <b>in water and the next day pass it over his eyes.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Similarly, when Rabba bar Mari came</b> from Eretz Yisrael <b>he said: The day before the Ninth of Av they bring one a cloth, and he</b> may <b>soak it in water and place it under his head. The next day,</b> when only some moisture remains, <b>he</b> may <b>wipe his face, hands, and feet</b> with it. <b>On the day before Yom Kippur, they bring one a cloth, and he</b> may <b>soak it in water and</b> wring it out to <b>make it like a dried cloth. The next day, he</b> may <b>pass it over his eyes. Rabbi Ya’akov said to Rabbi Yirmeya bar Taḥlifa: You told us the opposite.</b> What you told us about Yom Kippur was really what he did on the Ninth of Av, <b>and we objected to you</b> with regard to the prohibition of <b>wringing,</b> since Yom Kippur has the same prohibition of wringing that Shabbat has.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rav Menashya bar Taḥalifa said</b> that <b>Rav Amram said</b> that <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said: They asked Rabbi Elazar</b> ben Pedat: Must <b>an Elder who sits</b> and studies Torah <b>in a yeshiva receive permission</b> from the <i>Nasi</i> <b>to permit</b> him to render <b>firstborn animals permitted,</b> like others who must get permission from the <i>Nasi</i> <b>to</b> render <b>firstborn animals permitted, or not?</b> A firstborn animal may not be eaten until it has a blemish. Knowing which blemishes are permanent and permit the animal to be eaten and which are temporary is specialized knowledge.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What are they asking?</b> What is the basis of the question? The Gemara explains: <b>This is what they are asking, like this</b> statement of <b>Rav Idi bar Avin,</b> who <b>said: This matter,</b> the authority of the <i>Nasi</i> to grant permission, <b>was given to the house of the <i>Nasi</i> to raise its stature.</b> Therefore, <b>must permission be received,</b> since the request itself honors the <i>Nasi</i>? <b>Or, perhaps because</b> the individual in question <b>is an Elder who sits</b> and studies Torah <b>in a yeshiva, there is no need. Rav Tzadok ben Ḥaluka rose to his feet and said: I saw Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra, who was an Elder who sat in the yeshiva and who stood before the grandfather of this</b> current <i>Nasi</i>, <b>ask permission</b> from him <b>to permit firstborn animals.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Abba said to him:</b> The way you described it <b>was not how the incident was. Rather this was the incident: Rabbi Yosei ben Zimra was a priest, and he raised the following dilemma: Is the <i>halakha</i> in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who <b>said: One who is suspect in</b> a certain <b>area</b> may <b>not judge it and</b> may <b>not testify</b> about <b>it?</b> Priests are suspected of inflicting blemishes on firstborn animals because after the destruction of the Temple, even priests may not benefit from a firstborn animal until it becomes blemished. The question was not one of seeking permission from the <i>Nasi</i>, but it was a question of <i>halakha</i>. Are priests who are Torah scholars also suspected of inflicting blemishes? <b>Or perhaps the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel,</b> who <b>said:</b> One who is suspect <b>is believed about his fellow but is not believed about himself. He resolved</b> the question for <b>him:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.</b>

### Part 14
§ <b>They raised</b> another <b>dilemma</b> before <b>them,</b> the same Sages mentioned: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>going out in sandals made of</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC