
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> It is stated: <b>“And he shall go out to the altar that is before the Lord</b>, and make atonement for it; and he shall take of the blood of the bull, and of the blood of the goat, and place it upon the corners of the altar round about” (Leviticus 16:18). <b>This</b> altar <b>is the golden altar,</b> since the outer altar is not before the Lord in the Sanctuary. <b>He began to cleanse</b> the altar, sprinkling the blood <b>downward. From where does he begin?</b> He begins <b>from the northeast corner,</b> and proceeds to the <b>northwest</b> corner, and then to the <b>southwest</b> corner, and finally to the <b>southeast</b> corner. A way to remember this is: At the <b>place</b> where <b>he begins</b> sprinkling the blood <b>for a sin-offering</b> sacrificed <b>on the outer altar,</b> the southeast corner, <b>there he finishes</b> sprinkling the blood <b>on the inner altar.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The priest would not circle the altar; rather, <b>he stood in</b> one <b>place and sprinkled</b> the blood from there. Since the altar was only one square cubit, he could sprinkle the blood on all four corners without moving.

### Part 3
<b>And on all the corners he would present</b> the blood <b>from below upward, except for that</b> corner <b>that was</b> directly <b>before him,</b> on <b>which he would present</b> the blood <b>from above downward. He sprinkled</b> blood <b>on</b> the <b>pure</b> gold <b>of the altar seven times</b> after clearing away the ashes. <b>And he would pour the remainder of the blood on the western base of the outer altar.</b> On a related topic, the mishna teaches that <b>he would pour</b> the remaining blood of an offering, after it was sprinkled, <b>on the outer altar, on its southern base. These</b> remainders of blood from the outer altar <b>and those</b> remainders of blood from the inner altar are <b>mixed in the canal</b> beneath the altar <b>and flow out</b> with the water used to rinse the area <b>to the Kidron River.</b> This water was <b>sold to gardeners for</b> use as <b>fertilizer.</b> The gardeners paid for this water and thereby redeemed it from its sanctity. Failure to do so would render them guilty of <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: “And he shall go out to the altar”</b> (Leviticus 16:18). <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states</b> this? Upon his exit, after sprinkling toward the curtain, the High Priest must necessarily reach the golden altar. <b>Rabbi Neḥemya said:</b> It is <b>because we find with regard to the bull brought for</b> a violation of <b>all the mitzvot,</b> i.e., the bull that must be brought in the event that the community errs with regard to any of the mitzvot, which is called the bull for an unwitting communal sin, <b>that when the priest sprinkles</b> toward the curtain <b>he stands past the altar and sprinkles</b> back <b>toward the curtain;</b> therefore, one <b>might</b> have thought <b>that here, too,</b> the rite should be performed in <b>the same</b> manner.

### Part 5
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And he shall go out to the altar.” Where was he</b> before? He was <b>on the inner side of the altar,</b> i.e., the western side, close to the curtain, when he sprinkled, not on the outer side of the altar.

### Part 6
<b>It was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the bull for an unwitting communal sin the verse states: “And he shall sprinkle seven times <b>before the Lord</b> in front of the curtain” (Leviticus 4:17). <b>What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states:</b> Before the Lord? <b>Rabbi Neḥemya said:</b> It is <b>because we find with regard to the bull and the goat of Yom Kippur that when he sprinkles</b> the High <b>Priest stands on the inner side of the altar,</b> close to the curtain, <b>and sprinkles toward the curtain;</b> therefore, one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>here, too,</b> in the case of the bull for an unwitting communal sin, it should be <b>the same</b> rite.

### Part 7
Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And the priest shall put the blood upon the corners of the <b>altar of sweet incense before the Lord, which is in the Tent of Meeting”</b> (Leviticus 4:7). This verse teaches that the <b>altar</b> is <b>before the Lord, but the priest is not before the Lord. How so?</b> The priest <b>stands on the outer side of the altar and sprinkles.</b>

### Part 8
§ The mishna taught: <b>He began to cleanse</b> the altar, sprinkling the blood <b>downward. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>He began to cleanse downward. From where would he begin?</b> He would begin <b>from the southeast corner</b> of the altar, and from there he would turn to the <b>southwest</b> corner, onward to the <b>northwest</b> corner, and finally to the <b>northeast</b> corner. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says:</b> He began <b>from the northeast corner,</b> from which he turned to the <b>northwest</b> corner, then to the <b>southwest</b> corner, and finished at the <b>southeast</b> corner.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: The place where the High Priest <b>begins</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili,</b> i.e., the northeast corner, <b>there</b> is where <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> says he <b>ends;</b> and the place where the High Priest <b>begins</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> the southeast corner, <b>there</b> is where <b>Rabbi Yosei HaGelili</b> says he <b>ends.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>Everyone</b> agrees, <b>in any case,</b> that <b>he does not perform</b> the service <b>at the corner that he encounters first.</b> Since the High Priest approaches the altar from the west side, the first corner he encounters is located on the west side. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>Shmuel said:</b> The reason is <b>that the verse states: “And he shall go out to the altar,”</b> which indicates that he does not begin <b>until he goes out from</b> the sacred area beyond the <b>entire</b> area of the <b>altar.</b> At this stage, he is no longer on the western side of the altar but on its eastern side.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, let him go around via the right.</b> Since the High Priest is standing at the eastern side of the altar facing the west, the corner on his right is the northeast one. <b>Let us say</b> that <b>they disagree with regard to</b> the opinion <b>of Rami bar Yeḥezkel.</b>

### Part 12
<b>As Rami bar Yeḥezkel said:</b> A verse describes <b>the sea,</b> the basin <b>that Solomon built,</b> in the following terms: <b>“It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward”</b> (II Chronicles 4:4). From the direction in which the text lists the groups of oxen under the basin, <b>you learn that all turns that you turn should be only to the right</b> and <b>to the east</b> side. Let us say that <b>this Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Rami bar Yeḥezkel, and this Sage,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is <b>not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rami bar Yeḥezkel.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>No, everyone is of</b> the opinion that the ruling is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rami bar Yeḥezkel, but here they disagree with regard to this</b> matter: <b>One Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, <b>holds: We derive</b> the order of the rite <b>inside</b> the Sanctuary <b>from</b> the manner of the sprinkling on the <b>outside:</b> Just as the priest sprinkles on the corners of the outer altar in that order, he sprinkles similarly on the inner altar. <b>And one Sage,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>holds: We do not derive</b> the order of the rite <b>inside</b> of the Sanctuary <b>from</b> the rite performed <b>outside.</b>

### Part 14
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, although he does not derive</b> the <b>inside from</b> the <b>outside,</b> nevertheless <b>if</b> the High Priest <b>wants, let him perform</b> the rite in <b>this</b> manner, and <b>if he wants, let him perform</b> the rite in <b>that</b> manner. Why must he begin specifically at the southeast corner? The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> Indeed, <b>by right he should begin</b> sprinkling <b>by that corner</b> of the altar <b>that he reaches first, as Reish Lakish said: One does not pass on</b> an opportunity to perform <b>mitzvot.</b> If one has the chance to perform a mitzva, he should not put it off for later but should do it immediately.

### Part 15
<b>And why does he not do</b> so; why does the High Priest not begin the sprinkling on one of the western corners? This is <b>due to</b> that <b>which is written: “He shall go out to the altar,”</b> meaning that he does not begin <b>until he goes out from</b> the area of the <b>entire altar. And since he presents</b> the blood <b>at that corner</b> on the outside of the altar, <b>he then comes to that corner</b> on the west side <b>where he should have presented</b> the blood <b>first.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC