
### Part 1
<b>You must say</b> that <b>this is the lamb</b> of the morning daily offering, concerning which the Torah commands that a new woodpile be prepared every day and that the altar must be lit anew each morning. Therefore, although the verse is ostensibly speaking of a bull, it also alludes to the lamb of the daily offering and to the fact that it should be brought by six priests.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A non-priest who set up the arrangement of wood</b> on the altar <b>is liable</b> to receive the death penalty by God’s hand for having performed an act that is restricted to priests, and the woodpile that he placed is invalid. <b>What should he do</b> to repair the woodpile? <b>He</b> should <b>dismantle it and then rearrange it.</b> The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>What good would this do for</b> the woodpile? How would it help for the non-priest himself to rearrange the wood? It would be just as invalid as it was the first time. <b>Rather,</b> one must say that the <b>non-priest</b> should <b>dismantle</b> it, as there is nothing wrong with a non-priest dismantling the woodpile, <b>and a priest</b> then <b>rearranges it.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects</b> to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s teaching: <b>And do you have any service that is valid if performed at night and</b> yet <b>is invalid</b> if performed <b>by a non-priest?</b> A bona fide Temple service must be performed during the day. That the wood on the altar may be arranged while it is still nighttime shows that it is not a bona fide service, and therefore it should be permitted for non-priests to perform it.

### Part 4
The Gemara expresses wonder at Rabbi Zeira’s equation of the two issues: <b>And</b> is there really <b>no</b> such thing as a service that may be performed at night but which is prohibited for a non-priest to perform? <b>Isn’t there</b> the burning <b>of the limbs and the fats</b> of offerings on the altar, which continues throughout the night, and yet it was taught earlier in this chapter that a non-priest who participates in that service incurs the death penalty? The Gemara rejects this objection: The burning of sacrificial limbs and fats, though it may be done at night, is not considered a nighttime service but <b>the end of the daytime service,</b> as it is merely the culmination of the sacrificial service that began during the day.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks further: <b>But isn’t there the removal of the ashes</b> from the altar, which may be performed at night, and yet may not be done by a non-priest? The Gemara rejects this too: The removal of ashes is also not considered a nighttime service but <b>the start of the daytime service.</b> And the proof for this is <b>that Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If a priest has <b>sanctified his hands</b> at night by washing them <b>for the removal of the ashes, the next day,</b> i.e., after daybreak, <b>he need not sanctify</b> his hands again, <b>as he already sanctified</b> them <b>at the start of the service.</b> Rabbi Zeira’s equation between services performed at night and services that may be performed by non-priests therefore remains intact. <b>If so,</b> the objection that he raised to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan remains <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement must be revised, and one must posit that <b>when it was stated, this is how it was stated. Rabbi Asi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A non-priest who arranges the two logs</b> on the altar <b>is liable</b> to receive the death penalty by God’s hand, <b>since it is a daytime service. Rava strongly objects to this: But if</b> that is <b>so,</b> if arranging the two logs is a bona fide daytime service and is prohibited to non-priests on pain of death, it <b>should require a lottery;</b> and yet in practice this service is not assigned by a lottery. The Gemara comments that <b>it must have escaped</b> Rava’s mind <b>that which is taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: The priest <b>who was privileged to</b> perform the <b>removal of the ashes was</b> also <b>privileged with setting up the arrangement of wood</b> on the altar and with placing the <b>two logs.</b>

### Part 7
Another difficulty is raised with regard to Rava’s statement: <b>Is that to say that a daytime service requires a lottery</b> and, conversely, <b>a nighttime service does not require a lottery? Isn’t there</b> the burning of <b>the limbs and the fats</b> on the altar, which is done at night and yet is assigned through a lottery? The Gemara responds: That is not difficult, since the burning of the limbs and the fats <b>is the end of the daytime service,</b> as explained above. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there the removal of the ashes</b> from the altar, which is a nighttime service and yet requires a lottery? The Gemara answers: Indeed, a lottery should not have been required for that service, but one was instituted <b>due to the incident that occurred,</b> when the priests came to danger, as related in the mishna.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks further: <b>Is that to say that</b> any service that is a <b>daytime service and</b> for which <b>a non-priest</b> would be <b>liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty requires a lottery,</b> and conversely, a daytime service for which <b>a non-priest</b> would <b>not</b> be <b>liable</b> to receive <b>the death penalty does not require a lottery? But isn’t there</b> the <b>slaughtering</b> of the daily offering, which may be performed by a non-priest and yet requires a lottery? The Gemara rejects this point: <b>Slaughtering is different,</b> because <b>it is the beginning of the service</b> of the daily offering and is therefore considered important enough to warrant a lottery.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks with regard to the revised version of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement: <b>Mar Zutra, and some say Rav Ashi, said: But didn’t we learn</b> that <b>it is not so</b> that arranging the logs must be done during the day, as it was taught in a mishna: <b>The appointed</b> priest <b>said to them: Go out and see if the time for slaughtering has arrived.</b> The mishna <b>does not teach</b> that the appointee said: Go and see if <b>the time for</b> arranging <b>the two logs</b> has arrived. This shows that the logs need not be placed after daybreak but may be arranged while it is still night.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this argument: The reason the mishna mentions slaughtering is that it prefers to <b>teach</b> this statement with regard to <b>that which has no rectification</b> if it is done at night, such as slaughtering the offering, which is rendered irreparably invalid if done before daybreak. <b>It does not</b> want to <b>teach something that has rectification</b> if done at night, such as arranging the two logs, which can always be removed and replaced properly. However, the proper time for arranging the logs is indeed daytime.

### Part 11
<b>And some say</b> a different version of Rabbi Zeira’s objection: <b>Rabbi Zeira strongly objects to</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement that a non-priest who arranged the woodpile incurs the death penalty: <b>And do you have any service that is</b> not complete on its own but is <b>followed by a different service,</b> such as the arrangement of the two logs, <b>and</b> yet is <b>invalid</b> and is punishable by death if performed <b>by a non-priest?</b> It was taught earlier in the chapter that a non-priest incurs the death penalty only for performing a service that is complete, i.e., a service that is not followed by other services that complete the task being performed.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC