
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Initially,</b> the practice among the priests was that <b>whoever wishes to remove</b> the ashes from <b>the altar removes them. And when there are many</b> priests who wish to perform that task, the privilege to do so is determined by a race: The priests <b>run and ascend on the ramp</b> leading to the top of the altar. <b>Any</b> priest <b>who precedes another</b> and reaches within <b>four cubits</b> of the top of the altar first <b>is privileged</b> to remove the ashes. <b>And if both of them were equal</b> and neither preceded the other, <b>the appointed</b> priest says to all the priests: <b>Extend</b> your <b>fingers,</b> and a lottery was performed, as will be explained.

### Part 2
<b>And what</b> fingers <b>do they extend</b> for the lottery? They may extend <b>one or two</b> fingers, <b>and</b> the priests <b>do not extend a thumb in the Temple.</b> The reason is that the lottery was conducted by the appointee choosing a number and counting the extended fingers of the priests standing in a circle. As the count progressed, a priest could calculate and manipulate the result in his favor by surreptitiously extending his thumb and an additional finger. Since there is separation between the thumb and the forefinger it could appear as though they belonged to two different priests, skewing the results of the lottery.

### Part 3
Initially, that was the procedure; however, <b>an incident</b> occurred <b>where both of them were equal</b> as they were <b>running and ascending on the ramp, and one of them shoved another and he fell and his leg was broken. And once the court saw that</b> people <b>were coming to</b> potential <b>danger, they instituted that</b> priests <b>would remove</b> ashes from <b>the altar only</b> by means <b>of a lottery. There were four lotteries there,</b> in the Temple, on a daily basis to determine the priests privileged to perform the various services, <b>and this,</b> determining which priest would remove the ashes, was <b>the first lottery.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara questions the original practice of holding a race to determine which priest would remove the ashes: <b>And what is the reason that the Sages did not initially institute a lottery for</b> the removal of the ashes as they did for other parts of the service? The Gemara answers: <b>Initially</b> they <b>thought:</b> Since it is <b>a service</b> performed <b>at night it would not be important to</b> the priests, and <b>not</b> many of them would <b>come</b> to perform it, so a lottery would be unnecessary. Then, <b>when they saw that</b> many priests <b>did</b> indeed <b>come and</b> that <b>they were coming to danger</b> by racing up the altar’s ramp, <b>they instituted a lottery.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara poses a question against the assertion that nighttime Temple services did not normally require a lottery: <b>But there is</b> the burning of the <b>limbs</b> of burnt-offerings <b>and the fats</b> of other offerings, <b>which is a service</b> that is performed at <b>night, and</b> nevertheless <b>the Sages instituted a lottery</b> for that from the outset. The Gemara answers: The burning of those parts is not considered a nighttime service but <b>the end of a daytime service,</b> as the main part of the sacrificial service, the slaughtering and the sprinkling of blood, took place during the day.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: If so, it could be argued that <b>this</b> service of removing the ashes is <b>also</b> not a nighttime service but <b>the start of a daytime service, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If a priest has <b>sanctified his hands</b> at night by washing them <b>for the removal of the ashes, the next day,</b> i.e., after daybreak, if he remained in the confines of the Temple, <b>he need not sanctify</b> his hands again, <b>because he already sanctified</b> them <b>at the start of the service.</b> Apparently, the removal of the ashes, though performed at night, is considered the start of the next day’s service.

### Part 7
The Gemara responds by emending Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement: <b>Say</b> the following version of the end of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement: <b>Because he had already sanctified</b> them <b>at the outset for service.</b> According to this formulation, Rabbi Yoḥanan did not say that the removal of the ashes is considered the start of the following day’s service. Rather, he said that although the removal of the ashes is a nighttime service, since the priest sanctified his hands before performing that service, the sanctification remains in effect for the services performed after daybreak as well, since there is no interruption between the two activities.

### Part 8
<b>Some say</b> that the original practice should be explained as follows: <b>Initially,</b> the Sages <b>thought</b> that <b>since there is</b> a likelihood of being <b>overcome by sleep</b> at that time of night, <b>not</b> many priests <b>would come. When they saw that they did</b> indeed <b>come and</b> that <b>they were also coming to danger, the Sages instituted a lottery</b> for this task. The Gemara asks: <b>But there is</b> the burning of the <b>limbs</b> of burnt-offerings <b>and the fats</b> of other offerings, a service for <b>which there is</b> the same likelihood of being <b>overcome by sleep,</b> and nevertheless <b>the Sages instituted a lottery</b> for that from the outset. The Gemara answers: <b>Lying down</b> to go to sleep late <b>is different from rising</b> in the middle of the night. It is not as difficult to stay up late in order to burn limbs on the altar as it is to rise before dawn to remove the ashes from the altar.

### Part 9
The Gemara addresses the substance of the mishna’s claim: <b>But was the ordinance</b> to assign the removal of ashes by means of a lottery <b>due to that reason</b> cited in the mishna, the matter of the dangerous incident? <b>The ordinance</b> was instituted <b>due to this reason:</b> There were other important tasks associated with the removal of the ashes that required a lottery in their own right, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The priest <b>who was privileged to</b> perform <b>the removal of the ashes was</b> also <b>privileged with laying out the arrangement of wood</b> on the altar and with placing <b>the two logs</b> that were placed on the altar each morning. Since these were inherently important tasks, the only way to assign them was through a lottery, which would also determine who removed the ashes.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Ashi said: There were two</b> separate <b>ordinances</b> instituted. <b>Initially,</b> the Sages <b>thought</b> that priests <b>would not</b> come forward to perform the task of removing the ashes. <b>Once they saw that</b> many priests <b>did come and</b> that <b>they were also coming to danger,</b> the Sages <b>instituted a lottery</b> for this task. <b>Once they established a lottery</b> for removing the ashes, the priests <b>did not come</b> anymore. <b>They said: Who says</b> the lottery <b>will fall in our favor?</b> Therefore, they did not bother to come. <b>Then</b> the Sages <b>instituted for</b> the priests that <b>whoever was privileged with</b> performing <b>the removal of the ashes would</b> also <b>be privileged with laying out the arrangement of wood</b> on the altar and with placing the <b>two logs, so that</b> the importance of all these tasks combined would ensure that the priests <b>would come and participate in the lottery.</b>

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna that before the lottery was instituted, <b>when there were many</b> priests who sought to perform the removal of the ashes, the first priest to reach within four cubits of the top of the altar was privileged with performing the removal of the ashes. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> It is <b>obvious to me</b> that the <b>four cubits</b> the mishna is referring to are not the four cubits adjacent to the ramp <b>on the ground,</b> because <b>we learned</b> in the mishna that the priests <b>run and ascend on the ramp,</b> and not adjacent to the ramp. It is <b>also not</b> referring to the <b>first</b> four cubits from the foot of the ramp, because <b>we learned</b> that the priests <b>run and ascend on the ramp, and only afterward</b> it says: <b>Any</b> priest <b>who precedes another</b> and reaches within four cubits of the altar first, indicating that the competition begins only once they have ascended the ramp to some extent.

### Part 12
It is <b>also not</b> referring to four cubits somewhere in the <b>middle,</b> between the four on the bottom and the top of the altar, because <b>the matter is not defined</b> and there is no clear indication which four cubits on the ramp are the determining cubits. In light of all this, it is <b>obvious to me</b> that the four cubits <b>we learned</b> in the mishna are referring to the four cubits <b>that are adjacent to the altar</b> itself. The priest who reaches those four cubits first is the one privileged to remove the ashes.

### Part 13
Rav Pappa <b>raised a dilemma</b> based on the above clarification: Are the <b>four cubits that they stated,</b> which are the four cubits adjacent to the altar, calculated <b>including the cubit of the base</b> of the altar <b>and the cubit of</b> its <b>ledge,</b> as the ramp continues and overlaps these two cubits at the top of the altar,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC