
### Part 1
<b>What, is</b> this <b>not</b> talking <b>about those</b> priests <b>who won the lottery,</b> describing how their non-sacred garments were removed from them before they were dressed in the priestly garments? <b>Rav Huna bar Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Sheshet said,</b> rejecting that interpretation: <b>No,</b> it is possible to explain that all the priests at the lottery were wearing sacred garments and that, on the contrary, the mishna speaks <b>about those</b> priests <b>who did not win the lottery.</b> The text describes how the sacred garments they wore during the lottery were removed from them.

### Part 2
The Gemara supports this latter interpretation: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to follow Rav Sheshet’s interpretation of the mishna. <b>As, if it were to enter your mind</b> to say that the mishna is dealing <b>with those who won the lottery</b> and describes how their non-sacred garments were removed and sacred garments put on, how would one understand the statement: <b>They would leave only their trousers on them?</b> One would have to explain that the priests subsequently donned the sacred clothes on top of the non-sacred trousers; then they would remove the non-sacred trousers and replace them with the sacred trousers. <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that nothing should precede the trousers</b> when the priest dresses? <b>The verse states: “And he shall have linen trousers upon his flesh”</b> (Leviticus 16:4)? However, according to the proposed interpretation of the mishna, the priests donned the other sacred garments and put on the trousers after them.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how would <b>the other one,</b> Rav Naḥman, resolve this difficulty? He would respond that <b>this is not difficult,</b> as <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>is teaching: While the non-sacred garments are still on them they put the sacred trousers on them, and</b> then <b>they remove</b> from them <b>the non-sacred clothes, and they left</b> them wearing <b>only the</b> sacred <b>trousers.</b> Therefore, it is possible to interpret the mishna either way.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Sheshet said: From where do I say</b> that the priests wore sacred garments when the lottery was held? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Chamber of Hewn Stone was</b> built <b>in the style of a large basilica [<i>basileki</i>]; the lottery</b> is held <b>in the east</b> of the chamber, <b>and an Elder</b> of the court <b>sits in its west</b> to provide instruction and adjudicate any doubtful cases. <b>And the priests stand in a circle in the shape of a bracelet [<i>bekholyar</i>], and the appointed</b> priest <b>comes and removes the mitre from the head of one of them, and</b> everyone thereby <b>knew that the count began from him. And if it were to enter your mind</b> to say that the priests wore <b>non-sacred garments</b> during the lottery, <b>is there</b> such a thing as <b>a mitre among</b> one’s <b>non-sacred garments?</b> This shows that the priests were wearing their sacred garments when the lottery took place.

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this reasoning: <b>Yes,</b> indeed, there is such a thing as a mitre that one wears as non-sacred apparel, <b>as Rav Yehuda, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Shmuel bar Yehuda, taught: A priest whose mother made a tunic for him,</b> to show her love for her son and her love for mitzvot, <b>may perform an individual service with it on,</b> but not communal services. Therefore, it is possible that the priests had non-sacred mitres in the style of the sacred mitres, just as they sometimes had non-sacred tunics.

### Part 6
Apropos the <i>baraita</i> that was just cited, <b>Abaye said: Conclude from this</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>the Chamber of Hewn Stone</b> was built <b>half in the sacred</b> area, within the consecrated Temple grounds, <b>and half in the non-sacred</b> part of the Temple grounds. <b>And conclude from it</b> as well that the chamber <b>had two doorways, one</b> that <b>opened to the sacred</b> area of the Temple <b>and one</b> that <b>opened to the non-sacred</b> area. Abaye explains these inferences: <b>As, were it to enter your mind</b> that the Chamber of Hewn Stone stood <b>entirely in the sacred</b> area, how could one say that <b>an Elder sat in its west? Didn’t the Master say: There is no sitting</b> allowed <b>in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard except for kings of the house of David alone?</b> The Elder must therefore have been sitting in an area external to the Temple courtyard area.

### Part 7
<b>And if it were to enter your mind</b> to say the opposite, that the chamber stood <b>entirely in the non-sacred</b> area, how could <b>the lottery</b> be held <b>in the east? Aren’t we required</b> to fulfill the verse: <b>“In the House of God we walked with the throng”</b> (Psalms 55:15), from where it was derived earlier that it is desirable that the lotteries cause a commotion in the House of God, i.e., in the sacred area of the Temple? If the lottery were held in a non-sacred area, <b>there</b> would <b>not be</b> a fulfillment of this verse. <b>Rather,</b> one must <b>conclude from this</b> <i>baraita</i> that the chamber was situated <b>half in the sacred</b> area of the Temple <b>and half in the non-sacred</b> area.

### Part 8
Abaye continues: <b>And were it to enter your mind</b> that the chamber <b>had</b> just <b>one doorway, which opened to the sacred</b> area, how could the <b>Elder sit in its west? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>Chambers that are built in the non-sacred</b> area of the Temple Mount, but that <b>open up into the sacred</b> area, <b>their interior is</b> considered entirely <b>sacred,</b> despite the fact that they also occupy land outside the sacred area? <b>And if,</b> on the other hand, <b>it were to enter your mind</b> that the chamber had just one doorway, <b>which opened to the non-sacred</b> area, how could the <b>lottery</b> be held <b>in its east? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: With regard to chambers that are <b>built in the sacred</b> area but which <b>open up into the non-sacred</b> area, the space <b>within them is</b> considered entirely <b>non-sacred,</b> despite the chambers’ location on sacred territory. <b>Rather, isn’t it</b> correct to <b>conclude from this</b> that the Chamber of Hewn Stone <b>had two doorways, one that opened up into the sacred</b> area <b>and one that opened into the non-sacred</b> area?

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The second lottery</b> conducted daily among the priests determines the following: <b>Who slaughters</b> the daily morning offering, <b>who sprinkles</b> its blood, <b>who removes the ashes</b> from <b>the inner altar, and who removes the ashes</b> and burnt wicks from <b>the candelabrum, and who takes the limbs</b> of the daily offering <b>up to the ramp</b> to be burned later.

### Part 10
This is how the limbs were divided before taking them up to the altar: <b>The head and the</b> right <b>leg</b> were carried by one priest, <b>and the two forelegs</b> were carried by a second priest. <b>The tail,</b> including the lower vertebrae of the spinal column and the fat tail, <b>and the</b> left <b>leg</b> were carried by a third priest. <b>And the breast and the throat</b> and some of the inner organs attached to it were carried by a fourth priest. <b>And the two flanks</b> were taken by a fifth priest, <b>and the intestines</b> by a sixth priest. <b>And the fine flour</b> of the meal-offering accompanying the daily offering was carried by a seventh priest. <b>And the</b> High Priest’s daily <b>griddle-cake offering</b> was carried by an eighth priest, <b>and the wine</b> for libation was carried by a ninth priest. Altogether <b>thirteen priests prevailed in this</b> lottery: Nine priests who carried the daily offering and its accompanying elements, and four who performed the slaughter, sprinkling, and removal of ashes from the inner altar and the candelabrum.

### Part 11
<b>Ben Azzai said before Rabbi Akiva in the name of RabbiYehoshua:</b> That was not the sequence of taking the limbs up to the ramp; rather, the order in which <b>it was sacrificed</b> was according to <b>the way it walks</b> when alive, as will be explained in the Gemara.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>When the priests performed the lottery, did they perform a lottery for</b> just <b>one service,</b> such as the slaughtering, and the other twelve tasks were divided among the priests adjacent to the chosen one; <b>or perhaps they performed a</b> separate <b>lottery for each and every service</b> of the thirteen acts listed? The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from that which was taught in the mishna: <b>There were four lotteries there. And if it were to enter your mind</b> that <b>they performed a lottery</b> for <b>each and every service</b> separately, <b>there would be many</b> more than four lotteries. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> That is not a conclusive proof, because one could argue that <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>issaying:</b> The priests <b>gathered four times for a lottery, but each</b> gathering involved <b>many lotteries</b> for many individual services.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC