
### Part 1
<b>and from your</b> own <b>they shall give you.</b> Everyone has a portion designated for him by God, and the individual is privileged to receive what is coming to him, as was the case with the House of Avtinas. The principle is: <b>No person</b> may <b>touch</b> that <b>which is prepared for another</b> by God; everyone receives what is designated for him. <b>And one reign does not overlap with another</b> and deduct from the time allotted it <b>even a hairbreadth.</b> When the time comes for one kingdom to fall, its successor takes over immediately, as no king rules during the time designated for another.

### Part 2
§ The mishna related that <b>Hugras ben Levi</b> knew a lesson in the art of music and he did not want to teach it to others. <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When</b> Hugras ben Levi <b>projects his voice in</b> a sweet <b>melody,</b> he <b>places his thumb into his mouth and places his finger between the strings</b> of a lyre and sings. This produced a sound <b>so</b> sweet <b>that his brethren the priests were abruptly taken aback.</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught: Ben Kamtzar did not want to teach</b> others a special <b>technique of writing.</b> What was that technique? <b>They said about him that he would take four quills between his fingers, and if there was a word</b> consisting <b>of four letters</b> that he wanted to write, <b>he could write it simultaneously. They said to him: What did you see that</b> led you <b>not to teach</b> that technique? <b>All the</b> others with unique skills <b>came up</b> with <b>a response to</b> questions about the <b>matter</b> of <b>their</b> conduct, claiming that they sought to prevent their technique from being used in idol worship. However, <b>ben Kamtzar did not come up</b> with <b>a response to</b> questions about the <b>matter</b> of <b>his</b> conduct, and it was clear that his only motivation in preventing his skill from being disseminated was his own personal honor. <b>With regard to the first</b> people listed, <b>it is stated: “The memory of the righteous shall be for a blessing”</b> (Proverbs 10:7); <b>and about ben Kamtzar and his counterparts it is stated: “But the name of the wicked shall rot”</b> (Proverbs 10:7).

### Part 4
§ Apropos the verse cited, the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>But the name of the wicked shall rot?</b> How does a name rot? <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> It means that <b>decay will spread on their names,</b> meaning <b>that we do not call</b> others <b>by their names,</b> and the name will sink into oblivion. <b>Ravina raised an objection</b> from an incident that transpired during the Second Temple era. There was <b>an incident involving Doeg ben Yosef, whose father</b> died and <b>left him</b> as <b>a young child to his mother,</b> who loved him. <b>Each day his mother measured</b> his height <b>in handbreadths and donated</b> a measure of <b>gold</b> equivalent to <b>the weight</b> that <b>he</b> gained <b>to the Temple.</b> Later, when the <b>enemy prevailed</b> and there was a terrible famine in the city, <b>she slaughtered and ate him.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And with regard to her</b> and others like her <b>Jeremiah lamented: “Shall the women eat their fruit, their children in their care [<i>tipuḥim</i>]?”</b> (Lamentations 2:20). The Gemara interprets the term <i>tipuḥim</i> homiletically as referring to this baby, who was measured in handbreadths [<i>tefaḥim</i>]. Even he was eaten by his mother. <b>And the Divine Spirit responds and says:</b> Why did this happen? <b>“Shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the Temple of the Lord?”</b> (Lamentations 2:20). It is punishment for the murder of the priest Zechariah ben Jehoiada. This incident involves aboy named Doeg; even though the person with that name was wicked (see I Samuel, chapter 22), the boy was named for him. The Gemara responds: <b>See what befell him.</b> Clearly, his name was a bad omen.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: A righteous person</b> is praised <b>for his own</b> actions, <b>and a wicked person</b> is cursed not only for his own actions but also for the actions <b>of his</b> wicked <b>counterpart. A righteous person</b> is praised <b>for his actions, as it is written: “The memory of the righteous shall be for a blessing”;</b> righteous is written in the singular. <b>A wicked person</b> is also cursed for the actions <b>of his</b> wicked <b>counterpart, as it is written: “But the name of the wicked shall rot”;</b> wicked is written in the plural. Once one wicked person is mentioned, his wicked counterparts are cursed as well.

### Part 7
<b>Ravina said to one of the Sages who would organize aggadic</b> statements <b>before him: From where is this matter that the Sages stated: The memory of the righteous shall be for a blessing,</b> derived?<b>He said to him: As it is written</b> explicitly in the book of Proverbs: <b>“The memory of the righteous shall be for a blessing.”</b> He then asked him: <b>From where in the Torah do we</b> derive this? He said to him: <b>As it is written: “And God said: Shall I hide from Abraham that which I am doing?”</b> (Genesis 18:17). <b>And</b> as soon as Abraham’s name is mentioned, <b>it is written: “And Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation”</b> (Genesis 18:18), although there is no clear connection to the previous verse. Apparently, once the name of a righteous person is mentioned, it is followed directly by praise of the individual. That is the Torah source for the statement that the mention of the righteous is for blessing.

### Part 8
Then he asked: <b>From where is this matter that the Sages said: But the name of the wicked shall rot,</b> derived? <b>He said to him: As it is written</b> explicitly in the book of Proverbs: <b>“But the name of the wicked shall rot.”</b> He then asked him: <b>From where in the Torah do we</b> derive this? He said to him: <b>As it is written</b> with regard to Lot: <b>“And he moved his tent as far as Sodom”</b> (Genesis 13:12). <b>And</b> as soon as Sodom is mentioned, <b>it is written: “And the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinful to God”</b> (Genesis 13:13).

### Part 9
Apropos these statements, the Gemara cites another statement that <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> There was <b>a righteous person</b> who <b>lived between two wicked people and did not learn from their actions;</b> there was <b>a wicked person</b> who <b>lived between two righteous people and did not learn from their actions.</b> How so? <b>A righteous person lived between two wicked people and did not learn from their actions</b> is <b>Obadiah,</b> who was a minister for Ahab and Jezebel and nevertheless remained God-fearing (see I Kings, chapter 18). <b>A wicked person who lived between two righteous people and did not learn from their actions is Esau,</b> who was born and raised in the house of Isaac and Rebecca and nevertheless remained wicked.

### Part 10
§ <b>Rabbi Elazar said: From the blessing of the righteous you infer a curse for the wicked; and</b> conversely, <b>from the curse of the wicked you infer a blessing for the righteous.</b> How so? <b>From the blessing of the righteous you infer a curse for the wicked, as it is written</b> with regard to Abraham: <b>“For I have known him to the end that he will command</b> his children and his household after him” (Genesis 18:19), <b>and it is written thereafter: “The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is very great”</b> (Genesis 18:20). The righteousness of Abraham underscores the relative wickedness of Sodom and Gomorrah, exacerbating their punishment.

### Part 11
Conversely, <b>from the curse of the wicked you infer a blessing for the righteous, as it is written: “And the men of Sodom were</b> exceedingly <b>wicked and sinful to God”</b> (Genesis 13:13), after which it is written: <b>“And God said to Abram, after that Lot had separated from him”</b> (Genesis 13:14); God proceeds to bless him. And <b>Rabbi Elazar said: Even for one righteous</b> person an entire <b>world is created, as it is stated: “And God saw the light, that it was good”</b> (Genesis 1:4), <b>and good means nothing other than righteous, as it is stated: “Say of the righteous that he is good”</b> (Isaiah 3:10).

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Elazar</b> further <b>said: One who causes himself to forget a matter of his studies</b> ultimately <b>causes exile for his children, as it is stated: “Because you have forgotten the Torah of your God, I will also forget your children”</b> (Hosea 4:6). <b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> With regard to he who causes his studies to be forgotten, <b>one reduces him from his prominence, as it is stated: “Because you have rejected knowledge, I will also reject you; you shall not serve Me”</b> (Hosea 4:6).

### Part 13
Apropos the righteous, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: No righteous person departs from this world until another comparable righteous person is created, as it is stated: “And the sun rises and the sun sets”</b> (Ecclesiastes 1:5); before the sun sets the new sun has already risen. <b>Before the sun of Eli was extinguished, the sun of Samuel of Ramah</b> had already <b>shone</b> (see I Samuel, chapter 3), and so on throughout the generations. And <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The Holy One, Blessed be He, saw that righteous people were few,</b> so <b>He arose and planted</b> some of <b>them in each and every generation</b> to ensure the presence of at least one righteous person in each generation. <b>As it is stated: “For the pillars of the earth are the Lord’s, and He has set the world upon them”</b> (I Samuel 2:8). Since the world rests upon the righteous, each generation requires the presence of a righteous person to provide that support.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even for one righteous person the world exists, as it is stated: “But the righteous is the foundation of the world”</b> (Proverbs 10:25). <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya himself said:</b> The proof is <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“He will keep the feet of His pious ones”</b> (I Samuel 2:9), meaning that God maintains the world due to the pious people. The Gemara questions this proof; <b>“pious ones” indicates many</b> rather than a single righteous person. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said:</b> Although the text is vocalized in the plural, it <b>is written</b> in the singular: “<b>His pious one”;</b> God maintains the world even for a single pious individual.

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Once most of a person’s years have passed and he did not sin, he will never sin, as it is stated: “He will keep the feet of His pious ones”</b> (I Samuel 2:9). Once a person has established himself as righteous, God will keep him from failing thereafter. In <b>the school of Rabbi Sheila they say: Once</b> the opportunity to perform <b>a sinful act presents itself</b> to a person <b>a first time and a second, and he does not sin, he will never sin, as it is stated: “He will keep the feet of His pious ones”</b> (I Samuel 2:9). Once he has refrained from sin several times, he has established himself as pious and God will protect him thereafter.

### Part 16
<b>Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “If it concerns the scorners, He scorns them, but to the humble He gives grace”</b> (Proverbs 3:34)? If one <b>comes to impurify, they open</b> before him the opportunity to exercise his free will and do as he pleases. If one <b>comes to purify, they assist him.</b> In <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael it was taught</b> with regard to this verse: This is <b>comparable to</b> the case of <b>a man who was selling</b> both crude <b>naphtha [<i>neft</i>],</b> whose odor is vile, and <b>balsam,</b> whose fragrance is pleasant.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC