
### Part 1
<b>cress, purslane, eggs, and arugula.</b> Apropos the arugula plant, the Gemara cites a verse: <b>“And one of them went out into the fields to collect <i>orot</i>”</b> (II Kings 4:39). It was <b>taught in the name of Rabbi Meir</b> with regard to <i>orot</i> in this verse: <b>This is</b> the plant called <b>arugula. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Why are</b> these arugula plants <b>called <i>orot</i>?</b> It is because <b>they enlighten [<i>me’irot</i>] the eyes. Rav Huna said:</b> With regard to <b>one who finds arugula, if he can eat it, he eats it, and if not, he passes it over his eyes,</b> as that too is beneficial. <b>Rav Pappa said: Arugula</b> is most effective when it grows <b>on the border</b> of the field, where it is unadulterated by other plants.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Giddel said</b> that <b>Rav said: A guest</b> should <b>neither eat eggs,</b> because they lead to a seminal emission, <b>nor sleep in a garment belonging to the homeowner,</b> his host, because if he experiences a seminal emission and it gets on the garment, he will be diminished in the estimation of his host. Apropos conduct of a guest, theGemara relates: <b>When Rav would happen</b> to come <b>to Darshish he would declare: Who will be</b> married to me <b>for the day</b> that I am here so that I will not be unwed in this place, after which I will divorce her? Similarly, <b>when Rav Naḥman would come to Shekhantziv he would declare: Who will be</b> married to me <b>for the day</b> that I am here?

### Part 3
<b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: A man should not marry a woman in one state and go and marry</b> another <b>woman in a different state, lest</b> a <b>match be arranged</b> between the child of <b>this</b> wife <b>with</b> the child of <b>that</b> wife who are unaware of their relationship. This would <b>lead to a brother marrying his sister</b> or <b>a father marrying his daughter, filling the whole world in its entirety with <i>mamzerim</i>. And concerning this it is stated: “And the land became filled with lewdness”</b> (Leviticus 19:29). The Sages <b>say</b> in response: <b>The Sages generate publicity.</b> Since they were well-known, the identity of their children was also undoubtedly known. Therefore, there was no concern that errors of this kind would befall their children.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a different problem with the practice of Rav and Rav Naḥman. <b>But didn’t Rava say:</b> With regard to <b>one who proposed marriage to</b> a woman <b>and she agreed,</b> she <b>is required to sit seven clean days,</b> as perhaps due to the anticipatory desire she might not notice that she experienced menstrual bleeding and she is therefore impure. How, then, could these <i>amora’im</i> marry a woman on the day that they proposed? The Gemara answers: <b>The Sages would inform them by sending messengers before</b> their arrival. The messenger would announce that the <i>amora</i> sought to marry a local woman. The woman who agreed would in fact wait seven clean days before marrying him.

### Part 5
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that these Sages were not actually proposing marriage; rather, they proposed so that they could <b>be in seclusion with</b> the women, without consummating the relationship. Since the women knew that the marriage would not be consummated, they did not experience anticipatory desire. <b>There is no similarity between one who has bread in his basket and one who does not have bread in his basket.</b> One who does not have access to bread experiences hunger more acutely than one for whom bread is available and can eat whenever he chooses. Similarly, an unmarried man experiences a more acute desire. In order to mitigate that desire, these Sages made certain that women would be designated for them.

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The Elders of the court</b> who read the order of the service of the day before the High Priest <b>passed him to the Elders of the priesthood, and they took him up to the House of Avtinas. And they administered him an oath and took leave</b> of him <b>and went on their way.</b> When they administered this oath <b>they said to him: My Master, High Priest. We are agents of the court, and you are our agent and the agent of the court. We administer an oath to you in</b> the name of <b>Him who housed His name in this House, that you will not change</b> even one <b>matter from all that we have said to you</b> with regard to the burning of the incense or any other service that you will perform when alone. After this oath, <b>he would leave</b> them <b>and cry, and they would leave</b> him <b>and cry</b> in sorrow that the oath was necessary.

### Part 7
They kept him occupied throughout the night to prevent him from sleeping. <b>If he was a scholar, he</b> would <b>teach</b> Torah. <b>If</b> he was <b>not</b> a scholar, <b>Torah scholars</b> would <b>teach</b> Torah <b>before him. And if</b> he was <b>accustomed to read</b> the Bible, <b>he</b> would <b>read; and if</b> he was <b>not, they</b> would <b>read</b> the Bible <b>before him. And what</b> books would <b>they read before him</b> to pique his interest so that he would not fall asleep? They would read <b>from Job, and from Ezra, and from Chronicles. Zekharya, son of Kevutal, says: Many times I read before him from</b> the book of <b>Daniel.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC