
### Part 1
Rabbi Yehuda means <b>to say that</b> the High Priest <b>does not serve for the entire day</b> even though the Torah allows him to do so, due to a rabbinic <b>decree lest</b> he forget that he is an acute mourner and <b>eat</b> consecrated food forbidden to him. <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said to Rava: And did Rabbi Yehuda issue a decree lest he eat? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The Sages would <b>even designate another wife for him lest his wife die? And if his wife dies,</b> he nevertheless <b>performs</b> the Temple <b>service, and Rabbi Yehuda did not issue a decree lest he eat.</b> That contradicts the other statement by Rabbi Yehuda that a High Priest may not serve for the entire day that he is an acute mourner. Rava <b>said to him: How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the mishna, <b>since it is Yom Kippur, when everyone does not eat, he too</b> will <b>not come to eat.</b> However, <b>here,</b> during the rest of the year, <b>when everyone eats, he too</b> will <b>come to eat.</b> Therefore, a decree was issued.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a question from a different perspective: <b>And</b> in a case <b>like this,</b> would the halakhic status of <b>acute mourning take effect on him,</b> considering that <b>she is divorced?</b> According to Rabbi Yehuda, the High Priest must give his wife a provisional divorce in which case she is no longer his wife and if she dies he is no longer obligated to mourn her. The Gemara answers: <b>Although</b> the status of <b>acute mourning does not take effect on him, is he not troubled</b> over the death of his wife? Therefore, according to Rabbi Yehuda, it is appropriate to prohibit his performance of the service on that day.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> During <b>all seven days</b> of the High Priest’s sequestering before Yom Kippur, <b>he sprinkles the blood</b> of the daily burnt-offering, <b>and he burns the incense, and he removes</b> the ashes of <b>the lamps</b> of the candelabrum, <b>and he sacrifices the head and the</b> hind <b>leg</b> of the daily offering. The High Priest performs these tasks in order to grow accustomed to the services that he will perform on Yom Kippur. <b>On all the other days</b> of the year, <b>if</b> the High Priest <b>wishes to sacrifice</b> any of the offerings, <b>he sacrifices them, as the High Priest sacrifices</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first and takes</b> any <b>portion</b> that he chooses <b>first.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> this mishna? <b>Rav Ḥisda said:</b> This mishna is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> it is difficult. <b>Didn’t</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>say:</b> With regard to a <b>ritually pure</b> person <b>upon whom a sprinkling</b> of purification water <b>fell, it renders him impure?</b> This is based on the enigmatic principle with regard to the water of the red heifer: It purifies the ritually impure and renders impure the ritually pure. If so, <b>how</b> can the High Priest <b>perform the</b> Temple <b>service?</b> The High Priest is sprinkled with purification water on each of the seven days of his sequestering due to the possibility that he was impure with impurity imparted by a corpse. However, it is possible that he is ritually pure. If he is ritually pure, the sprinkling will render him impure.

### Part 5
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“And the pure person will sprinkle it upon the impure person”</b> (Numbers 19:19); this emphasis that he sprinkles the water upon the impure person comes to teach that if he sprinkled <b>on the ritually impure</b> person, that person becomes <b>pure; but</b> if he sprinkled <b>on the pure</b> person, that person becomes <b>ritually impure.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. And the Rabbis say: These matters are stated</b> to teach that it is considered sprinkling <b>only</b> if it is performed <b>on items susceptible to impurity,</b> whereas if the water was sprinkled on items not susceptible to impurity, it is not considered sprinkling.

### Part 6
<b>What is</b> the halakhic implication of that statement? It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to one who mistakenly <b>intended to sprinkle</b> purification water <b>on an animal,</b> which does not become impure when alive, <b>but</b> happened to <b>sprinkle</b> it <b>upon</b> an impure <b>person, if</b> water remains <b>on the hyssop</b> that he used to sprinkle the water, <b>he</b> should <b>repeat</b> the action and sprinkle the purification water on the person to purify him. Since the first sprinkling was onto a person, who can become impure, the water remaining on the hyssop may be reused, and it is not disqualified by improper use. However, with regard to one who <b>intended to sprinkle</b> purification water <b>on a person but</b> happened to <b>sprinkle</b> it <b>upon an animal,</b> even <b>if</b> water remains <b>on the hyssop, he</b> should <b>not repeat</b> the action. Since the first sprinkling was onto an animal, which cannot become impure, the water is disqualified by improper use, and may not be used in a second sprinkling.

### Part 7
The Gemara analyzes the basis of the dispute: <b>What is the reason for</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva?</b> Instead of writing: And the pure person will sprinkle it upon the impure person, <b>let the Merciful One write</b> in the Torah: <b>And the pure person will sprinkle it upon him,</b> and it would be clear that it is upon the aforementioned impure person. <b>What</b> is taught by the phrase: <b>Upon the impure person? Learn from it</b> that if he sprinkled <b>on the impure</b> person, that person becomes <b>pure; but</b> if he sprinkled <b>on the pure</b> person, that person becomes <b>impure. And the Rabbis</b> say with regard to <b>that</b> phrase: <b>It comes</b> to teach that it is only considered sprinkling if it is performed <b>on items susceptible to impurity. However, here,</b> with regard to sprinkling purification water on a pure person, it is derived through an <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that he remains ritually pure: <b>If</b> the water falls <b>on the impure</b> person, he is <b>pure;</b> if the water falls on <b>the pure</b> person, <b>all the more so</b> is it <b>not</b> clear that he remains pure?

### Part 8
<b>And Rabbi Akiva</b> would respond to that <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>That is what</b> King <b>Solomon said: “I said I would become wise, but it eludes me”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:23). According to tradition, even Solomon in his great wisdom could not understand the contradictory nature of the sprinkling of purification water that purifies an impure person and impurifies a pure person. <b>And the Rabbis</b> ascribe Solomon’s bewilderment to a different aspect of the <i>halakha</i>: <b>The one who sprinkles</b> the water <b>and the one upon whom one sprinkles</b> the water are <b>pure; but one who touches</b> the water unrelated to sprinkling is <b>impure.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Is</b> the <b>one who sprinkles</b> the water actually <b>pure? Isn’t it written: “He who sprinkles the purification waters will wash his clothes,</b> and he who touches the purification waters will be unclean until evening” (Numbers 19:21)? The Gemara responds: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>He who sprinkles?</b> It means: <b>He who touches. But isn’t it written: He who sprinkles? And isn’t it written</b> in the same verse: And <b>he who touches? And furthermore,</b> in that verse, <b>one who sprinkles requires washing</b> of his <b>clothes,</b> indicating a more severe level of impurity, whereas <b>one who touches does not require washing</b> of his <b>clothes.</b> Apparently, when it is written: He who sprinkles, it is not referring to one who touches.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> the Rabbis assert: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>He who sprinkles?</b> It refers to <b>one who carries</b> the purification water. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>let the Merciful One write: One who carries; what is the reason</b> that <b>he who sprinkles is written</b> if the reference is to carrying? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> use of the term sprinkling to depict carrying <b>teaches us</b> that in order to become impure from carrying purification water, one <b>must</b> carry the <b>measure</b> required for <b>sprinkling.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> works out <b>well</b> according <b>to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling requires a</b> minimum <b>measure</b> of water, as then the concept of a measure required for sprinkling has meaning. <b>However,</b> according <b>to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling does not require a</b> minimum <b>measure</b> of water, <b>what can be said?</b> There is no concept of a measure required for sprinkling. The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> according <b>to the one who said</b> that <b>sprinkling does not require a</b> minimum <b>measure</b> of water, <b>that applies</b> only to the measure of purification water that must be sprinkled on <b>the back of the</b> impure <b>man;</b> any amount will suffice. <b>However, in the vessel</b> into which one dips the hyssop in order to sprinkle the water, a certain <b>measure</b> of water <b>is required, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>How much</b> water should <b>be in</b> the vessel so that it <b>will be equivalent</b> to the measure required for <b>sprinkling?</b> It must be <b>equivalent</b> to the measure required <b>to dip</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC