
### Part 1
<b>All the gates that were there</b> on the east side of the Temple courtyard <b>did not have a <i>mezuza</i> except for the Gate of Nicanor, as</b> in the courtyard just <b>inside</b> the gate was <b>the Chamber of <i>Parhedrin</i>,</b> in which there is an obligation to affix a <i>mezuza</i>. Therefore, a <i>mezuza</i> was affixed to the gate as well.

### Part 2
<b>Let us say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> a difficulty arises. The principle is that decrees are issued only to prevent violation of a Torah prohibition. The fact that a <i>mezuza</i> was affixed to the <i>Parhedrin</i> chamber <b>itself</b> is due to a rabbinic <b>decree, and will we</b> then <b>proceed to issue a decree</b> to affix a <i>mezuza</i> on the gate before the chamber in order <b>to</b> prevent violation of the existing <b>decree?</b> The Gemara rejects this reasoning: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> it is not difficult, as the <b>entire</b> obligation to affix the <i>mezuza</i> on both the chamber and the gate is the result of <b>a single decree.</b>

### Part 3
§ Apropos the <i>mezuza</i> in the High Priest’s chamber, the Gemara discusses other <i>halakhot</i> of <i>mezuza</i>. <b>The Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse: “And you will write them upon the doorposts of your houses and <b>upon your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:9): With regard to <b>the gates of houses, and the gates of courtyards, and the gates of cities, and the gates of towns, all</b> of them are <b>obligated</b> in <b>the mitzva</b> of <i>mezuza</i> in that <b>place, due to</b> the fact <b>that it is stated: “And you will write them upon the doorposts of your houses and upon your gates.”</b>

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said to Rav Safra:</b> If there is an obligation to affix a <i>mezuza</i> on city gates, with regard to <b>those</b> city <b>gates [<i>abbulei</i>] of Meḥoza,</b> a city with a Jewish majority, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages did not affix a <i>mezuza</i> on them?</b> Rav Safra <b>said to him: Those</b> gates are not the city gates. They are <b>made as reinforcement to the fort [<i>akra</i>] of turrets</b> above the gate, and therefore no <i>mezuza</i> is required. Abaye <b>said to him: And shouldn’t the fort of turrets itself require a <i>mezuza</i>, since</b> there <b>is a residence for the prison guard in</b> the fort? <b>As, wasn’t</b> a similar case <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A synagogue in which there is a residence for the synagogue attendant requires a <i>mezuza</i>?</b> Although no one lives in the synagogue itself, since the attendant lives in an adjacent room, the synagogue requires a <i>mezuza</i>.

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Abaye said:</b> The reason that no <i>mezuza</i> was affixed there was <b>due to</b> the <b>danger</b> involved. The gates of a city populated by Jews certainly require a <i>mezuza</i>; however, since gentiles live there as well, the danger is that the gentiles would suspect the Jews of witchcraft or espionage, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The <i>mezuza</i></b> belonging to <b>an individual is examined twice every seven years</b> to determine whether it was stolen or became disqualified. And in order to avoid excessive burden on the community, the <i>mezuza</i> belonging to <b>the public</b> is examined <b>twice in a</b> fifty-year <b>Jubilee</b> period.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> There was <b>an incident</b> involving <b>an examiner [<i>artavin</i>], who was examining <i>mezuzot</i> in the upper marketplace of Tzippori</b> during a period when decrees were issued against the Jewish people, <b>and a</b> Roman <b>official [<i>kasdor</i>] found him and collected</b> a fine of <b>one thousand <i>zuz</i> from him.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Elazar say</b> that <b>those on the path to perform a mitzva are not</b> susceptible to <b>harm</b> throughout the process of performing the mitzva? The Gemara responds: In a place <b>where danger is permanent it is different,</b> as one should not rely on a miracle, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to God’s command to Samuel to anoint David as king in place of Saul: <b>“And Samuel said: How will I go, and Saul will hear and kill me; and God said: Take in your hand a calf and say: I have come to offer a sacrifice to God”</b> (I Samuel 16:2). Even when God Himself issues the command, there is concern with regard to a clear and present danger.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Kahana taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Yehuda: A storehouse for hay, and a cattle barn, and a woodshed, and a storehouse are exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>, due to</b> the fact <b>that the women make use of them. And what</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>Make use?</b> It means that the women <b>bathe</b> in them. Since women bathe there unclothed, it is inappropriate to affix a <i>mezuza</i> there. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said to him: The reason</b> that there is no requirement to affix a <i>mezuza</i> there is due to the fact <b>that</b> women <b>bathe</b> there; one can learn by inference <b>that standard</b> buildings of this kind, where women do not bathe, <b>are obligated</b> in the mitzva of affixing a <i>mezuza</i> there. <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>A cattle barn is exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>,</b> unrelated to whether or not women bathe there?

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the term should be understood otherwise. <b>What</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>Make use?</b> It means that the women <b>adorn</b> themselves there, <b>and this</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is teaching: Although</b> these structures are solid and clean to the extent that <b>the women adorn themselves in them, they are exempt</b> from the obligation of <i>mezuza</i> since they are not residences. <b>Rav Kahana said to him:</b> Are you saying that structures where <b>the women adorn themselves are exempt</b> from the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>? <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>A cattle stable is exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>,</b> and a barn <b>in which women adorn themselves is obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rather, what have you to say,</b> that with regard to the requirement of <i>mezuza</i> the status of places where <b>women adorn themselves is</b> subject to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>?</b> Just as there are different opinions in that case, <b>in my</b> opinion, the status of <b>standard</b> cattle barns <b>is also</b> subject to a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: Upon the doorposts <b>of your house,</b> meaning <b>your house</b> that is <b>designated</b> as a residence, <b>to the exclusion of a storehouse for hay, and a cattle barn, and a woodshed, and a storehouse, which are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i>, and some obligate</b> these structures in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>. Apparently, the Rabbis dispute the requirement of affixing a <i>mezuza</i> in a standard stable.

### Part 10
<b>Actually they said:</b> There is a legal tradition that <b>a building</b> housing <b>a bathroom, and a building</b> housing <b>a tannery [<i>burseki</i>], and a bathhouse, and a building</b> housing a ritual bath for <b>immersion,</b> and any places of <b>which women make use are exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>.</b> This <i>baraita</i> is inconsistent with the opinions of both Rav Kahana and Rav Yehuda. Therefore, <b>Rav Kahana interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning, and Rav Yehuda interprets</b> it <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rav Kahana interprets</b> it <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning: Your house</b> means <b>your house that is designated</b> for <b>your</b> residence, <b>to the exclusion of a storehouse for hay, and a cattle barn, and a woodshed, and a storehouse, which are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i> in</b> a case where their use is <b>standard</b> and they are not used for bathing or other immodest acts. <b>And some obligate</b> these structures in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i> <b>in</b> a case where their use is <b>standard. In truth they said</b> the following with regard to <b>a bathroom, and a tannery, and a bathhouse, and a</b> ritual bath for <b>immersion,</b> and any places of <b>which women make use; and what</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>Make use?</b> It is that women <b>bathe</b> there. These places <b>are exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara challenges this interpretation: <b>If so,</b> that make use in this context means bathe, <b>this is</b> identical to the <b>bathhouse.</b> Why would the <i>baraita</i> need to list both a bathhouse and a place where women bathe? The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the bathhouse of the public, and it teaches us</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the bathhouse of an individual. As it could enter your mind to say: A bathhouse of the public, whose filth is extensive,</b> is exempt from <i>mezuza</i>; <b>however, the bathhouse of an individual, whose filth is not extensive,</b> as only women of that house bathe there, <b>I</b> would <b>say it is obligated in</b> the mitzva of affixing a <b><i>mezuza</i></b>. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that the bathhouse of an individual is also exempt.

### Part 13
<b>And Rav Yehuda interprets</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>according to his</b> line of <b>reasoning, and this</b> is what it <b>is teaching: Your house</b> means <b>your house that is designated</b> for <b>your</b> residence, <b>to the exclusion of a storehouse for hay, and a cattle barn, and a woodshed, and a storehouse, which are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>mezuza</i> even</b> in a case where women <b>adorn themselves there. And some obligate</b> these structures in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i> <b>in</b> a case where <b>women adorn themselves</b> there. <b>However, in</b> a case where use of the building is <b>standard,</b> everyone <b>agrees</b> that these structures <b>are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>. <b>In truth they said</b> that <b>a bathroom, and a tannery, and a bathhouse, and a</b> ritual bath for <b>immersion, even though women adorn themselves</b> there, <b>are exempt from</b> the obligation of <b><i>mezuza</i>, because its filth is extensive.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rav Yehuda,</b> in cases where use of the building is <b>standard,</b> does <b>everyone agree</b> that a storehouse <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>? <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written with regard to the mitzva to affix a <i>mezuza</i>: <b>And upon your gates,</b> meaning that with regard to <b>the gates of houses, and the gates of courtyards, and the gates of cities, and the gates of towns, and a barn, and chicken coops, and a hay storehouse, and wine storehouses, and oil storehouses, all</b> of them are <b>obligated</b> in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>? I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that I include</b> in the obligation of <i>mezuza</i> <b>even</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC