
### Part 1
<b>the tops of the stems</b> of the hyssop branch into the water <b>and sprinkle it.</b> Apparently, even according to the one who said that there is no minimum measure of water for sprinkling there is a minimum measure of water that must be in the vessel. <b>Abaye said: Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> who said that the purification water impurifies the pure, the difficulty can be resolved: The High Priest <b>performs the</b> Temple <b>service</b> for <b>the entire day</b> on each of the seven days of sequestering, <b>and toward the evening</b> the priests <b>sprinkle</b> the purification water <b>upon him.</b> Even if he was pure and the sprinkling rendered him impure, he <b>immerses</b> immediately <b>and observes</b> the requirement to wait <b>until sunset,</b> at which point he is purified and prepared to serve the next day.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that on each of the seven days the High Priest <b>burns the incense and removes</b> the ashes from <b>the lamps. Apparently, incense</b> is burned <b>first, and then the lamps</b> are cleaned. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna in tractate <i>Tamid</i> that discusses the lottery in which the priests performing the various tasks that constitute the morning Temple service are selected. That mishna first mentions the one <b>who was privileged</b> to be selected to perform <b>removal of the ashes from the inner altar,</b> and then <b>the one who was privileged</b> to be selected to remove the ashes from the lamps of <b>the candelabrum,</b> and only then does it deal with <b>the one who is privileged</b> to be selected burn <b>the incense.</b> According to that mishna, removing ashes from the candelabrum precedes the burning of the incense.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Huna said: Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> the <i>mishnayot</i> in tractate <b><i>Tamid</i>? It is Rabbi Shimon Ish HaMitzpa,</b> who disagrees with the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna here. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn the opposite, as we learned</b> in the mishna in tractate <i>Tamid</i>: The priest sprinkles the blood of the daily offering on the altar. <b>He comes to the northeast corner</b> of the altar and <b>sprinkles</b> once on the <b>northeast</b> corner. From there he proceeds to the <b>southwest corner</b> and <b>sprinkles</b> once on the <b>southwest</b> corner.

### Part 4
<b>And it was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> <b>concerning</b> this mishna: <b>Rabbi Shimon Ish HaMitzpa changes the</b> sprinkling of the blood of the <b>daily offering</b> relative to the sprinkling of blood of all other burnt-offerings. He agrees with the first <i>tanna</i> with regard to the first sprinkling of the blood; the priest comes to the <b>northeast</b> corner and <b>sprinkles</b> once on the <b>northeast</b> corner. However, when he proceeds to the <b>southwest</b> corner he does not sprinkle once as he would when offering a burnt-offering; rather, <b>he sprinkles</b> on the <b>west</b> side of the altar <b>and then sprinkles</b> on the <b>south</b> side. Since the disputing opinion is that of Rabbi Shimon Ish HaMitzpa, apparently the unattributed opinions in the <i>mishnayot</i> in tractate <i>Tamid</i> are not the opinions of Rabbi Shimon Ish HaMitzpa.

### Part 5
<b>Rather,</b> there must be a different resolution to the contradiction between the mishna here and the one in tractate <i>Tamid</i>. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Who</b> is the <i>tanna</i> who <b>taught</b> the Yom Kippur service in <b>tractate <i>Yoma</i>? It is Rabbi Shimon Ish HaMitzpa,</b> and tractate <i>Tamid</i> is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis who disagree with him.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from one mishna in <b>tractate <i>Yoma</i> against</b> another mishna in <b>tractate <i>Yoma</i>, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>The second lottery</b> conducted daily among the priests determined the following: <b>Who slaughters</b> the daily morning offering; <b>who sprinkles</b> its blood; <b>who removes the ashes</b> from <b>the inner altar; and who removes the ashes</b> and burnt wicks from <b>the candelabrum; and who takes the limbs</b> of the daily offering <b>up to the ramp</b> to be burned later. Following the second lottery the priests dispersed, and they later reconvened for <b>the third lottery.</b> Before the third lottery, the appointee declared: Let only those priests who are <b>new to</b> offering <b>the incense</b> come and <b>participate in the lottery</b> for the incense. Apparently, removing the ashes from the lamps of the candelabrum preceded the burning of the incense, which contradicts the mishna here.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> the mishna is discussing <b>the removal</b> of the ashes from <b>two lamps,</b> which is performed after the burning of the incense; <b>there,</b> the mishna of the lotteries is discussing <b>the removal</b> of the ashes from <b>five lamps,</b> which precedes the burning of the incense. As will be explained, the priest attends to five lamps first, and after a break, he attends to the final two lamps.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say that the</b> burning of the <b>incense interposes</b> between attending to the first five lamps and attending the last two? <b>But</b> when <b>Abaye related the order of the</b> daily <b>priestly functions in the name of tradition, didn’t</b> he state that it was the sprinkling of <b>the blood of the daily offering that interposed between</b> the five lamps and the two, not the burning of the incense? The Sages <b>say</b> in response: This is <b>not difficult. That</b> sequence cited by Abaye is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Abba Shaul,</b> whereas <b>this</b> sequence cited in the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> should <b>not remove</b> the ashes from <b>the lamps and then burn</b> the incense; <b>rather one should burn</b> the incense <b>and then remove</b> the ashes from the lamps. <b>Abba Shaul says: One removes</b> the ashes from the lamps <b>and then burns</b> the incense. The different sources reflect the dispute cited in the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion of <b>Abba Shaul?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “Every morning when he removes the ashes from the lamps,</b> he shall burn it” (Exodus 30:7), <b>and then</b> it is written: <b>“He shall burn it”</b> (Exodus 30:8). First the lamps are cleaned, and only then is the incense burned. <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that the incense was burned first, interpret this verse? They say: <b>What is the Merciful One saying?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC