
### Part 1
<b>The large date-bulk that they said</b> is the measure that determines liability for eating on Yom Kippur, does this refer to the volume of a large date <b>with its pit or without its pit? Rav Ashi asked</b> a similar question: The mishna that states that <b>a bone</b> that is <b>a barley-grain-bulk</b> imparts ritual impurity, does this refer to the volume of a barley grain <b>with its husk or without its husk?</b> And is that referring to <b>a wet</b> kernel <b>or a dry</b> one? The Gemara clarifies: <b>Rav Ashi did not ask</b> the question <b>that Rav Pappa</b> asked, regarding the size of the date-bulk on Yom Kippur because the answer was clear to him. Since <b>it is stated</b> in the mishna: <b>Large,</b> it means <b>as large as possible,</b> which must include the pit. Conversely, <b>Rav Pappa did not ask</b> the question <b>that Rav Ashi</b> asked regarding the size of the barley-grain-bulk because the answer was clear to him. <b>Wet</b> barley <b>is called <i>shibbolet</i></b> and not barley; <b>without its shell</b> it is no longer called barley but <b>is called <i>ushla</i>.</b> Therefore, the mishna must be referring to dry barley within its shell.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said: The volume of a large date that they said</b> is <b>larger than an egg-bulk. The Sages have an</b> accepted <b>tradition that with this</b> amount of food, the <b>mind</b> of the one who eats <b>is settled,</b> and he is not afflicted. <b>Less than this</b> amount, <b>the mind is not settled.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from what we have learned: <b>An incident</b> happened on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>. <b>They brought a cooked dish to Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai to taste, and</b> they brought <b>to Rabban Gamliel two dates and a tankard of water.</b> Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai and Rabban Gamliel <b>said</b> to them: <b>Bring them up to the <i>sukka</i>,</b> and we will eat there. <b>And</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in that regard:</b> They <b>did not</b> act this way <b>because that is the <i>halakha</i>,</b> that such food must be eaten in the <i>sukka</i>. <b>Rather, they wished to be stringent upon themselves</b> and not eat anything outside of the <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 3
On the other hand, the Gemara reports: <b>And when they gave Rabbi Tzadok food</b> that was <b>less than an egg-bulk</b> to eat, <b>he held it in a cloth</b> and did not wash his hands. <b>And he ate it outside of the <i>sukka</i> and did not recite</b> Grace after Meals <b>afterward.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC