
### Part 1
<b>How should</b> the High Priest <b>act</b> in the Holy of Holies, when he needs to place the incense on the coals by taking a handful from the spoon and placing it in his hands? After he places the coal pan on the ground, <b>he holds the</b> front of <b>the ladle,</b> i.e., the spoon of incense, <b>with his fingertips, and some say</b> he holds it <b>with his teeth.</b> At this stage the handle of the spoon rests between his arms. <b>And</b> he pushes it and <b>raises</b> it <b>up</b> slowly <b>with his thumb</b> toward his body <b>until it reaches between his elbows,</b> which he then uses to turn it over. <b>He then returns</b> the incense <b>into his palms,</b> after which he pours it from his hands into the coal pan. <b>And he heaps</b> the incense into a pile on the coals <b>so that its smoke rises slowly. And some say</b> he does the opposite, that <b>he scatters it so that its smoke rises quickly.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And this</b> taking of a handful of incense <b>is</b> the most <b>difficult</b> sacrificial <b>rite in the Temple.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>This one</b> is the hardest rite, <b>and no other? But there is pinching,</b> which is also considered extremely difficult; <b>and there is taking a handful</b> of a meal-offering, another complex rite. <b>Rather, this</b> taking of a handful of incense <b>is</b> one <b>of</b> the most <b>difficult rites in the Temple,</b> rather than the single most difficult one. In any event, you can <b>learn from this</b> that the High Priest <b>scoops</b> a handful <b>and again scoops.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from this</b> that it is so.

### Part 3
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If a High Priest <b>slaughtered</b> the bull <b>and died, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether <b>another</b> High Priest may <b>enter</b> the Holy of Holies <b>with the blood</b> of the bull that his predecessor slaughtered? <b>Do we say</b> that the verse: “With this Aaron shall come into the sacred place, <b>with a bull”</b> (Leviticus 16:3) teaches that the priest must enter with the blood of a bull, but it need not necessarily be the blood of the bull he himself slaughtered, <b>and</b> in that case he may enter <b>even with the blood of a bull</b> slaughtered by someone else? <b>Or perhaps</b> the verse should be interpreted precisely: <b>“With a bull,” and not with the blood of a bull</b> slaughtered by another?

### Part 4
The Sages disputed this matter. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina says: “With a bull,” and not with the blood of a bull,</b> which means that the newly appointed High Priest must slaughter another bull, as he can enter only with the blood of a bull he himself slaughtered. <b>And Reish Lakish said: “With a bull,” and even with the blood of a bull.</b> Likewise, <b>Rabbi Ami said: “With a bull” and not with the blood of a bull; Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “With a bull,” and even with the blood of a bull.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Ami raised an objection to Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa,</b> the smith: To join a group of people who arranged to partake together of a single Paschal offering, individuals may <b>register</b> as part of a group <b>and they</b> may <b>withdraw from it</b> and join another group <b>until</b> the offering <b>is slaughtered. And if it is so,</b> that the blood of an animal is considered part of the offering, this <i>tanna</i> who authored this statement <b>should have said</b> that they may withdraw <b>until</b> the blood <b>is sprinkled.</b> If, as you maintain, the blood of an offering is part of the offering itself, why can’t a person register to or withdraw from a group of a Paschal offering until its blood is sprinkled?

### Part 6
He answered him: <b>It is different there, as it is written:</b> “And if the household is too small <b>for a lamb [<i>mehiyot miseh</i>],</b> he and his neighbor who is next to his house” (Exodus 12:4). The phrase “<i>mehiyot miseh</i>” is read as <b><i>meiḥiyutei deseh</i>,</b> from the life of a lamb. In other words, one can withdraw from a group only as long as the lamb is alive. If so, its blood is not considered part of the Paschal lamb by a special decree of the Torah, which does not apply to Yom Kippur.

### Part 7
<b>Mar Zutra raised an objection: And one may not redeem</b> a male firstborn donkey <b>with a calf, nor with an undomesticated animal, nor with a slaughtered</b> lamb, <b>nor with an animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>], nor with</b> the product of the prohibited <b>crossbreeding</b> of a lamb and a goat, <b>nor with a <i>koy</i>,</b> a kosher animal with characteristics of both a domesticated animal and a non-domesticated animal, <b>but with a lamb.</b> This proves that a slaughtered animal is not considered a lamb. The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>It is different there, as</b> that <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> a verbal analogy of <b>“lamb”</b> (Exodus 13:13) and <b>“lamb”</b> (Exodus 12:4) <b>from the Paschal offering:</b> Just as a slaughtered lamb cannot be used for a Paschal offering, the same applies to the case of a firstborn donkey.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> so, <b>just as there,</b> the Paschal offering must be <b>male, unblemished, and a year old, so too here,</b> for the redemption of a firstborn donkey, one should be obligated to use <b>a male</b> that is <b>unblemished and a year old.</b> Therefore <b>the verse states:</b> “And every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb; and if you shall not redeem it, then you shall break its neck” (Exodus 13:13). The repetition of: <b>“You shall redeem,” “you shall</b> not <b>redeem,”</b> serves to <b>amplify</b> the definition of the offering and include other animals as acceptable for this redemption, not merely those fit for the Paschal offering.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> the phrases <b>“You shall redeem” “you shall redeem”</b> serve to <b>amplify, even all</b> animals should <b>also</b> be fit for the redemption of a firstborn donkey, including a calf, undomesticated beast, a slaughtered animal, and the other exceptions listed above. The Gemara answers: <b>If so, what purpose does</b> the verbal analogy of <b>“lamb” serve?</b> Rather, it is evident that certain animals are included while others are excluded. In any case, it is clear that the <i>halakha</i> of the blood of the bull on Yom Kippur cannot be derived from here.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC