
### Part 1
and similarly, when the Torah states: <b>Make you,</b> it means <b>from your own</b> property. <b>However,</b> according <b>to the one who said</b> that when the Torah states both phrases it means <b>from communal</b> property, <b>what is there to say</b> to distinguish between Yom Kippur and the other days?

### Part 2
<b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that when the Torah states: <b>Take you,</b> it means <b>from your own</b> property, <b>and</b> when it states: <b>Make you,</b> it means <b>from your own</b> property; however, when the Torah states: <b>And they will bring to you,</b> it means <b>from community</b> property. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoshiya. Rabbi Yonatan says</b> that <b>both</b> when the Torah states: <b>Take you, and</b> when the Torah states: <b>And they will bring to you,</b> it means <b>from community</b> property. <b>And</b> for <b>what</b> purpose, then, <b>does the verse state: Take you,</b> which seems to mean from your own property? It should be understood, <b>as it were,</b> that God said to Moses: <b>I desire</b> that it come <b>from your</b> property <b>more than</b> I desire it <b>from theirs.</b> Therefore, the taking was attributed to Moses even though it was actually from community property.

### Part 3
<b>Abba Ḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Elazar</b> that <b>one verse says: “And make you an ark of wood”</b> (Deuteronomy 10:1), indicating that it should be from your own property; <b>and one verse says</b> on the same subject: <b>“And they shall make an ark of acacia wood”</b> (Exodus 25:10), meaning from the Jewish people. <b>How</b> can <b>this</b> contradiction be resolved? <b>Here,</b> the verse is referring <b>to a time when the Jewish people perform the will of God</b> and they are credited with building the Ark of the Covenant. <b>There,</b> it is referring <b>to a time when the Jewish people do not perform the will of God,</b> and construction of the Ark is attributed to Moses alone. According to that opinion, there is no difference between the offerings of Yom Kippur and other offerings.

### Part 4
The Gemara rejects this: <b>They disagree only with regard to</b> instances of <b>taking in general and</b> instances of <b>making in general:</b> Instances of <b>taking in general</b> are as in the verse: <b>“Take you spices”</b> (Exodus 30:34); and instances of <b>making in general</b> are as in the verse: <b>“Make you two silver trumpets”</b> (Numbers 10:2). <b>However,</b> in <b>these</b> cases of inauguration and of Yom Kippur <b>the verses explicitly</b> teach that the offerings must be <b>from your own</b> property. <b>With regard to</b> the <b>inauguration, now, since it is written: “And to the children of</b> Israel <b>you will speak, saying: Take a goat kid for a sin-offering</b> and an unblemished year-old calf and lamb for burnt-offerings” (Leviticus 9:3), with regard to the verse: <b>“And he said to Aaron: Take you a young calf for a sin-offering”</b> (Leviticus 9:2), <b>why do I</b> need this clear difference between the formulation of the command to the Jewish people and the formulation of the command to Aaron? <b>Learn from it</b> that in this context the phrase: <b>Take you,</b> means <b>from your own</b> property.

### Part 5
And <b>with regard to Yom Kippur, now, since it is written: “With this Aaron will come into the Sanctuary, with a young bull for a sin-offering</b> and a ram for a burnt-offering” (Leviticus 16:3), with regard to the verse: <b>“And from the congregation of the children of Israel he will take two goat kids for a sin-offering</b> and one ram for a burnt-offering <b>and</b> Aaron <b>will offer his young bull as a sin-offering”</b> (Leviticus 16:5–6), <b>why do I</b> need the emphasis that the goats come from the property of the children of Israel? <b>Learn from it</b> that <b>this</b> term: <b>His,</b> written with regard to the calf, means it <b>is from his own</b> property.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Ashi stated</b> another reason that distinguishes Yom Kippur from Rosh HaShana and <i>Shavuot</i>. <b>One derives</b> the <b>bull for a sin-offering and ram for a burnt-offering</b> written with regard to Yom Kippur <b>from</b> the <b>bull for a sin-offering and ram for a burnt-offering</b> written with regard to the inauguration, <b>to the exclusion of Rosh HaShana and <i>Shavuot</i>, on which both of them,</b> the bull and the ram, <b>are burnt-offerings.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Ravina stated</b> another distinction: <b>One derives</b> a matter that is restricted to the <b>service</b> performed <b>by the High Priest,</b> Yom Kippur, <b>from</b> a matter that is restricted to the <b>service</b> performed <b>by the High Priest,</b> the inauguration, which was performed by Aaron, <b>to the exclusion of all the difficulties</b> raised from the beginning of the discussion, <b>as</b> on the other potential days raised, <b>they are not</b> restricted to <b>service</b> performed <b>by the High Priest;</b> rather, the service on those days may be performed by any priest.

### Part 8
<b>And some say</b> that <b>Ravina said: One derives</b> a matter that is an <b>initial service from an initial service, to the exclusion of all these that are not initial</b> services. That statement of Ravina is unclear, and the Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>initial</b> service? <b>If we say</b> that <b>initial</b> service <b>means</b> one performed <b>by the High Priest; that is</b> identical to <b>the first</b> version of Ravina’s statement. <b>Rather,</b> it may be understood as follows: One derives <b>the initial service</b> performed <b>in the place,</b> the Holy of Holies, on Yom Kippur, <b>from the initial service</b> performed <b>in the place,</b> the Tabernacle, on the eighth day of the inauguration. Therefore, it is the service of Yom Kippur alone that is derived from the inauguration.

### Part 9
§ <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said: Rabbi Yoḥanan taught one</b> case derived from the inauguration, while <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi taught two.</b> The Gemara elaborates. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan taught one: To do, to make atonement; these are the actions</b> performed on <b>Yom Kippur</b> that require sequestering beforehand, like the inauguration. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi taught two: To do, these are the actions</b> performed in the burning <b>of the</b> red <b>heifer; to atone, these are the actions</b> performed on <b>Yom Kippur.</b> Both require sequestering.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: And did <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan teach</b> only <b>one</b> case derived from the inauguration, i.e., Yom Kippur? <b>Didn’t we learn</b> explicitly in the mishna: <b>Seven days prior to Yom Kippur,</b> and in another mishna: <b>Seven days prior to the burning of the heifer,</b> the Sages would remove the priest from his home? Apparently, there are two cases in which the priest is sequestered. The Gemara answers: With regard to sequestering the priest prior to the burning of the heifer, the Sages <b>merely</b> established <b>a higher standard.</b> They issued a decree to underscore the sanctity of the ritual after they permitted its performance by a priest who immersed that day. There is no Torah source for the sequestering of the priest in that case.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Minyomi bar Ḥilkiya say</b> that <b>Rabbi Maḥseya bar Idi said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that the verse states: <b>“As has been done this day, so the Lord has commanded to do, to make atonement for you”</b> (Leviticus 8:34), from which it is derived: <b>To do, these are the actions</b> performed in the burning <b>of the</b> red <b>heifer; to make atonement, these are the actions</b> performed on <b>Yom Kippur?</b> Apparently, even Rabbi Yoḥanan taught two cases derived from inauguration. The Gemara resolves the difficulty: <b>That is</b> the opinion <b>of his teacher;</b> however, he himself disagrees. <b>As when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Yishmael: To do, these are the actions</b> performed in the burning <b>of the</b> red <b>heifer; to atone, these are the actions</b> performed on <b>Yom Kippur.</b> That which Rabbi Manyumei cited in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan was the opinion of his teacher, Rabbi Yishmael.

### Part 12
§ With regard to the sequestering of the priest, <b>Reish Lakish said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: From where did you derive this</b> principle of sequestering? You derived it <b>from</b> the <b>inauguration. If so, just as</b> with regard to the <b>inauguration,</b> failure to perform <b>all</b> the details <b>that are written in its</b> regard <b>invalidates</b> it, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to Yom Kippur, failure to perform <b>all</b> the details <b>that are written in its</b> regard <b>invalidates</b> the Yom Kippur service. All the <i>halakhot</i> of sequestering must be precisely observed.

### Part 13
<b>And if you say: Indeed, that</b> is so; <b>didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>And they would designate another priest in his stead, and it is not taught</b> with regard to the designated priest: Seven days before Yom Kippur <b>they remove</b> him from his house, although ultimately he may perform the Yom Kippur service. Apparently, failure to sequester the priest does not invalidate the service. <b>And if you say</b> in response: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>They would designate?</b> It means: <b>They would remove;</b> that is implausible. Were that so, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach either</b> with regard to both <b>this</b> High Priest <b>and that</b> designated replacement: <b>They would designate; or</b> with regard to both <b>this</b> High Priest <b>and that</b> designated replacement: <b>They would remove.</b>

### Part 14
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>Rather, from where do</b> you, <b>Master, derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of sequestering before Yom Kippur? Reish Lakish <b>said to him:</b> I derive it <b>from Sinai, as it is written: “And the glory of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai and the cloud covered him [<i>vaykhasehu</i>] six days, and He called to Moses on the seventh day</b> from the midst of the cloud” (Exodus 24:16). The masculine suffix <i>hu</i> in <i>vaykhasehu</i> can be interpreted either as him, referring to Moses, or as it, referring to the mountain. <b>Now, since it states: “And He called to Moses on the seventh day,” what is</b> derived from the previous explicit mention of <b>six days? These</b> six days are mentioned as <b>a paradigm,</b> from which a general principle is derived <b>that anyone who enters the camp of the Divine Presence,</b> the site of the revelation at Mount Sinai, or the place where the Divine Presence rests, the Holy of Holies, <b>requires</b> prior <b>sequestering for six</b> days of sanctification.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>Wasn’t it seven,</b> not six, days of sequestering that <b>we learned</b> in the mishna? Reish Lakish answered: <b>The mishna</b> that requires sequestering for seven days <b>is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira, who is concerned</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC