
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the Sages disputed the precise expression that was employed in the Temple. <b>Rabbi Yishmael says</b> that the formula is: <b>The light flashed; Rabbi Akiva says: The light has risen,</b> which is brighter than a mere flash. <b>Naḥuma ben Apakshiyon says:</b> There is <b>even light in Hebron. Matya ben Shmuel says</b> that <b>the appointed</b> priest in charge of <b>the lotteries says: The entire eastern sky is illuminated</b> all the way <b>to Hebron. Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira says</b> that this is what the appointed priest said: <b>The entire eastern sky is illuminated</b> all the way <b>to Hebron and the entire nation has gone out, each and every person to</b> engage in <b>his labor.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara questions Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira’s version of the formula: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the people have gone to work, it has <b>grown considerably lighter.</b> People go to work after it is light. Apparently, Rabbi Yehuda ben Beteira is referring to a time after sunrise, not a time adjacent to dawn. The Gemara answers: It is that people have gone out <b>to hire workers</b> that <b>we are saying.</b> Owners of fields rose early, adjacent to dawn, to hire workers so that they could begin working when it is light.

### Part 3
§ <b>Rav Safra said:</b> The time for the afternoon <b>prayer of Abraham</b> begins <b>from when the walls</b> begin to <b>blacken</b> from shade. When the sun begins to descend from the middle of the sky, producing shadows on the walls, that marks the beginning of the setting of the sun and then the afternoon prayer may be recited.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> And will <b>we arise and derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>from Abraham?</b> Didn’t Abraham live before the Torah was given to the Jewish people, and therefore <i>halakhot</i> cannot be derived from his conduct? <b>Rava said:</b> The <b><i>tanna</i> derived</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>from Abraham’s</b> conduct, <b>and we do not derive</b> a <i>halakha</i> <b>from his</b> conduct? <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: <b>“And on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised”</b> (Leviticus 12:3), this verse <b>teaches that the entire day is suitable for</b> performance of the mitzva of <b>circumcision. However, the vigilant are early</b> in their performance of <b>mitzvot</b> and circumcise in the morning, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the binding of Isaac: <b>“And Abraham arose early in the morning and saddled</b> his donkey” (Genesis 22:3). He awakened early to fulfill the mitzva without delay. Apparently, <i>halakha</i> is derived from the conduct of Abraham.

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>Rav Yosef,</b> it was not the matter of deriving <i>halakha</i> from the conduct of Abraham that is difficult. Rather, <b>this is difficult for him, as we learned</b> in a mishna: When <b>Passover eves occur on Shabbat eves,</b> the daily afternoon offering is slaughtered <b>at six and a half hours</b> of the day <b>and sacrificed</b> on the altar <b>at seven and a half hours.</b> The afternoon offering was slaughtered as early as possible to enable all the Paschal lambs, which were slaughtered after the daily afternoon offering was sacrificed, to be slaughtered and roasted before sunset, so that no labor would be performed on Shabbat. Now, if indeed this <i>halakha</i> is derived from the conduct of Abraham, <b>let us slaughter</b> the offering even earlier, <b>from when the walls</b> begin to <b>blacken,</b> just after the end of the sixth hour of the day. Apparently, <i>halakha</i> is not derived from the conduct of Abraham.

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this: <b>What is the difficulty?</b> <br><b>Perhaps the walls of the Temple</b> begin to <b>blacken</b> only <b>at six and a half</b> hours of the day <b>because they are not perfectly aligned.</b> The Temple walls were broad at the bottom and gradually narrowed as they reached the top; therefore, the upper part of the wall did not cast a shadow on the wall opposite it until six and a half hours of the day. <br><b>Or, alternatively,</b> it is <b>different</b> with regard to <b>Abraham</b> because <b>there was great</b> knowledge of <b>astronomy [<i>itztagninut</i>] in his heart.</b> He was able to precisely calculate the movements of the heavenly bodies and was therefore able to discern immediately after noon that the sun had begun its descent. Others require a half hour to be certain that the descent of the sun has begun. <br><b>Or, alternatively</b> Abraham was different <b>because he was an Elder and sat</b> and studied Torah <b>in a yeshiva,</b> where the Divine Presence rests. There he developed the expertise to determine the precise hour. <b>As Rabbi Ḥama, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: From the days of our ancestors, yeshiva never left them.</b> Our ancestors were leaders of their generations, who taught Torah to students who came to them.

### Part 7
When <b>they were in Egypt</b> there was <b>a yeshiva with them, as it is stated: “Go and gather the Elders of Israel”</b> (Exodus 3:16), indicating that there were Sages among them who studied Torah. And similarly, when <b>they were in the desert,</b> there was <b>a yeshiva with them, as it is stated: “Gather for me seventy men from the Elders of Israel”</b> (Numbers 11:16). <b>Abraham our Patriarch</b> was himself <b>an Elder and would sit in yeshiva, as it is stated: “And Abraham was old, advanced in years”</b> (Genesis 24:1). From the apparent redundancy of the terms old and advanced in years, it is derived that old means that he was a wise Elder and prominent in Torah, and advanced in years means that he was elderly. Similarly, <b>Isaac our Patriarch was an Elder and sat in yeshiva, as it is stated: “And it came to pass when Isaac was old</b> and his eyes were dim” (Genesis 27:1). Similarly, <b>Jacob our Patriarch was an Elder and sat in yeshiva, as it is stated: “And Israel’s eyes were heavy with age”</b> (Genesis 48:10).

### Part 8
<b>Eliezer, servant of Abraham, was an Elder and sat in yeshiva, as it is stated: “And Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his household, who ruled over all he had”</b> (Genesis 24:2). <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The verse means that <b>he had mastery over the Torah of his master,</b> having gained proficiency in all of the Torah of Abraham. That is the meaning of the verse: <b>“He is Damascus [<i>Dammesek</i>] Eliezer”</b> (Genesis 15:2). <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The word <i>Dammesek</i> is a contraction of he <b>who draws [<i>doleh</i>] and gives drink [<i>mashke</i>] to others from his master’s Torah.</b>

### Part 9
Apropos the previous statement, the Gemara cites that <b>Rav said: Abraham our Patriarch fulfilled the entire Torah</b> before it was given, <b>as it is stated: “Because [<i>ekev</i>] Abraham hearkened to My voice and kept</b> My charge, My mitzvot, My statutes and My Torahs” (Genesis 26:5). <b>Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya said to Rav: And say</b> that the verse means that he fulfilled only the <b>seven</b> Noahide <b>mitzvot</b> and not the entire Torah. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t there also circumcision</b> that Abraham clearly observed, which is not one of the Noahide laws? Apparently, Abraham fulfilled more than just those seven. The Gemara asks: <b>And say</b> that he fulfilled only <b>the seven mitzvot and circumcision.</b> Rav <b>said to him: If so, why do I</b> need the continuation of the verse, that Abraham kept: <b>My mitzvot and myTorah?</b> That is a clear indication that he fulfilled mitzvot beyond the seven Noahide mitzvot, and apparently fulfilled the entire Torah.

### Part 10
<b>Rav said, and some say Rav Ashi</b> said: <b>Abraham our Patriarch fulfilled</b> the entire Torah, <b>even</b> the mitzva of <b>the joining of cooked foods,</b> a rabbinic ordinance instituted later, <b>as it is stated: MyTorahs.</b> Since the term is in the plural, it indicates that Abraham kept two Torahs; <b>one, the Written Torah, and one, the Oral Torah.</b> In the course of fulfilling the Oral Torah, he fulfilled all the details and parameters included therein.

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna that <b>Matya ben Shmuel says</b> that the appointed priest asks: <b>Is the entire eastern sky illuminated even to Hebron? And he says: Yes.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who said yes? If we say</b> it is <b>that</b> person <b>who is standing on the roof,</b> does <b>he dream and</b> also <b>interpret</b> his dream? Is it reasonable that the one asking the question answers it? <b>Rather,</b> say that it was <b>that</b> person <b>who is standing on the ground</b> who said yes. <b>From where does he know</b> that the sky is illuminated such that he is able to answer yes?

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests two possible solutions: <b>If you wish, say</b> it was <b>that</b> person <b>who is standing on the ground</b> who answered yes, <b>and if you wish, say</b> it was <b>that</b> person <b>who is standing on the roof</b> who answered. <b>If you wish, say that</b> the person <b>who is standing on the roof said: The entire eastern sky is illuminated. And that</b> person <b>who is standing on the ground said to him:</b> Has it illuminated <b>even to Hebron? And he</b> who is standing on the roof <b>said to him: Yes.</b>

### Part 13
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that</b> the person <b>who is standing on the ground said: Is the entire eastern sky illuminated? And he</b> who is standing on the roof <b>said to him:</b> Do you mean that it is illuminated even <b>to Hebron? And he</b> who is standing on the ground <b>said to him: Yes,</b> that is what I mean.

### Part 14
§ The mishna asks: <b>And why did they need to</b> ascertain <b>this?</b> The mishna answered that there was an incident where they confused the light of the moon with the light of the rising sun and slaughtered the daily morning offering too early. The Gemara asks: <b>And are</b> sunlight and moonlight <b>mistaken</b> for one another? <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: A column of</b> the light of the <b>moon is not similar to a column of</b> the light of the <b>sun; a column of</b> the light of the <b>moon rises like a staff</b> in one column while <b>a column of</b> the light of the <b>sun diffuses to here and to there?</b> The Gemara answers that <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> It <b>was a cloudy day, and</b> then even the moonlight <b>diffuses to here and to there,</b> which caused them to err and believe that it was the rising sun. <b>Rav Pappa said: Learn from this</b> statement of Rabbi Yishmael that <b>a cloudy day is</b> similar to <b>a completely sunny</b> day because the sunlight is further diffused by the clouds.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the</b> practical <b>ramifications</b> of the statement that a cloudy day is similar to a completely sunny day? The Gemara explains: The ramifications are with regard <b>to spreading hides</b> to dry them. On a cloudy day, wherever the hides are placed they will be exposed to sunlight. <b>Alternatively,</b> the ramifications are according <b>to</b> that <b>which Rava taught</b> with regard to <i>matza</i>: <b>A woman</b> may <b>neither knead</b> dough for <i>matza</i> for Passover <b>in</b> the light of <b>the sun nor</b> may she prepare the dough <b>with hot water</b> heated <b>in the sun.</b> On a cloudy day, one may not knead the dough anywhere outside since the light of the sun is diffused everywhere.

### Part 16
Apropos a cloudy day, the Gemara cites that <b>Rav Naḥman said: The hazy</b> light <b>of the sun</b> through the clouds <b>is more damaging than the</b> light of the <b>sun</b> itself. <b>And your mnemonic</b> is <b>the</b> cover of <b>a jar of vinegar:</b> As long as the jar is tightly closed, the odor of the vinegar does not spread and it intensifies. Even the slightest opening in the lid releases an odor more powerful than the odor generated by vinegar that was not sealed in a jar. The same is true with regard to the rays of the sun. With regard to sunlight that is obscured behind clouds, when it escapes through breaks in the clouds it is more powerful than direct sunlight. <b>Dazzling sunlight,</b> which shines through cracks in the clouds, <b>is more harmful</b> to the eyes <b>than</b> direct <b>sunlight. And your mnemonic is a drip;</b> water that drips on a person is more bothersome than water in which one completely immerses his body.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC