
### Part 1
<b>killing it with an object that is thrown</b> from a distance like an arrow rather than with one’s hands. If the dog is possessed by an evil spirit, one should avoid direct contact with it.

### Part 2
The Gemara comments: This <b>was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel: When one kills</b> a mad dog, <b>he should kill it only with a thrown object.</b> Furthermore, <b>one who is rubbed by mad dog will become dangerously</b> ill, while <b>one bitten</b> by the dog <b>will die.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the remedy</b> for <b>one who is rubbed by mad dog</b> and <b>becomes dangerously ill?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Let him take off his clothing and run.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, was rubbed by one of these</b> mad dogs <b>in the market,</b> whereupon <b>he took off his clothing and ran. He said: I have fulfilled</b> the verse: <b>“Wisdom preserves the lives of those who have it”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:12).

### Part 3
The Gemara continues to discuss the <i>baraita</i>: <b>One bitten</b> by a mad dog <b>will die.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the remedy? Abaye said: Let him bring the skin of a male hyena and write on it: I, so-and-so, son of so-and-so, am writing</b> this spell <b>about you upon the skin of a male hyena: <i>Kanti kanti kelirus</i>. And some say</b> he should write: <b><i>Kandi kandi keloros</i>.</b> He then writes names of God, <b><i>Yah</i>, <i>Yah</i>, Lord of Hosts, amen amen Selah. And let him take off his clothes and bury them in a cemetery for twelve months</b> of <b>the year,</b> after which <b>he should take them out, and burn them in an oven, and scatter the ashes at a crossroads. And</b> during <b>those twelve months</b> of <b>the year,</b> when his clothes are buried, <b>when he drinks water, let him drink only from a copper tube</b> and not from a spring, <b>lest he see the</b> image of the <b>demon in the water and be endangered, like</b> the case of <b>Abba bar Marta, who is</b> also called <b>Abba bar Manyumi, whose mother made him a gold tube</b> for this purpose.

### Part 4
§ The mishna said: <b>And furthermore, Rabbi Matya</b> ben Ḥarash <b>said:</b> With regard to one who suffers pain in his throat, one may place medicine inside his mouth on Shabbat, although administering a remedy is prohibited on Shabbat. The Gemara discusses a related incident: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan suffered</b> from the illness <b><i>tzefidna</i>,</b> which first affects the teeth and gums and then the intestines. <b>He went to a certain</b> gentile <b>matron [<i>matronita</i>]</b> who was a well-known healer. <b>She prepared a medicine for him on Thursday and Friday. He said to her: What</b> shall I do <b>on Shabbat,</b> when I cannot come to collect the medicine from you? <b>She said to him: You will not need</b> it. He asked her: <b>If I do need</b> it, <b>what</b> shall I do? <b>She said to him: Swear to me that you will not reveal</b> the remedy; then I will tell you, and you can prepare it yourself should you need it. <b>He swore: To the God of the Jews, I will not reveal it.</b> She told him the remedy. Rabbi Yoḥanan then <b>went out and taught it publicly,</b> revealing the secret of the remedy.

### Part 5
The Gemara is surprised at this: <b>But he swore to her</b> that he would not reveal it. The Gemara answers that in his vow he declared: <b>I will not reveal it to the God of the Jews.</b> However, his words imply: <b>I will reveal it to His people, the Jews.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Still, there is a desecration of God’s name,</b> as the matron now thinks that a great man of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s stature broke his vow. The Gemara answers: <b>He revealed</b> it <b>to her at the outset.</b> As soon as she revealed the remedy to him, he told her that his vow would not prevent him from publicizing the remedy.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> was the medicine that <b>she prepared for him? Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ami, said:</b> It was <b>water</b> in which <b>leaven</b> was steeped, <b>olive oil, and salt. Rav Yeimar said:</b> It was <b>leaven itself, olive oil, and salt. Rav Ashi said:</b> The remedy was <b>fat</b> from the bone marrow of <b>a goose’s wing. Abaye said: I made all of these</b> medicines <b>and was not cured</b> from this ailment, <b>until a certain Arab told me</b> the remedy for it: <b>Take olive seeds that are less than one-third</b> ripe, <b>and burn them in a fire on top of a new hoe, and stick them along the row of gums. I did this and was cured.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> does <b>this</b> disease <i>tzefidna</i> come? It is from eating <b>wheat bread that is too hot and fish remains fried in oil. What is the sign of</b> this sickness? <b>When one puts something between his teeth, blood comes out from his gums. When Rabbi Yoḥanan suffered from <i>tzefidna</i>, he prepared this</b> medicine described above <b>on Shabbat and was cured.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how did Rabbi Yoḥanan prepare this</b> medicine on Shabbat for an ailment which affects only the gums but is not life-threatening? <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: <i>Tzefidna</i> is different, since it does</b> indeed <b>begin in the mouth</b> and appears to be an illness of the teeth, <b>but it ends up in the intestines</b> and is dangerous.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Abba said to Rabbi Yoḥanan: In accordance with whose</b> opinion did you do this? Was it not in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Matya ben Ḥarash, who said:</b> In the case of <b>one who suffers pain in his mouth, one puts medicine in his</b> mouth <b>on Shabbat,</b> which is a minority opinion? Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him:</b> It is so, <b>but I say</b> the Sages agreed with him about taking medicine <b>in this</b> case alone, <b>but no other.</b> If so, with regard to medicine on Shabbat, the view of Rabbi Matya ben Ḥarash is not a minority opinion.

### Part 9
<b>Let us say that</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>supports him:</b> With regard to <b>one who is seized with <i>yerakon</i>, one feeds him donkey meat</b> as medicine; with regard to <b>one whom a mad dog bit, one feeds him the lobe of its liver;</b> in the case of <b>one who has pain in his mouth, one puts medicine in his</b> mouth <b>on Shabbat; this is the statement of Rabbi Matya ben Ḥarash. And the Rabbis say: These have no</b> value <b>as a remedy.</b> The Rabbis used the term <b>these, to exclude what? What, is it not to exclude</b> this <b>medicine</b> for <i>tzefidna</i>, which the Rabbis agree is permitted on Shabbat?

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, it excludes</b> a different remedy, which Rabbi Matya suggests: <b>Bloodletting</b> to heal the ailment <b><i>serunkhi</i></b> is permitted on Shabbat. The Gemara comments: <b>So too, this is reasonable</b> to say, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said three things that he heard in the name of Rabbi Matya ben Ḥarash: One</b> may <b>let blood for <i>serunkhi</i> on Shabbat; and</b> in the case of <b>one whom a mad dog bit, one feeds him the lobe of its liver; and</b> in the case of <b>one who has pain in his mouth, one puts medicine in his</b> mouth <b>on Shabbat.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And the Rabbis say: These have no</b> value <b>as a remedy.</b> The Rabbis used the term <b>these to exclude what? What, is it not</b> to limit their argument only to <b>the latter two</b> items, which do not cure anything, and <b>to exclude the first</b> item, bloodletting for <i>serunkhi</i>, which everyone agrees is an effective remedy? The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> there is no proof from here, since it is possible to say that it is referring <b>to the first two</b> items of the <b>first</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and excludes the latter clause</b> with regard to medicine on Shabbat, which they agree with.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC