
### Part 1
do items that are generally considered interpositions that invalidate an immersion <b>interpose</b> in this immersion, <b>or</b> do they <b>not interpose,</b> since the immersion is only ancillary and serves as a reminder? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: All</b> ordinances <b>that the Sages instituted, they instituted parallel to Torah law.</b> Therefore, this immersion by rabbinic law has the same basic parameters as immersion by Torah law. There may be no interposition.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef:</b> Is <b>partial entry,</b> when one enters a certain place with only part of his body, <b>considered entry or not?</b> Rav Yosef <b>said to him: The thumbs</b> of the leper <b>will prove</b> this point, <b>as</b> the leper reaching his thumbs into the Temple <b>constitutes partial entry, and it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A leper immerses and stands at the Gate of Nicanor,</b> indicating that immersion is required before even partial entry. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>; may an impure person <b>craft</b> a very <b>long knife and slaughter</b> an animal in the Temple courtyard while remaining outside the courtyard? Is it the essence of the service that requires immersion, or is it entry into the courtyard that requires immersion?

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>Raise the dilemma</b> according <b>to ben Zoma,</b> who rules stringently with regard to immersion; and <b>raise the dilemma</b> according <b>to the Rabbis who disagree with Rabbi Yehuda</b> and do not obligate all people in this immersion. The Gemara elaborates: <b>Raise the dilemma</b> according <b>to ben Zoma:</b> Does <b>ben Zoma require</b> immersion <b>only for</b> entry <b>inside</b> the courtyard; <b>however, for</b> standing <b>outside</b> the courtyard, <b>no,</b> he does not require immersion? <b>Or perhaps</b> even for one standing outside the courtyard ben Zoma requires immersion, <b>lest he</b> inadvertently <b>come to be drawn</b> inside in the course of his service.

### Part 4
Similarly, <b>raise the dilemma</b> according <b>to the Rabbis, who disagree with Rabbi Yehuda:</b> How so? Do <b>the Rabbis say</b> that there is no requirement of immersion <b>only there, where he is not performing</b> any Temple <b>service; however, here, where he is performing service, no,</b> they would require immersion? <b>Or perhaps there is no difference,</b> and they would not require immersion under any circumstances. The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>Five immersions and ten sanctifications</b> the <b>High Priest immerses</b> and sanctifies his hands and feet, respectively. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Five immersions and ten sanctifications</b> the <b>High Priest immerses and sanctifies</b> his hands and feet, respectively, <b>on the day</b> of Yom Kippur. <b>And all</b> of these immersions and sanctifications take place <b>in the sacred</b> area, the Temple courtyard, <b>in</b> the <b>Hall of <i>Parva</i>, except for</b> this <b>first</b> immersion, <b>which was in the non-sacred</b> area <b>on the roof of Gate of the Water, and</b> that gate <b>was alongside his chamber. Abaye said: Conclude from that</b> which was taught in this <i>baraita</i> that <b><i>Ein Eitam</i>,</b> the spring from which water was supplied to the Temple, was <b>twenty-three cubits higher than the ground of the Temple courtyard.</b>

### Part 6
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>All the entrances that were there</b> in the Temple, <b>their height is twenty cubits and their width is ten cubits, except for</b> the entrance <b>to the Entrance Hall</b> of the Sanctuary, which was twice that, i.e., forty cubits high and twenty cubits wide. <b>And it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is stated: <b>“And he shall wash his flesh in water”</b> (Leviticus 15:13), and it is stated in another verse: “And he shall wash all of his flesh in water”(Leviticus 15:16). This refers to water known as <b>the waters of a ritual bath.</b> The verse adds the emphasis: <b>All of his flesh,</b> to say that immersion must be <b>in water that one’s entire body enters</b> at the same time. <b>And how much</b> water <b>is it?</b> It is <b>one cubit</b> length <b>by one cubit</b> width <b>by a height of three cubits.</b> That is sufficient water to cover a person’s height. <b>And the Sages calculated</b> that the volume of <b>the waters of a ritual bath</b> that fit into that space is <b>forty <i>se’a</i>.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC