
### Part 1
The Gemara clarifies: Food that has the volume of <b>an egg-bulk is required</b> to be eaten in <b>a <i>sukka</i>. If it should enter your mind</b> to say that the <b>volume of the large date that they spoke of is larger than</b> the volume of <b>an egg-bulk,</b> there is a contradiction. <b>Now,</b> comparing the two episodes, it seems that <b>two dates without their pits are not</b> the volume of <b>an egg.</b> If so, <b>can the volume of a large date and its pit</b> be <b>greater than that of an egg-bulk? Rav Yirmeya said: Yes,</b> although <b>two dates without their pits are not equal</b> to <b>an egg-bulk, the volume of a large date and its pit are larger than an egg-bulk,</b> since date pits are very large. <b>Rav Pappa said: This</b> explains the folk saying <b>that people say:</b> In <b>two <i>kav</i> of dates</b> there is <b>one <i>kav</i> and more of pits,</b> meaning that the volume of the pit is larger than that of the fruit itself.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said:</b> This entire line of questioning has no basis: <b>There,</b> in the incident of the <i>sukka</i>, <b>this is the reasoning</b> that the <i>halakha</i> permits eating the dates outside of the <i>sukka</i>, <b>due to</b> the fact that dates <b>are fruit, and fruit need not</b> be eaten in <b>a <i>sukka</i></b> but may be eaten outside of a <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara <b>raises an objection. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: When we would learn Torah with Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua, they brought before us figs and grapes, and we ate them as a casual meal outside of the <i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara analyzes this: This implies that in the case of <b>a casual meal, yes,</b> it may be eaten outside of a <i>sukka</i>; but <b>a fixed meal</b> may <b>not</b> be eaten outside of a <i>sukka</i>. Therefore, a meal consisting of fruit must be eaten in a <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara rejects this: That is the wrong inference. Instead, <b>say we ate them as if</b> they were <b>a casual meal,</b> which may be eaten <b>outside of the <i>sukka</i>,</b> meaning that eating fruit is always considered a snack.

### Part 3
<b>If you wish, say</b> instead that it can be understood in this way: <b>We ate</b> that fruit <b>as a fixed meal, and we ate bread as a casual meal with</b> the fruit, to temper their sweetness, <b>outside of the <i>sukka</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> Rava. It teaches: <b>Therefore, if one completed</b> consuming the amount that one is required to eat in the <i>sukka</i> <b>with types of sweets, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation of sitting in the <i>sukka</i>. <b>If it should enter your mind</b> to say that <b>fruit</b> is <b>required</b> to be eaten in <b>a <i>sukka</i>,</b> then it should not say sweets; <b>let it teach fruit.</b> The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>What</b> do the words <b>types of sweets</b> mean? It means <b>fruit.</b> Therefore, this <i>baraita</i> is not a support for Rava’s opinion. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that this <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>a place where fruits are uncommon,</b> and therefore other sweet foods are eaten, but fruit can similarly complete the requirement. Consequently, no support can be brought from here.

### Part 5
Until now, the Gemara has assumed that the volume of a large date is more than that of an egg. <b>Rav Zevid</b> disagreed with what was mentioned earlier and <b>said:</b> This is not so. Rather, <b>the volume of a large date that they spoke</b> of <b>is less than an egg-bulk, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> With regard to <b>leaven,</b> the sourdough used to make dough rise, ownership of <b>the volume of an olive-bulk</b> violates the prohibitions in the following verses stated regarding Passover: “And no leavened bread shall be seen with you” (Exodus 13:7) and “Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses” (Exodus 12:19). However, the amount of <b>leavened bread</b> that must be owned to violate the prohibition <b>is the volume of a large date.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara continues. <b>And we discussed it: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Beit Shammai?</b> If both leaven and leavened bread had the same measure that determines liability, <b>let the Merciful One write</b> only: <b>“Leavened bread,” and</b> He would <b>not need</b> to write: <b>“Leaven.” I would say,</b> based on logic: <b>If leavened bread, whose leavening ability is</b> not as <b>strong, is prohibited</b> at <b>an olive-bulk, all the more so</b> should <b>not leaven, whose leavening ability is strong</b> because it causes dough to rise, be also prohibited at an olive-bulk? Since <b>the Merciful One distinguishes</b> between <b>them</b> and states both “leaven” and “leavened bread,” this <b>taught you</b> that <b>the measure for one is not</b> the same as <b>the measure for the other.</b> The measure that determines liability for <b>leaven</b> is <b>an olive-bulk,</b> like in the case of most prohibitions from the Torah, and the measure that determines liability for <b>leavened bread,</b> whose leavening ability is weaker, is the <b>volume of a large date.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And if it should enter your mind</b> to say: <b>The volume of the large date that they spoke</b> of <b>is greater than an egg-bulk, since Beit Shammai are searching for the measure</b> one size <b>larger than an olive-bulk,</b> as they proved that leavened bread must have a larger measure than an olive-bulk, and if the measure one size larger than an olive-bulk is an egg-bulk, then <b>let them teach an egg-bulk</b> and not a date. <b>Alternatively, if they are</b> exactly <b>the same</b> volume, and the volume of a large date has the same volume as an egg-bulk, <b>they should have taught an egg-bulk,</b> which is the more commonly used measure. <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from here that the volume of a large date is less than an egg-bulk?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this: <b>From where</b> is your proof? <b>Perhaps I could actually say to you</b> that the measure of <b>the volume of a large date that they said is larger than an egg-bulk;</b> however, the volume of a date of <b>normal</b> size is the same as <b>an egg-bulk,</b> and Beit Shammai were referring to a normal-sized date. <b>Alternatively,</b> say <b>that</b> the volume of a large date and an egg-bulk <b>are equal, and</b> the mishna <b>chose</b> to use <b>one of them.</b> Either way, there is no proof from here that the volume of a large date is greater than an egg-bulk.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it cannot be proven from here. Proof can be found <b>from here: How much</b> must one eat <b>to obligate</b> those with whom he ate in <b>an invitation</b> [<b><i>zimmun</i>]</b> for Grace After Meals? <b>An olive-bulk</b> of food suffices to obligate those with whom they ate in a <i>zimmun</i>; these are <b>the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says: An egg-bulk</b> is the minimum measure to obligate those with whom they ate in a <i>zimmun</i>. The Gemara clarifies: <b>With regard to what do they disagree? Rabbi Meir holds</b> that the verse “And you shall eat and be satisfied and bless the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 8:10) should be understood as follows: <b>“And you shall eat”; this</b> is referring to <b>eating. “And be satisfied”; this</b> is referring to <b>drinking.</b> The definition of <b>eating</b> throughout the Torah is consuming <b>an olive-bulk. Rabbi Yehuda holds: “And you shall eat and be satisfied”</b> is referring to <b>eating that causes satisfaction, and what is that?</b> The volume of <b>an egg-bulk.</b> Less than that amount of food is not satisfying.

### Part 10
<b>And if it should enter your mind</b> to say that <b>the volume of the large date that they spoke</b> of <b>is larger than an egg-bulk,</b> the following question can be asked: <b>Now</b> that we have said that the volume of <b>an egg-bulk satisfies,</b> can we say that <b>it does not settle the mind,</b> and thereby remove the affliction of Yom Kippur? <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from</b> this that <b>the volume of a large date that they said is less than the size of an egg-bulk?</b> Eating the larger amount <b>of an egg-bulk satisfies</b> a person, but eating <b>the volume of a large date</b> only <b>settles his mind.</b>

### Part 11
<b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC