
### michna 1
Pillows, bed coverings, sacks and packing cases that were damaged are still susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity [transmitted by sitting or lying]. A fodder-bag that can hold four <em>kav</em>, a shepherd's bag that can hold five <em>kav</em>, a  traveling bag that can hold a <em>se'ah</em>, a skin that can hold seven <em>kav</em>, Rabbi Yehudah adds: also a spice-bag, and a food wallet that can hold the smallest quantity are susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity. If any of them was damaged it becomes pure, since if the primary function is annulled, the secondary function is  also annulled.

### michna 2
A bagpipe is not susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity. A trough for mixing mortar: Beit Shammai says: it is susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity, and Beit Hillel says it is susceptible to corpse impurity [only]. A trough that can hold two <em>log</em> to nine <em>kav</em> which becomes split, becomes susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity. If he left it out in the rain and it became damaged, it is susceptible to corpse impurity [only]. [If he left it out] during the east wind and it split, it is susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity. This is a stringency in the case of remnants of wooden vessels [that is more severe] than [that of such vessels] in their original condition. There is also a stringency in regard to the remnants of wicker vessels [that is more severe] than [to such vessels] in their original condition, for when they are in their original condition they are not susceptible to impurity until their rim is finished, but after their rim has been finished, even though their edges fell away leaving only the smallest amount, they are susceptible to impurity.

### michna 3
A stick which was made into a handle for a hatchet is regarded as connected for [purposes of susceptibility to] impurity at the time of use. A yarn winder is regarded as connected for [purposes of susceptibility to] impurity at the time of its use. If he fixed it to a pole, it is susceptible to impurity, but it is not considered connected to [the pole]. If he made the pole itself into a yarn winder, only that part which is needed for use is susceptible to impurity. A seat that he fixed to a pole is susceptible to impurity, but it is not regarded as connected to [the pole]. If he made the pole itself  into a seat, only the place of the seat is susceptible to impurity. [If he fixed a seat] to the beam of an olive-press, it is susceptible to impurity, but it is not regarded as connected to [the beam]. If he made the end of a beam into a seat it remains pure, because people would say to him, "Get up and let us do our work."

### michna 4
A large trough, which was so damaged that it could no longer hold pomegranates, and which he repaired it to be used as a seat: Rabbi Akiva declares it susceptible to impurity, but the Sages declare it pure until he trims it. If he made it into a feeding bowl for cattle, even if he fixed it to a wall, it is susceptible to impurity.

### michna 5
A wood block that he fixed to a row on a wall, whether he fixed it and did not built upon it, or built upon it but did not fix it, is susceptible to impurity. If he fixed it and also built upon it, it is pure. Matting that he spread over roof-beams, whether he fixed it but did not put on the plasterwork, or whether he put on the plasterwork but did not fix it, is susceptible to impurity. If he fixed it and he laid plasterwork over it, it is pure. A dish that he fixed to a chest, box or cupboard: If [he did so] so that it holds [its contents] in the usual way, it is susceptible to impurity, but if it cannot hold [its contents] in the usual way, it is pure.

### michna 6
A sheet that is susceptible to impurity by <em>midras</em> and is used as a curtain is not susceptible to <em>midras</em> impurity, but it is susceptible to corpse impurity. When is it not susceptible to [<em>midras</em> impurity]? Beit Shammai says, when it is torn. Beit Hillel says, when it is tied. Rabbi Akiva says, when it is hung.

### michna 7
A mat in which reeds are run lengthwise is not susceptible to impurity. The Sages say, only if they are in the form of [the Greek letter] chi. If they were run through its width and there were not four <em>tefachim</em> [handbreadths] between each reed, it is not susceptible to impurity. If it were divided along its width, Rabbi Yehuda [says] it is not susceptible to impurity. So, too, if the end knots [of reed matting] are untied, it is not susceptible to impurity. If it were divided along its length, and three knots of six <em>tefachim</em> were left on it, it is susceptible to impurity. A mat - when does it become susceptible to impurity? When it is trimmed, as this completes its production.
