
### michna 1
A [piece of cloth] three by three [fingerbreadths] which was stuffed into a ball, or was itself made into a ball, is pure. But a [piece of cloth] three by three [handbreadths] which was stuffed into a ball is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. If it was itself made it into a ball, it is pure, because the sewing diminishes it.

### michna 2
Regarding a [piece of cloth] less than three by three [handbreadths] which one adapted for plugging bathhouse with it, for emptying a cooking-pot with it [by using it on a handle to protect from the heat], or for wiping the mill stones with it, whether or not it is [set aside and] ready for such use, is [susceptible to being rendered] impure, according to Rabbi Eliezer. Rabbi Yehoshua says: whether or not it is ready for such use, it is pure. Rabbi Akiva says: if it is ready, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure; and if it is not ready, it is pure.

### michna 3
If one makes a bandage, whether of cloth or of leather, it is pure. Rabbi Yose says, regarding leather, that it is pure. Regarding a poultice, with cloth it is pure, and with leather it is [susceptible to becoming] impure. Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says: even with cloth it is [susceptible to becoming] impure because it can be shaken off [once it dries, and then appropriated for other uses].

### michna 4
Covers of ,<i>sefarim</i> [books of the Tanach written in holiness, on parchment, and used for personal or public study, or for reading aloud in public. Sometimes the intent is specifically Torah scrolls] whether or not [the covers] are embroidered, are [susceptible to being rendered] impure, in accordance with Beit Shammai. Beit Hillel say: those which are embroidered pure, and those which are not embroidered are [susceptible to being rendered] impure. Rabban Gamaliel says: these and those are pure.

### michna 5
Regarding a head-covering which was rendered impure with <i>midras</i> impurity [a type of impurity due to being sat on by certain types of impure individuals, rendering something an Origin of impurity], if one placed it [as a covering] on a book, it is pure from <i>midras</i> impurity, but it is [susceptible to being  rendered] impure from corpse impurity. A skin which one fashioned into a rug, or a rug which one fashioned into a skin, is pure. A skin which one fashioned into a satchel, or a satchel which one fashioned into a skin, a cushion which one fashioned into a sheet, or a sheet which one fashioned into a cushion, a blanket which one fashioned into a kerchief, or a kerchief which one fashioned into a blanket, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. This is the general rule: any object which one changed into one with the same name [the same general use] is impure; if [one changed it into something] of another name, it is pure.

### michna 6
A piece of cloth which one patched onto a basket renders one item impure [with a second degree level of impurity, upon coming into contact with it], and invalidates one [for <i>terumah</i>, the priestly tithe; i.e. if the second item comes into contact with a third item, it renders it impure with a third degree level of impurity, which invalidates it with regard to <i>terumah</i>]. If one separated it from the basket, the basket renders one item impure [with a second degree level of impurity], and renders one invalid [with regard to <i>terumah</i>], and the piece of cloth is pure. If one patched it onto a garment, it renders two items impure [i.e. it renders one impure upon contact, with a first degree impurity, and that item, in turn, renders a second item impure with a second degree level of impurity], and renders one invalid [i.e. the second item then renders a third item invalid for the purposes of <i>terumah</i>]. If one separated it from the garment, it renders one impure [upon contact, with a second degree of impurity], and [that one, in turn] invalidates one [for the purposes of <i>terumah</i>], and the piece of cloth renders two items impure [i.e. it renders one impure with a first degree impurity, and that item renders a second item impure with a second degree impurity], and renders one invalid [i.e. the second item then renders a third item invalid for the purposes of <i>terumah</i>]. And such is the case regarding one who attaches [a piece of fabric as a patch] onto sack-cloth or leather, according to Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Shimon considers it pure. Rabbi Yose says, with regard to leather, that it is pure, and with regard to sack-cloth that is it impure because it is a woven material.

### michna 7
The [piece of fabric of] three by three [fingerbreadths] of which They spoke does not include the hem, according to Rabbi Shimon. And the Sages say: it is precisely three by three [including the hem]. If one patched it onto a garment on one side [only], it is not considered a connection [for the purposes of impurity]; if on two sides, one opposite the other, it is considered to be a connection. If one fashioned it like a gamma [in an L-shape], Rabbi Akiva considers it impure, and the Sages consider it pure. Rabbi Yehudah said, "With regard to what do these things apply? To a cloak. But regarding a robe, if [it was patched on] from above [the tear], it is considered a connection; and if from below [the tear], it is not considered a connection."

### michna 8
Poor people's garments, even if they contain less than three by three [fingerbreadths], can thereby be rendered impure with <i>midras</i> impurity. Regarding a cloak which one began to tear, once the majority of it is torn, it [i.e. its two halves] is not considered a connection. Those [materials] which are coarse or fine are not subject to [the minimum measure of] three by three [fingerbreadths; they are instead subject to the larger minimum of three by three handbreadths].

### michna 9
A porter's blanket [used as shoulder padding] is [susceptible to being rendered] impure with <i>midras</i> impurity. A [cloth] wine strainer is not susceptible to [contracting the impurity of] a seat.      An old woman's hair-net is [susceptible to being rendered] impure as a seat. The robe of a prostitute [literally: she who goes out] which is woven like a net is pure [i.e. insusceptible to being rendered impure]. If one makes a garment out of a fishing net, it is pure; if [one makes it] out of its bottom part [which is more tightly woven] it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says: even one who makes a garment out of a fishing net and doubles it over, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure.

### michna 10
A hair-net which one began [to knit] from its opening is pure [and insusceptible to impurity] until he complete its base section. If one began from its base section, it is pure until he completes its opening.  Its headband is [susceptible to being rendered] impure on its own [even if separated from the hair-net]. Its ribbons are [susceptible to being rendered] impure by way of connection. A hair-net which was torn, if it cannot hold the majority of the hair, it is pure.
