
### michna 1
Wooden vessels, leather vessels, bone vessels or glass vessels: those that are simple are clean and those that have a receptacle are susceptible to impurity. If they are broken they become pure again. If he remade them into vessels they are susceptible to impurity from that point on. A chest, a box, a cupboard, a straw basket, a reed basket, or the tank of an Alexandrian ship, that have flat bottoms and can hold a minimum of forty <em>se'ah</em> in liquid measure, which is equivalent to two <em>kor</em> in dry measure, are pure. All other vessels, whether they can contain the minimum or cannot contain it, are susceptible to impurity: the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehudah says: the large barrel [fixed to] a wagon, the food chests of kings, the tanners trough, the tank of a small ship, and an ark, even though they are able to contain [the minimum], are susceptible to impurity, since they were made to be moved around only with their contents. As to all other vessels, those that can contain [the minimum] are pure and those that cannot contain it are susceptible to impurity. There is no difference between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehudah except a baking trough which belongs to a householder.

### michna 2
Bakers’ baking-boards are susceptible to impurity, but those of householders are clean. If he dyed them red or saffron they are susceptible to impurity. A bakers’ shelf which was fixed to a wall: Rabbi Eliezer rules that it is pure, and the Sages rule that it is susceptible to impurity. The bakers' frame is susceptible to impurity but one used by a householder is pure. If he made a rim for it on four sides it is susceptible to impurity. If one side was opened it is pure. Rabbi Shimon says: if he fixed it so that he could cut dough on it, it is susceptible to impurity. Similarly, a rolling-pin is susceptible to impurity.

### michna 3
The container of the flour-dealers’ sifter is susceptible to impurity, but the one of a householder is pure. Rabbi Yehudah says: also one that is used by a hair braider is susceptible to seat impurity, since girls sit in it and have their hair braided.

### michna 4
All hangers are susceptible to impurity, except for a hanger used for a sifter or a sieve that belong to householders: the words of Rabbi Meir.  But the Sages say: all hangers are clean, except for a hanger used for a sifter of flour-dealers, a hanger used for a sieve used on threshing-floors, a hanger used for a hand-sickle and a hanger for a constable's staff, since they aid when the instrument is in use. This is the general rule: [a hanger] that is made to aid when the instrument is in use is susceptible to impurity and one made only for hanging is pure.

### michna 5
The grist-dealers’ shovel is susceptible to impurity. The one used in grain stores is pure.  The one used in wine-presses is susceptible to impurity. The one used on threshing- floors is clean. This is the general rule: [a shovel] that is intended to hold anything is susceptible to impurity but one intended only to gather together is pure.

### michna 6
Ordinary harps are susceptible to impurity, but the harps of the Levites are pure. All liquids are susceptible to impurity, but the liquids in the [Temple] slaughtering house are clean. All <i>sefarim</i> [books of the Tanach written in holiness, on parchment, and used for personal or public study, or for reading aloud in public. Sometimes the intent is specifically Torah scrolls] convey impurity to the hands, except the scroll [kept in] the Temple courtyard. A wooden toy horse is clean. The belly-lute, the donkey-shaped musical instrument and the <em>erus</em> [a musical instrument used at weddings and funerals] are susceptible to impurity.  Rabbi Judah says: the <em>erus</em> is susceptible to sitting impurity since the wailer sits on it.  A weasel-trap is susceptible to impurity, but a [trap] for mice is pure.
