
### michna 1
Wooden vessels, leather vessels, bone vessels and glass vessels - their flat surfaces are pure and their concave surfaces are impure. If they break [and are impure], they become pure. If someone went back and made vessels from [the broken pieces], they can be rendered impure from then and onward. Clay vessels and lye vessels are equal in [the manner of their] impurity - they can be rendered and render [objects] impure in its interior space; and render impure by [contact] with its exterior, but do not become impure by [contact] from its outside; and their breaking [if they are impure] is their purification.

### michna 2
The smaller clay vessels or their bottoms or their sides - [if they] sit upright without something to support them - their measurement [to be eligible for impurity] is enough [to store oil] to smear an infant. [This is in the case that these items only ever had the capacity of] up to a <i>log</i> (about a third of  liter); from a <i>log</i> to a <i>seah</i> (slightly over eight liters), [the measurement required for eligibility] is a <i>revi'it</i> (about 86 cubic centimeters); from one <i>seah</i> to two <i>seah</i>, half a <i>log</i>; from two <i>seah</i> to three [or even] to five <i>seah</i>, a <i>log</i> - these are the words of Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva says, "I do not give them a measurement [to determine what is required for eligibility], but rather the smaller clay vessels or their bottoms or their sides - [if they] sit upright without something to support them - their measurement is enough to smear an infant. [This is in the case that these items were ever only] up to a small pot; from small pots to Lyddean barrels, [the measurement required] is a <i>revi'it</i>; from Lyddean [barrels] to Bethlehemite ones, half a <i>log</i>; from Bethlehemite ones to large vats, a <i>log</i>." Rabban Yochanan be Zakkai says, "The measurement for large vats is two <i>log</i>." Gallilean jars and firkins - the [required measurement] of their bottoms is any bit, but they do not have sides [that can become impure by themselves].

### michna 3
The pure ones (that cannot be rendered impure) among clay vessels are: a tray that does not have a rim; a split poker; a roaster's rack; pipes - even though [they are] bent, [or] even though [they have sections that] accumulate; a cover that is made for a bread basket; jars that are designed [to cover] grapes; a sailor's [floating] barrel; inner barrels at the bottom of the crushing [vats]; a bed; a chair; a bench, a table; a boat; a clay lamp - behold, these are pure. This is the general principle - every clay vessel that does not have an interior does not have an exterior [that can become impure].

### michna 4
A lantern that has a receptacle for oil [can become] impure; and one that does not is pure. A mold of craftsmen - when he begins [his work] with it - it is pure; and when he finishes with it - it [can become] impure. A funnel of homeowners is pure; and of peddlers [can become] impure, because it is [used] for measurement. These are the words of Rabbi Yehuda ben Betira. Rabbi Akiva says, "Because he leans it on its side and has the customer smell from it."

### michna 5
The covers of wine jugs and oil jugs and covers of Nurean barrels are pure. But if they are made fit for usage [in their own right], they [can become] impure. A pan cover - when it is perforated or [its back] is pointed - is pure. If it is not perforated and does not have a pointed [back], it [can become] impure, because [a woman] strains the vegetable into it. Rabbi Eliezer bar Tsadok says, "Because she flips the vegetable concentrate onto it."

### michna 6
A chipped vessel found in the kiln - until its production is finished - is pure; from when its production is finished - it [can become] impure. A <i>titros</i> (a particular type of perforated vessel) - Rabbi Eliezer bar Tsadok determines it to be pure; Rabbi Yose determines it to be [able to become] impure because it releases [slowly].

### michna 7
The impure ones (that can be rendered impure) among clay vessels are: a tray with a rim; a full (unsplit) poker; a tray full of pans (connected to it). If one of [the pans] is rendered impure by a crawling creature (<i>sherets</i>), not all of them became impure. If there is surplus to the lid (above the tops of the pans), if one of them became impure, they all became impure. And so [too] a spice-tray of clay and quillsets. And a spice-tray of wood in which one [compartment] became impure from a liquid, its fellow did not become impure. Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri says, "We divide its thickness - that [part] which serves the pure is pure and that which serves the impure is impure. If there is a surplus rim - if one [compartment] becomes impure, its fellow becomes impure.

### michna 8
A lamphead [can become] impure. And the hollow of a lamp renders [objects] impure in its interior space. The comb of a holding vessel - Rabbi Eliezer determines it to be pure and the sages determine it to be [able to become] impure.
