
### michna 1
Regarding an Imki sandal [a sandal from the Imki valley, consisting of a piece of leather with attached straps], and a draw-string pouch, Rabbi Yehudah says: also an Egyptian basket, Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel says: also a Ladiki sandal [from Ludkia], anything similar to them can thereby be made [susceptible or insusceptible to being rendered] impure or pure without [the aid of] a craftsman. Rabbi Yose said: but are not all vessels able to be rendered [susceptible or insusceptible to being rendered] impure or pure and without a craftsman? Rather, these, even when they are unlaced are [susceptible to being rendered] impure, since a layperson can restore them. They said this [that unlacing something can make it insusceptible to impurity] only regarding an Egyptian basket which even a craftsman cannot [easily] restore.

### michna 2
A draw-string pouch whose laces were removed is still [susceptible to being rendered] impure; if it flattened out, it is pure [insusceptible to impurity]. If one hung a flap on it from below [such that it can still hold something, even when flattened out], it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. Regarding a pouch within a pouch, if one of them was rendered impure by a liquid, the other is not rendered impure. A [leather] bundle for a gem is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. Regarding a bundle for money, Rabbi Eliezer considers it [susceptible to being rendered] impure; and the Sages consider it pure [insusceptible to impurity].

### michna 3
A glove of thorn-pickers is pure [i.e. insusceptible to impurity]. A [leather] belt or knee-guard is [susceptible to being rendered] impure.  And [leather] sleeves are [susceptible to being rendered] impure. And hand-coverings are pure [i.e. insusceptible to impurity]. And all finger-coverings are pure, except one of thorn-pickers [alternatively: pickers of Summer fruit], since it can [be used as vessels to] hold the sumac berry. If it was torn, if it cannot hold the majority of a sumac berry, it is pure [i.e. insusceptible to impurity].

### michna 4
Regarding a sandal with a hole [for a strap] that was broken, if one fixed it, it [retains prior impurities and thus] is impure with <i>midras</i> impurity [a type of impurity due to being sat on by certain types of impure individuals, rendering something an Origin of impurity]. If the second hole was broken and one fixed it, it is pure from [and can no longer retain] <i>midras</i> impurity, but is [still susceptible to be being rendered] impure from contact with <i>midras</i> impurity. If one was unable to fix the first [hole] before the second was broken, it is pure. If its heel broke off, or if its toe-piece was removed, or if it was split in two, it is pure. A heel-less slipper that was torn anywhere is pure. A shoe that was diminished [by damage], if it cannot hold the majority of the foot, it is pure. Regarding a shoe [still] on the last, Rabbi Eliezer considers it pure [i.e. insusceptible to impurity], and the Sages consider it impure. All [punctured] water skins which are tied up in a bundle are pure [insusceptible to impurity, due to being punctured], except for Arabian ones [since their ties are stronger]. Rabbi Meir says: if [they are tied in] a temporary bundle, they are pure; if [in] a permanent bundle, they are impure. Rabbi Yose says: all water skins tied up in bundles are pure.

### michna 5
The following hides are susceptible to <i>midras</i> impurity: a hide which one intended to use as a rug, a hide used as an apron, a hide used as a bed-covering, a hide used by a donkey-driver, a hide used by a flax-worker, a hide used by a porter [who carries burdens on his shoulders], a hide used by a physician, a hide used for a cradle, a hide [used as a bib] for a child's chest, a hide for a cushion, a hide for a blanket; [all these are susceptible to] <i>midras</i> impurity. Regarding a hide used for [wrapping] combed wool, and a hide used by a wool-comber [to place upon his knees], Rabbi Eliezer says: [it is susceptible to] <i>midras</i> impurity; and the Sages say: [it is susceptible only to] corpse impurity.

### michna 6
A cover or wrapper for garments is susceptible to <i>midras</i> impurity. Regarding a bag or wrapper for purple [garments], Beit Shammai say: [it is susceptible to] <i>midras</i> impurity; and Beit Hillel say: [it is susceptible only to] corpse impurity. A hide which one made to be a covering for a vessel is pure; [if one made it to be a covering] for weights, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure.  Rabbi Yose considers it pure, in the name of his father.

### michna 7
Whenever no act is lacking [in order to make vessels fit for use], intentional thought [to use them as they are] renders them [susceptible to becoming] impure. But whenever an act is lacking [in order to make vessels fit for use], intentional thought does not render them impure, except with regard to a [leather] seat-covering [for a wagon or a saddle, which is sometimes used as such even before being fully trimmed or finished].

### michna 8
The hides of a householder are rendered [susceptible to becoming] impure by intentional thought, but those of a tanner are not rendered [susceptible to becoming] impure by intentional thought. Those of a thief are rendered impure by intentional thought; but those of a robber are not rendered impure by intentional thought. Rabbi Shimon says: the matter should be reversed: those of a robber are rendered impure by intentional thought; but those of a thief are not rendered impure by intentional thought, since [in the latter case] the owners have not abandoned hope [for recovery].

### michna 9
Regarding a hide that has contracted <i>midras</i> impurity, if one then thought to use it for straps or sandals, as soon as he put the knife to it, it is pure, according to Rabbi Yehuda. And the Sages say: [it is not pure] until he has reduced it to less than five handbreadths. Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok says: even if one made a napkin from a hide it is [still susceptible to being rendered] impure; if [one made one] from a blanket, it is pure [and insusceptible to impurity].
