
### michna 1
A needle or a ring which was found in the floor of an oven, and they can be seen but do not protrude into the oven - if one bakes dough and it touches them, [the oven] is impure. Regarding which dough did they speak? With regard to ordinary dough. If they are found in the plaster of an oven with a tightly fitting lid: If [the oven is] impure, they are impure; if [the oven is] pure, they are pure. If they are found in the stopper of a jar: If on the sides, they are impure. If opposite the mouth, they are pure. If they can be seen in it, but they do not enter its airspace, they are pure. If they sink into it, and there is [plaster] underneath them as thick as garlic peel, they are pure.

### michna 2
A jar that was full of pure liquids, with a siphon in it, and it had a tightly fitting cover and it was in a tent in which there was a corpse:  Beit Shammai says: Both the jar and the liquids are pure, but the siphon is impure. And Beit Hillel says: The siphon also is clean. Beit Hillel reversed its position and ruled in agreement with Beit Shammai.

### michna 3
If a <em>sheretz</em> [one of a number of small creatures which transmit impurity] is found beneath the bottom of an oven, the oven remains pure, for I can say that it fell there while it was still alive and that it died only now. If a needle or a ring is found beneath the bottom of an oven, the oven remains pure, for I can say that they were there before the oven arrived.  If they were found in the wood ashes, the oven is impure since there is nothing upon which to base an assumption [of purity].

### michna 4
If a sponge absorbed impure liquids and its outer surface became dry, and it fell into the air-space of an oven, the oven is impure, for the liquid would eventually come out. And the same with regard to a piece of turnip or reed grass. Rabbi Shimon declares [the oven] pure in both these cases.

### michna 5
If potsherds that had been used for unclean liquids fell into the air-space of an oven, if the oven was heated, it becomes impure, for the liquid would eventually come out. And the same with regard to fresh olive pomace, but if it was old, the oven remains pure. If it was known that liquid comes out, even after three years, the oven becomes impure.

### michna 6
If olive or grape pomace was prepared in purity, and unclean persons trod upon them and afterwards liquids came out from them, they remain pure, since they had originally been prepared in conditions of purity. A spindle hook which was sunk into the spindle, or the iron point into the ox goad, or a ring into a brick, and all these were pure, and then they went into a tent in which there was a corpse, they become impure. If a <em>zav</em> [male suffering from abnormal genital discharge] shifted them they become impure. If they then fell into the air-space of a clean oven, they cause it to be impure. If a loaf of <em>terumah</em> bread [made from the priest's portion, which must remain ritually pure] came in contact with them, it remains pure.

### michna 7
If netting was placed over the mouth of an oven, forming a tightly fitting lid, and a split appeared between the oven and the netting, the minimum size [to allow impurity to enter] is that of the circumference of the tip of an ox goad that cannot actually enter it. Rabbi Yehudah says: [Even if it] can enter. If the netting was split, the minimum size is the circumference of the tip of an ox goad that can enter it. Rabbi Yehudah says: [Even if it] cannot enter. If the split was round they do not regard it as straight, and still the minimum size must be the circumference of the tip of an ox goad that can actually enter.

### michna 8
If an oven has a hole made in its "eye", the minimum size [for it to leave the category of being tightly closed] is the circumference of a spindle staff that can enter and come out while burning [without being extinguished]. Rabbi Yehudah says: [Even if it] cannot burn. If the hole was at its side, the minimum size must be that of the circumference of a spindle staff that can enter and come out while it is not burning.    Rabbi Judah says: While burning. Rabbi Shimon says: if the hole is in the middle its size must be large enough so that it can actually enter, but if it was at the side it need not be able to actually enter. And similarly he used to say concerning the stopper of a jar which was pierced: The minimum size is the circumference of the second knot in a rye stalk. If the hole was in the middle the stalk must be able to enter, and if at the side it need not be able to enter. And similarly he used to say concerning large stone jars whose stoppers became pierced. The minimum size is the circumference of the second knot in a reed. If the hole was in the middle the reed must be able to enter it, and if it was at the side the reed need not be able to enter it. When is this so? When the jars were made for wine, but if they were made for other liquids, if they have even the smallest hole, they are impure. When is this so? When the holes were not made by a person, but if they were made by a person, if they have even the smallest hole, they are impure. If [a different vessel] was pierced [the rule to render it not tightly covered] is as follows: If the vessel was used for food, [the hole] must be large enough to let olives fall out; if for liquids, [a hole] that lets out liquids; if for both, they impose the greater restriction, that for a tightly fitting cover, [the size of the hole need only be] one that admits a liquid.
