
### michna 1
Clothing may be rendered impure due to five different reasons; sack-cloth [may be rentered impure] due to four; leather due to three; wood due to two; and an earthenware vessel due to one. An earthenware vessel may be rendered impure [only] due to [being] a receptacle. Regarding earthenware vessels, any that has no inside, has no outside [which can be rendered impure]. Wood, in addition to this, can also be rendered impure due to [being] a seat. Similarly, regarding a tablet which has no rim, if it is a wooden vessel it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure; and if it is an earthenware vessel it is pure.  Leather, in addition to this, may be rendered impure due to tents [if it forms an enclosure over certain impure things]. Sack-cloth, in addition to this, may be rendered impure due to [being] a woven work. Clothing, in addition to this, may be rendered impure due to [being] a three by three [fingerbreadths piece of fabric].

### michna 2
Clothing may be rendered impure as a [piece which is] three by three [handbreadths] with <i>midras</i> impurity [a type of impurity due to being sat on by certain impure individuals, rendering something an Origin of impurity], and at three by three [fingerbreadths] with corpse impurity. Sack-cloth [may be rendered impure] at four by four  [handbreadths]; Leather, five by five; matting, six by six; these are all equally [susceptible to being rendered impure] with <i>midras</i> and corpse impurity.  Rabbi Meir says: regarding sack-cloth, its scraps [may be rendered impure] at four [by four handbreadths], but initially [it can be rendered impure only] once it is  completed.

### michna 3
One who makes a piece of material from two [handbreadths] of cloth and one [handbreadth] of sack-cloth, or three of sack-cloth and one of leather, or four of leather and one of matting, it is pure [insusceptible to impurity]. If [one made something] of five [handbreadths] of matting and one of leather, or four of leather and one of sack-cloth, or three of sack-cloth and one of cloth, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. This is the general rule: anything to which one attached something of a higher level of stringency is [susceptible to being remdered] impure; [anything to which one attached something] of a lesser level of stringency is pure.

### michna 4
If one cuts off [a piece of] one square handbreadth from each of these [materials, and then fashions them into a single piece], it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. If [one cuts off a piece which is] one square handbreadth from the bottom of a basket, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. If from the sides of a basket,  Rabbi Shimon considers it pure, and the Sages say: if one cuts off a square handbreadth from anywhere, it is [susceptible to being rendered] impure.

### michna 5
Regarding worn-out pieces of a sifter or a sieve that one adapted for use as a seat,  Rabbi Akiva consideres them [susceptible to being rendered] impure, and the Sages consider them pure until one trims them [for use as a seat]. A child's chair which has legs, even if it is less than a handbreadth high, is [susceptible to being rendered] impure. Regarding a child's robe, Rabbi Eliezer says: [it is susceptible to impurity] at any size; and the Sages say: only once it is of the prescribed measure; and it is measured doubled [i.e. folded] over [such that it must actually be twice the required measure].

### michna 6
The following are measured when doubled over: cloth slippers, and knee-breeches, and pants, and a hat, and a hollow [in a belt which functions as a] pouch. Regarding a piece of fabric which one sewed onto the hem [of the collar of a garment], if it is [sewn on] unfolded it is measured unfolded; and if doubled over it is measured doubled over.

### michna 7
Regarding a piece of cloth which one wove to be three by three [handbreadths] which was rendered impure with <i>midras</i> impurity, and one then completed the whole garment upon it, if afterwards one then removed a thread from its initial portion, it is pure from <i>midras</i> impurity, but it is impure from contact with <i>midras</i> impurity. If one removed a thread from  its initial portion and then afterwards completed the whole garment upon it, it is [still] impure from contact with <i>midras</i> impurity.

### michna 8
And likewise regarding a piece of cloth which one wove to be three by three [fingerbreadths] which contracted corpse impurity, and one then completed the whole garment upon it, and then afterwards removed a thread from its initial portion, it is pure of corpse impurity, but is still impure from contact with corpse impurity. If one removed a thread from its initial portion and then afterwards completed the whole garment upon it, it is pure; for They said: a [piece of cloth of] three by three [fingerbreadths] which was diminished is pure. But one of three by three [handbreadths] which was diminished, even though it is pure of <i>midras</i> impurity, is [susceptible to being] impure from all the [other] impurities.

### michna 9
Regarding a sheet which contracted <i>midras</i> impurity, which one then fashioned into a curtain, it is pure from <i>midras</i> impurity, but is impure from contact with <i>midras</i> impurity.  Rabbi Yose said, "And yet which <i>midras</i> impurity has touched it?! [Rather] only if a <i>zav</i> [a male with a genital discharge that renders him an Origin of impurity] touched it is it [rendered] impure from contact with a <i>zav</i>."

### michna 10
A [piece of cloth] three by three [handbreadths] which was divided, is pure from <i>midras</i> impurity, but is impure from contact with <i>midras</i> impurity.  Rabbi Yose said, "And yet which <i>midras</i> impurity has touched it?! [Rather] only if a <i>zav</i> touched it is it [rendered] impure from contact with a <i>zav</i>."

### michna 11
Regarding a [piece of cloth] three by three [handbreadths], if [it was found] in the trash heaps, [it is susceptible to retaining impurity only] if it is sound and capable of  storing salt;      if [it was found] in the house, [it is susceptible to impurity] if it is either sound or capable of storing salt.  How much salt must it be capable of storing? A <i> rova</i> [a specific unit of volume, a quarter of a <i>kav</i>]. Rabbi Yehudah says: this is with regard to fine salt. And the Sages say: it is with regard to coarse salt.  Both of their intentions were to rule leniently.      Rabbi Shimon says: [pieces which are] three by three [handbreadths, which were found] in a trash heap, are [legally] equivalent to [pieces which are] three by three [fingerbreadths, which were found] in a house.

### michna 12
Regarding a [piece of cloth of] three by three [handbreadths] which was torn, if one places it on a chair and [when he sits down upon it] his skin touches the chair, it is pure; and if not, it is impure [i.e. it can retain impurity]. Regarding a [piece of cloth of] three by three [fingerbreadths], if one of its threads was worn away, or if a knot was found in it, or if two of its threads ran alongside each other [i.e. as an imperfection in its weave], it is pure. A [piece of cloth of] three by three [fingerbreadths] which was cast to the trash heap is pure. If one brought it back [from the trash], it is [once more susceptible to being rendered] impure. Its having been thrown away always renders it pure, and its being brought back renders it [susceptible to becoming] impure, except when it is of purple or fine crimson [which can still be rendered impure even after being cast into the trash].      Rabbi Eliezer says: the same applies also to a piece of new cloth. Rabbi Shimon says: all of these are pure; they were mentioned [as exceptions] only with regard to the returning of lost property.
