
### Part 1
<b>“But if the white leprous spot stays in its place [<i>taḥteha</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 13:23). In this verse, the word “<i>taḥteha</i>” indicates that the white leprous spot remains in its place. This usage of the word is fitting for substitution, since when sanctity is transferred by substitution from a consecrated animal to a non-sacred animal, the sanctity of the consecrated animal remains in place, despite the fact that the non-sacred animal is also consecrated.

### Part 2
Yet <i>taḥat</i> is also a term <b>that</b> indicates <b>desacralization, as it is written: “In place of [<i>taḥat</i>] brass I will bring gold,</b> and in place of iron I will bring silver, and in place of wood brass, and in place of stones iron” (Isaiah 60:17). In this verse, <i>taḥat</i> means replacement, which is what occurs in desacralization, where one item is replaced by another. <b>And therefore,</b> the term should be understood in accordance with the context: <b>With regard to</b> animals <b>consecrated</b> for sacrifice upon the <b>altar, which render</b> a non-sacred animal for which they are exchanged <b>a substitute,</b> <i>taḥat</i> <b>is a term that</b> indicates the <b>associating</b> of one sanctity with another. <b>With regard to</b> animals <b>consecrated for Temple maintenance, which do not render</b> a non-sacred animal for which they are exchanged <b>a substitute,</b> <i>taḥat</i> <b>is a term that</b> indicates <b>desacralization.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rava said: Even</b> with regard to animals <b>consecrated</b> for sacrifice upon the <b>altar,</b> which render a non-sacred animal for which they are exchanged a substitute, <b>you</b> can <b>find</b> that <i>taḥat</i> <b>is a term that</b> indicates <b>desacralization. For example,</b> in a case <b>where a consecrated</b> animal <b>was blemished</b> and can be desacralized because it is unfit to be sacrificed, and one placed that consecrated animal next to a non-sacred animal and said: This animal is in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] that animal. Although the blemished sacred animal can render a non-sacred animal for which it is exchanged consecrated as a substitute, in this context the term <i>taḥat</i> means desacralization.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Ashi said: Even in</b> the case of <b>a blemished</b> animal, mentioned by Rava, sometimes <b>you find</b> that <i>taḥat</i> <b>is a term that</b> indicates <b>desacralization and</b> sometimes <b>you find</b> that <i>taḥat</i> <b>is a term that</b> indicates the <b>associating</b> of one sanctity with another. If the owner’s <b>hand</b> is resting <b>on the consecrated</b> animal and he says: This animal is in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] that animal, it <b>is</b> a term of <b>desacralization,</b> as the placement of his hand indicates that his intention is to desacralize the consecrated animal, with its sanctity transferred to that non-sacred animal. If the owner’s <b>hand</b> is resting <b>on the non-sacred</b> animal when he says: This animal is in place of that animal, then <i>taḥat</i> <b>is</b> a term of substitution, as the placement of his hand indicates that his intention is for the non-sacred animal to be <b>consecrated</b> with the same sanctity as the consecrated animal.

### Part 5
<b>Abaye raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>there were</b> standing <b>before him two sacrificial animals</b> that <b>were blemished and two non-sacred animals</b> that <b>were unblemished,and,</b> without placing his hands on any animal, <b>he says: These</b> animals <b>are hereby in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] those</b> animals, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 6
The Gemara explains the dilemma: <b>Did he</b> intend to <b>say</b> <i>taḥat</i> <b>as association,</b> i.e., to consecrate the two non-sacred animals as substitutes, <b>and</b> therefore <b>he is flogged</b> two sets of lashes for the two violations of the prohibition against consecrating an animal as a substitute? <b>Or perhaps,</b> does one say that since <b>anywhere that there exists</b> both <b>a permitted</b> and a prohibited manner to perform an action, <b>a person does not cast aside the permitted</b> manner <b>and perform the prohibition?</b> If so, here too his intention was to desacralize the two blemished animals, and therefore he is not flogged.

### Part 7
<b>And if you say</b> that <b>anywhere that there exists</b> both <b>a permitted</b> and a prohibited manner to perform an action, <b>a person does not cast aside</b> the permitted manner <b>and perform the prohibition,</b> in a case where <b>there were</b> standing <b>before him two sacrificial animals, one of which was blemished</b> and one of which was unblemished, <b>and two non-sacred animals, one of which was blemished</b> and one of which was unblemished, <b>and he said: These</b> animals <b>are hereby in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] those</b> animals, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Although he certainly intended to transfer the sanctity of the unblemished sacrificial animal to a non-sacred animal by substitution, it is unclear which of the two non-sacred animals he intended to consecrate as a substitute.

### Part 8
Once again, the Gemara explains the dilemma: <b>Did he</b> intend to <b>say</b> that <b>the unblemished</b> non-sacred animal should be consecrated as a substitute <b>in place of the unblemished</b> consecrated animal, and with regard to this pairing he intended <b>to associate</b> the sanctity by substitution, while <b>the blemished</b> non-sacred animal should be consecrated <b>in place of the blemished</b> consecrated animal, and for this pairing he intended <b>to desacralize</b> the consecrated animal. If so, he is flogged only for the first pairing and not for the second pairing.

### Part 9
<b>Or perhaps,</b> he intended that <b>the unblemished non-sacred</b> animal should be consecrated as a substitute <b>in place of the blemished consecrated</b> animal, and <b>the blemished non-sacred</b> animal should be consecrated as a substitute <b>in place of the unblemished consecrated</b> animal, <b>and</b> since he intended to perform substitution in both cases he is <b>flogged for both</b> pairings.

### Part 10
<b>And if you say</b> that <b>anywhere that there exists</b> both <b>a permitted</b> and a prohibited manner to perform an action, one <b>does not perform the prohibition,</b> this would resolve the previous dilemma, as his intention must have been <b>to desacralize</b> the blemished consecrated animal, <b>and</b> therefore he is <b>not flogged</b> two sets of lashes, one can raise the following dilemma: In a case where <b>there were three sacrificial animals before him, one of which was blemished</b> while the other two were unblemished, <b>and three non-sacred animals,</b> all of which <b>were unblemished, and he said: These</b> animals <b>are hereby in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] those</b> animals, what is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 11
The Gemara explains the dilemma: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since</b> he intended for <b>the unblemished</b> non-sacred animals to be consecrated as substitutes <b>in place of the unblemished</b> consecrated animals, i.e., <b>to associate</b> their sanctity, <b>so too</b> he intended to consecrate <b>the unblemished</b> non-sacred animal as a substitute <b>in place of the blemished</b> consecrated animal, i.e., <b>to associate</b> its sanctity, and he therefore is flogged three sets of lashes? <b>Or perhaps, here too</b> one applies the principle that <b>anywhere that there exists</b> both <b>a permitted</b> and a prohibited manner to perform an action, a person <b>does not perform the prohibition.</b> If so, his intention with regard to <b>this latter</b> blemished consecrated animal was <b>to desacralize</b> it, and therefore he is not flogged for transferring its sanctity to a substitute.

### Part 12
<b>And if you say</b> that <b>here too, since</b> this <b>man</b> has <b>not</b> yet been <b>established as</b> one who regularly transgresses <b>a prohibition,</b> until he has done so three times, therefore it is assumed that he <b>does not cast aside the permitted</b> manner <b>and perform the prohibition, Rav Ashi</b> therefore <b>raises</b> the following <b>dilemma:</b> If <b>there were four sacrificial animals</b> standing <b>before him, one of which was blemished</b> and the other three were unblemished, <b>and four non-sacred animals,</b> all of which were unblemished, <b>and he said: These</b> animals <b>are hereby in place of [<i>taḥat</i>] those</b> animals, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 13
Again, the Gemara clarifies the dilemma: <b>Here, since</b> it is <b>certain</b> that he intended for three unblemished non-sacred animals to be consecrated as substitutes in place of the three unblemished consecrated animals, this <b>man</b> has been <b>established as</b> one who regularly transgresses <b>a prohibition.</b> Therefore, it is assumed that he also intended for one of the unblemished non-sacred animals to be consecrated as a substitute in place of the blemished consecrated animal, which means he is liable to be <b>flogged four</b> sets of <b>lashes</b> for the four substitutions.

### Part 14
<b>Or perhaps, even though</b> in this case he has been <b>established as</b> one who transgresses <b>the prohibition,</b> nevertheless even such <b>a person does not cast aside the permitted</b> manner <b>and perform the prohibition. And</b> if so, his intention with regard to <b>this latter</b> blemished animal was <b>to desacralize</b> it. The Gemara concludes that all of these dilemmas <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: <b>If the consecrated</b> animal <b>was blemished,</b> and he said: This consecrated animal is desacralized, with its sanctity transferred to that non-sacred animal, the consecrated animal <b>is desacralized.</b> The owner is required to conduct an appraisal to ascertain the relative value of the two animals, and if the consecrated animal was worth more than the non-sacred animal, he must pay the difference to the Temple treasury.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The consecrated animal <b>is desacralized by Torah law</b> even if the consecrated animal was worth one hundred dinars and the non-sacred animal was worth only one <i>peruta</i>. <b>But by rabbinic law,</b> the owner <b>is required to conduct</b> an appraisal to ascertain the relative <b>value</b> of the two animals and to pay the difference to the Temple treasury, so that the Temple treasury not suffer a loss. <b>And Reish Lakish says: Even the requirement to conduct</b> an appraisal, to ascertain the relative <b>value</b> of the two animals and to pay the difference to the Temple treasury, applies <b>by Torah law.</b>

### Part 17
<b>What are we dealing with</b> here, i.e., what is the case that is subject to the disagreement between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish? <b>If we say</b> that they disagree in a case where the difference in value between the two animals was exactly one-sixth, which is the difference <b>in</b> value that constitutes <b>exploitation</b> by Torah law, and the <i>halakha</i> is that such a transaction is valid but one must return the difference in value, would <b>Reish Lakish say</b> that <b>even</b> in such a case <b>the requirement to conduct</b> an appraisal to ascertain the relative <b>value</b> of the two animals applies <b>by Torah law?</b>

### Part 18
<b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Bava Metzia</i> 56a): <b>These are matters that,</b> even if the disparity between the value and the payment is one-sixth, <b>are not</b> subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>exploitation: Slaves, documents, lands, and consecrated property.</b>Since consecrated property is not subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of exploitation, why would Reish Lakish say that one must repay the difference in value between the two animals to the Temple treasury by Torah law?

### Part 19
<b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish disagree with regard to a case <b>of nullification of a transaction,</b> i.e., where the difference in value between the two animals was greater than one-sixth. Would <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan say</b> in such a case that one is <b>required to conduct</b> an appraisal to ascertain the relative <b>value</b> of the two animals <b>by rabbinic law?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC