
### Part 1
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> in response: The <i>baraita</i> is not referring to a flaw due to some sin; rather, it <b>is teaching</b> about the <b>flaw of</b> the early dispute over the <i>halakha</i> of <b>placing hands</b> on the head of an animal brought as a Festival peace offering, as taught in tractate <i>Ḥagiga</i> (16a).

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But Yosef ben Yo’ezer himself disputed</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>of placing hands</b> on the head of an offering. The first Sages to dispute this issue were Yosef ben Yo’ezer and Yosef ben Yoḥanan. The Gemara answers: <b>When they disputed it,</b> that was <b>at the end of the years</b> of Yosef ben Yo’ezer’s life, <b>when</b> the understanding of <b>his heart was limited,</b> due to old age. Therefore, the dispute is considered as though it occurred after his lifetime.

### Part 3
The Gemara returns to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself. Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: Three thousand <i>halakhot</i> were forgotten during the days of mourning for Moses.</b> The Jewish people <b>said to Joshua: Ask</b> for guidance from Heaven so that you can reacquire the forgotten <i>halakhot</i>. Joshua <b>said to them: “It is not in heaven”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:12). Once the Torah was given on Sinai, the Sages of each generation must determine the <i>halakha</i>. No new <i>halakhot</i> may be added or subtracted by heavenly instruction or through prophecy.

### Part 4
Many years later the Jewish people again <b>said to Samuel: Ask</b> for halakhic guidance from Heaven. <b>He said to them:</b> This is not possible, as the Torah states: <b>“These are the commandments</b> that the Lord commanded Moses to tell the children of Israel at Mount Sinai” (Leviticus 27:34). The word “these” indicates <b>that from now</b> on <b>a prophet is not permitted to introduce any</b> new <b>element</b> related to the Torah and its mitzvot through prophecy. With regard to the topic of the chapter, <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa says: Also,</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a sin offering whose owner has died was</b> one of those <b>forgotten during the days of mourning for Moses.</b>

### Part 5
At the time of Moses’ death, the people <b>said to Pinehas: Ask</b> for halakhic guidance from Heaven so that you can relearn the forgotten <i>halakhot</i>. Pinehas <b>said to them: “It is not in heaven”</b> (Deuteronomy 30:12). The people <b>said to Elazar: Ask</b> for halakhic guidance from God. <b>He said to them</b> that the verse states: <b>“These are the commandments,”</b> to teach <b>that a prophet is not permitted to introduce any</b> new <b>element from now</b> on.

### Part 6
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> Just before <b>the time when Moses, our teacher, left</b> this world and went <b>to the Garden of Eden, he said to Joshua: Ask from me all</b> the cases of <b>uncertainty</b> in matters of <i>halakha</i> <b>that you have,</b> so that I can clarify them for you. Joshua <b>said to him: My teacher, did I</b> ever <b>leave you</b> for even <b>one moment and go to another place? Didn’t you write this about me</b> in the Torah: <b>“But his minister, Joshua, son of Nun, a young man, did not depart out of the tent”</b> (Exodus 33:11)? If I would have had any case of uncertainty I would have asked you earlier. <b>Immediately</b> after he said this, <b>Joshua’s strength weakened, and three hundred <i>halakhot</i> were forgotten by him, and seven hundred</b> cases of <b>uncertainty emerged before him, and the entire Jewish people arose to kill him,</b> as he was unable to teach them the forgotten <i>halakhot</i>.

### Part 7
<b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said</b> to Joshua: It is <b>impossible to tell you</b> these <i>halakhot</i>, as the Torah is not in Heaven. But to save yourself from the Jewish people who want to kill you, <b>go and exhaust them in war,</b> so that they will leave you alone. <b>As it is stated: “Now it came to pass after the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, that the Lord spoke</b> to Joshua, son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying: Moses My servant is dead, now therefore arise, go over this Jordan” (Joshua 1:1–2). This shows that immediately after the death of Moses, God commanded Joshua to lead the nation into battle.

### Part 8
§ <b>It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: One thousand and seven hundred <i>a fortiori</i> inferences, and verbal analogies, and minutiae of the scribes were forgotten during the days of mourning for Moses.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Abbahu says: Even so, Othniel, son of Kenaz, restored them through his sharp</b> mind <b>[<i>pilpulo</i>], as it is stated:</b> “And Caleb said: To he who smites Kiriath Sefer, and takes it, to him will I give Achsah my daughter as a wife. <b>And Othniel, son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it; and he gave him Achsah his daughter as a wife”</b> (Joshua 15:16–17).The name “Kiriath Sefer,” which literally means the village of the book, is homiletically interpreted as a reference to those parts of the Torah that were forgotten, while the phrase “took it” is referring to Othniel’s acumen and learning. The <i>baraita</i> adds: <b>And why is she called Achsah?</b> The reason is <b>that anyone who sees her became angry [<i>ko’es</i>] about his</b> own <b>wife,</b> who was not as beautiful as Achsah.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates another incident involving Achsah. The verse states: <b>“And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she persuaded him to ask of her father a field; and she alighted from off her donkey;</b> and Caleb said to her: What do you want?” (Joshua 15:18). The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>“And she alighted [<i>vatitznaḥ</i>],”</b> which can also be understood as crying out? <b>Rava says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> Achsah <b>said to</b> Caleb: <b>Just as</b> in the case of <b>this donkey, when it has no food in its trough it immediately cries out, so too</b> in the case of <b>a woman, when she has no produce in her house she immediately cries out.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara cites yet another verse involving Achsah: <b>“And she said: Give me a blessing; for that you have set me in the land of the South [<i>negev</i>],</b> and you have given me springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs and the lower springs” (Joshua 15:19). She said to her father: You have given me <b>a home dried [<i>menugav</i>] of all goodness. “And you have given me springs of water”;</b> this is referring to <b>a man who has nothing other than Torah,</b> which is metaphorically called water. But as he is unable to provide me with food, how can I live? <b>“And gave her the upper springs and the lower springs.”</b> Caleb <b>said to her:</b> Does someone learned in Torah, <b>who dwells in the upper</b> worlds <b>and the lower</b> worlds, <b>require</b> that <b>sustenance be requested for him?</b> He certainly does not need it, as God will provide for him in merit of his Torah studies.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And Caleb,</b> was <b>he the son of Kenaz? Wasn’t he Caleb, son of Jephunneh</b> (Joshua 15:13)? The Gemara explains that Jephunneh was not the name of his father, but a description of Caleb. <b>What</b> does the word <b>Jephunneh</b> mean? It means <b>that he turned [<i>sheppana</i>] from the advice of the spies</b> and did not join with them in their negative report about Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 13
The Gemara further asks: <b>But still,</b> was <b>he the son of Kenaz? He was the son of Hezron, as it is written: “And Caleb, son of Hezron, begot children of Azubah</b> his wife, and of Jerioth, and these were her sons: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon” (I Chronicles 2:18). <b>Rava said:</b> Caleb was actually the son of Hezron, but after his father passed away his mother remarried Kenaz, and consequently <b>he was the stepson of Kenaz.</b> Othniel, son of Kenaz, was therefore his maternal half brother.

### Part 14
<b>A <i>tanna</i></b> taught in a <i>baraita</i>: The same person <b>is</b> known as <b>Othniel</b> and <b>he is</b> also known as <b>Jabez. And what is his</b> actual <b>name? Judah, brother of Simeon, is his name.</b> He was known as <b>Othniel, as God answered [<i>ana’o El</i>]</b> his prayer. He was also known as <b>Jabez [<i>yabetz</i>] because he advised and spread [<i>ya’atz veribetz</i>] Torah among the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that God answered him? As it is written: “And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying: If You will bless me indeed, and enlarge my border, and that Your hand may be with me, and that You will work deliverance from evil, that it may not pain me! And God granted him that which he requested”</b> (I Chronicles 4:10).

### Part 16
The Gemara interprets this verse. The phrase: <b>“If You will bless me indeed,”</b> means that he prayed for a blessing <b>with regard to Torah. “And enlarge my border,”</b> means that he prayed for a blessing <b>with regard to students. “And that Your hand be with me,” that my studies not be forgotten from my heart. “And that You will work deliverance from evil [<i>mera’ati</i>],” that I will find friends [<i>re’im</i>] like me. “That it may not pain me,” that the evil inclination should not grow stronger</b> and prevent <b>me from studying</b> Torah. Othniel further prayed: <b>If You do so, good; and if not, I will go depressed [<i>linsisi</i>] to</b> my grave and <b>the netherworld. Immediately,</b> God answered him, as the verse states: <b>“And God granted him that which he requested.”</b>

### Part 17
<b>On a similar</b> note, <b>you say</b> likewise with regard to the following verse: <b>“The poor man and the oppressor [<i>tekhakhim</i>] meet together; the Lord gives light to the eyes of both of them”</b> (Proverbs 29:13). <b>When the student,</b> who is poor in his knowledge, <b>goes to his teacher,</b> i.e., one who knows enough to teach but requires further enlightenment himself, as he is a man between [<i>tokh</i>] the levels of a Sage and a commoner, <b>and says to him: Teach me Torah, if</b> the teacher agrees to <b>teach him,</b> then <b>the Lord gives light to the eyes of both of them,</b> as they both become greater as a result. <b>But if</b> the teacher will <b>not</b> teach the student, then <b>“the rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all”</b> (Proverbs 22:2). This verse teaches that He <b>Who made this one wise</b> now <b>makes him foolish,</b> and He Who made <b>that one foolish</b> now <b>makes him wise. This is the exposition of Rabbi Natan.</b>

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi says</b> an alternative interpretation of the prayer of Jabez: <b>“If You will bless me indeed”</b> means <b>with procreation. “And enlarge my border”</b> refers to blessing <b>with sons and with daughters. “And that Your hand may be with me,”</b> indicates <b>in business. “And that You will work deliverance from evil,”</b> so <b>that I will not have a headache or an earache or an eye ache. “That it may not pain me,” that the evil inclination will not grow strong against me</b> and prevent <b>me from studying</b> Torah. Jabez then said to God: <b>If you do so, good; and if not, I will go depressed to</b> my grave and <b>the netherworld. Immediately,</b> God answered him: <b>And God granted him that which he requested.</b>

### Part 19
<b>On a similar</b> note, <b>you say</b> an interpretation with regard to the verse: <b>“The poor man and the oppressor meet together; the Lord gives light to the eyes of both of them”</b> (Proverbs 29:13). <b>When a poor</b> person <b>goes to a homeowner and says: Provide for me, if he provides for him,</b> that is <b>good. But if not,</b> then it is stated: <b>“The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all”</b> (Proverbs 22:2). This verse indicates that He <b>Who made this one wealthy</b> now <b>makes him poor,</b> and He Who made <b>that one poor</b> now <b>makes him wealthy.</b>

### Part 20
§ The mishna taught that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Just as we found</b> with regard to the offspring of a sin offering, and the substitute for a sin offering, and a sin offering whose owner died, that these matters apply to an individual sin offering but not to a communal sin offering, so too, with regard to a sin offering whose owner achieved atonement with another sin offering, and a sin offering whose year has passed, these matters are stated with regard to an individual sin offering but not with regard to a communal sin offering.

### Part 21
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Five</b> types of <b>sin offerings</b> are left to <b>die,</b> and one may not sacrifice them, and they are: <b>An offspring</b> born <b>to</b> a <b>sin offering,</b> i.e., if a female animal that was consecrated as a sin offering gave birth, its offspring is sacred but cannot be brought as an offering itself; <b>and the substitution of a sin offering,</b> if one substituted another animal for a sin offering, the same sanctity applies to it, but it cannot be sacrificed; <b>and a sin offering whose owner has died; and a sin offering whose owner achieved atonement</b> by sacrificing another offering; <b>and a sin offering whose</b> first <b>year has passed,</b> as a sin offering must be within its first year.

### Part 22
Rabbi Shimon continues: <b>You cannot say</b> that there could be <b>an offspring of a sin offering in the case of a community, because there</b> are <b>no female sin offerings</b> separated <b>by the community. And</b> likewise <b>you cannot say</b> that there could be <b>a substitution for a sin offering in the case of a community, because a community cannot render</b> a non-sacred animal that is exchanged for its consecrated one as <b>a substitute. And</b> furthermore, <b>you cannot say</b> that there could be <b>a sin offering whose owners have died in the case of a community, because a community cannot die.</b>

### Part 23
With regard to communal offerings <b>whose owners</b> already <b>achieved atonement and</b> a communal offering <b>whose</b> first <b>year has passed, we have not found</b> a similarly clear indication of the <i>halakha</i>. Therefore, one <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> these two cases <b>are in effect both for</b> the offering of <b>an individual and a communal</b> offering.

### Part 24
But <b>you</b> must <b>say: A person can learn</b> with regard to a case in which certain details are <b>not specified from</b> a similar case where these details <b>are specified. Just as</b> with regard to those offerings whose details are <b>specified,</b> i.e., an offspring of a sin offering, a substitution for a sin offering, and a sin offering whose owner has died, the <i>halakha</i> that it dies applies only <b>to</b> an offering <b>of an individual and not to a communal</b> offering, <b>so too,</b> with regard to a sin offering <b>whose owner achieved atonement, and</b> a sin offering <b>whose</b> first <b>year has passed, these matters are said with regard to</b> the offering of <b>an individual, but not with regard to a communal</b> offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC