
### Part 1
There were <b>ten years</b> during which <b>Samuel reigned alone,</b> from the death of Eli until the coronation of Saul, <b>and</b> one <b>year that Saul reigned and Samuel</b> was still alive, i.e., Saul reigned for one year during the lifetime of Samuel, <b>and two</b> years <b>that Saul reigned by himself,</b> i.e., after the death of Samuel. In addition, there were <b>thirty-seven</b> years during <b>which David ruled,</b> first in Hebron, and later in Jerusalem. This amounts to a total of forty years from when the Jewish people had first requested a king, and Absalom felt it was now his time to rule over the Jewish people.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai that there are five sin offerings that are unfit for sacrifice on the altar and have no remedy and are therefore left to die. They are: The offspring of a sin offering; the substitute for a sin offering; a sin offering whose owner died; a sin offering whose owner achieved atonement with another sin offering, when the original sin offering was lost or stolen and later recovered; and a sin offering whose year has passed. The mishna continues the discussion of the distinction between individual and communal offerings. <b>An individual sin offering whose owner achieved atonement</b> with another sin offering after it was lost is left to <b>die, but</b> in the case of <b>a communal</b> sin offering it <b>is not</b> left to <b>die.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Even a communal sin offering <b>shall</b> be left to <b>die. Rabbi Shimon says: Just as we found with regard to the offspring of a sin offering, and with regard to the substitute for a sin offering, and with regard to a sin offering whose owner died,</b> that <b>these matters apply to an individual</b> sin offering <b>and not to a communal</b> sin offering, <b>so too,</b> in the cases of a sin offering <b>whose owner achieved atonement</b> with another sin offering, <b>and</b> a sin offering <b>whose</b> first <b>year has passed,</b> the <b>matters</b> are <b>stated with regard to an individual</b> sin offering, <b>and not with regard to a communal</b> sin offering.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>What is</b> the verse teaching when it <b>says:</b> “And if <b>he bring</b> a lamb as his offering for <b>a sin offering,</b> he shall bring it a female without blemish” (Leviticus 4:32)? <b>From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to one who separated his sin offering and it was lost, and he separated another in its place and the first one was found alive, and they both stand</b> fit to be sacrificed, <b>from where</b> is it derived <b>that he may bring whichever of them he wishes? The verse states: “A sin offering.”</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>he</b> must <b>bring both of them.</b> Therefore, the continuation of <b>the verse states: “He shall bring it.”</b> This teaches that he must bring <b>one</b> of the animals <b>but not two</b> of them.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if so, <b>that second</b> animal, <b>what will be with it? Rav Hamnuna says</b> that <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is <b>left to graze</b> until it becomes unfit, and then it is redeemed and the money is used to purchase a gift offering. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> It <b>shall</b> be left to <b>die,</b> as it is an individual sin offering whose owner achieved atonement with another sin offering.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But did Rabbi Yehuda</b> actually <b>say</b> that it is <b>left to graze? But didn’t we hear</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> rules in the mishna that the animal <b>shall</b> be left to <b>die?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Reverse</b> the names in the <i>baraita</i>, so that it reads: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It <b>shall</b> be left to <b>die; Rabbi Shimon says:</b> It is <b>left to graze.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But did Rabbi Shimon</b> actually <b>say</b> that it is <b>left to graze? But didn’t Rabbi Shimon say:</b> There are <b>five sin offerings that</b> are left to <b>die,</b> including a sin offering whose owner achieved atonement with another sin offering.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> the Gemara explains: <b>Actually, do not reverse</b> the opinions of Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Shimon in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and it</b> is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> where Rabbi Yehuda says in the <i>baraita</i> that the second animal must be left to graze, it is referring <b>to</b> an animal <b>lost at the time of the separation</b> of a substitute to take its place, but the original animal was found before the second was sacrificed. Since the animal was found before the other was sacrificed, it is left to graze. <b>There,</b> in the mishna where Rabbi Yehuda says that the animal must be left to die, it is referring <b>to</b> an animal that was still <b>lost at the time of atonement,</b> i.e., when the substitute was sacrificed.

### Part 8
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: Both <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>and that</b> mishna are referring to an animal that was lost only <b>at the time of the separation</b> of the second animal, <b>and</b> yet it is <b>not difficult. Here</b> in the mishna, <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> rules that the animal must be left to die <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi in a mishna (22b), as he maintains that even if the animal was lost only when the second animal was separated and was found by the time it was sacrificed, it must still be left to die. <b>There</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> says that the animal is left to graze <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of the Rabbis</b> in that same mishna. The Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, and rule that the animal is left to die only if it was not yet found when the replacement animal was sacrificed.

### Part 9
§ The mishna taught that Rabbi Yehuda says: Even a communal sin offering shall be left to die if the community has already achieved atonement through another animal. The Gemara asks: <b>But is there one who said</b> that <b>a communal sin offering whose owners achieved atonement</b> with another sin offering after it was lost is left to <b>die?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC