
### Part 1
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: Slaughtering a pregnant peace offering containing a non-sacred fetus is not subject to the prohibition against slaughtering non-sacred animals in the Temple courtyard. <b>Do we read</b> the verse: <b>“If the place</b> which the Lord your God shall choose to put His name there <b>be too far from you, then you shall slaughter</b> of your herd and of your flock” (Deuteronomy 12:21), as applying <b>to</b> such a case? This verse prohibits the slaughter of non-sacred animals in the Temple, but only those that could be slaughtered elsewhere. But here, he had no choice but to slaughter the pregnant mother in the Temple, since it was a peace offering.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye posed</b> the opposite <b>dilemma to Rav Yosef:</b> According to the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan that fetuses can be consecrated, if one consecrated the fetus, but not its mother, as a peace offering, such that <b>it,</b> the mother, is <b>non-sacred, and its offspring is a peace offering, and he slaughtered it outside</b> the Temple courtyard as a non-sacred animal, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>Is one liable for it due to</b> the prohibition against <b>slaughtering</b> offerings <b>outside</b> the Temple courtyard, <b>or not?</b>

### Part 3
Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>Do we read</b> the verse: <b>“That they may bring them to the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 17:5), as applying <b>to</b> this case? The full passage reads: “Any man of the house of Israel who shall slaughter a bull, or a lamb, or a goat…and has not brought it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting…that man shall be cut off from among his people. To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice in the open field, even that they may bring them to the Lord, to the door of the Tent of Meeting” (Leviticus 17:3–5). The passage indicates that the prohibition against slaughtering offerings outside the Temple applies only to those offerings that are fit to be slaughtered inside. But this fetus is not fit to be slaughtered at all until it is born.

### Part 4
The Gemara cites <b>another version</b> of this answer. Rav Yosef <b>said to</b> Abaye: The verse states: “And has not brought it to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.” This teaches that <b>one is liable for</b> slaughtering an offering <b>outside</b> the Temple only if it is <b>fit to</b> come through <b>the entrance to the Tent of Meeting,</b> i.e., to be sacrificed in the Temple. This fetus is not yet fit.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <i>teruma</i>, the portion of the produce designated for the priest, was intermingled with non-sacred produce, and it is impossible to distinguish between them, if the ratio of non-sacred produce to <i>teruma</i> was less than one hundred to one, the <i>teruma</i> is not nullified and all the produce is forbidden to those for whom <i>teruma</i> is forbidden. If the mixture was then intermingled with other non-sacred produce, that <b>mixture renders</b> it <b>a mixture</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>only according to</b> the <b>calculation</b> of the percentage of the original <i>teruma</i> produce in the entire mixture.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> dough <b>that was leavened</b> with a <i>teruma</i> leavening agent is forbidden to those for whom <i>teruma</i> is forbidden even if the ratio between the non-sacred and the <i>teruma</i> is greater than one hundred to one. If a portion of that dough was intermingled with non-sacred dough, it <b>leavens only according to</b> the <b>calculation</b> of the percentage of the original leavening agent in the entire dough, and the second dough is forbidden only if the quantity of the original <i>teruma</i> leavening agent inside it is sufficient to leaven it. <b>And</b> if three <i>log</i> of drawn water were poured into a ritual bath with less than forty <i>se’a</i> to complete the requisite forty <i>se’a</i>, the ritual bath is invalidated. But <b>drawn water invalidates the ritual bath only according to calculation,</b> as explained in the Gemara.

### Part 7
<b>And the water of purification</b> of the red heifer <b>becomes water of purification only with</b> the <b>placement of</b> the <b>ashes</b> into the water, but not by placement of water onto the ashes. <b>And</b> one <b><i>beit haperas</i> does not create</b> another <b><i>beit haperas</i>.</b> The Sages decreed ritual impurity on a field in which a grave was plowed, scattering the bones throughout the field. This field is called a <i>beit haperas</i>. That impurity extends to the area of one hundred cubits surrounding the grave. Nevertheless, they did not decree impurity on the second field if one plowed from that field into another field. <b>And there is no <i>teruma</i> after <i>teruma</i>.</b> Once one designates produce from his crop as <i>teruma</i>, if he then designates additional produce from that crop as <i>teruma</i>, it is not <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 8
<b>And a substitute</b> animal that was consecrated when it was substituted for a consecrated animal <b>does not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute;</b> rather, it remains non-sacred. <b>And the offspring</b> born of a consecrated animal that was not consecrated itself <b>does not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute. Rabbi Yehuda says: The offspring renders</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute.</b> The Sages <b>said to him: A consecrated</b> animal <b>renders</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute, but the offspring does not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that if a mixture of <i>teruma</i> produce and non-sacred produce was intermingled with other non-sacred produce, that mixture is prohibited only according to the calculation of the percentage of the original <i>teruma</i> produce in the entire mixture. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion is reflected in this ruling? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> This ruling is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 10
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 5:6): If <b>a <i>se’a</i> of <i>teruma</i> fell into less than one hundred</b> <i>se’a</i> of <b>non-sacred</b> produce and thereby caused it to <b>become</b> a prohibited <b>mixture,</b> since the amount of <i>teruma</i> is too great to be nullified by the non-sacred produce, <b>and</b> a <i>se’a</i> <b>from the mixture</b> subsequently <b>fell into a different place</b> with non-sacred produce, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The <i>se’a</i> from the original mixture <b>renders it</b> a prohibited <b>mixture as definite <i>teruma</i></b> would, in the same ratio, since I say: It is possible that the same <i>se’a</i> of <i>teruma</i> that fell into the first mixture was not mixed evenly throughout, and it all came out of it intact and fell into the second mixture. Therefore, it requires nullification as if it were unadulterated <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 11
<b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The <i>se’a</i> from the original prohibited mixture <b>renders</b> the derivative <b>mixture</b> prohibited <b>only according to</b> the <b>calculation</b> of actual <i>teruma</i> <b>in</b> the entire mixture, calculated as if the <i>teruma</i> were evenly distributed throughout the first mixture. The mishna evidently follows the opinion of the Rabbis.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> if a portion of dough <b>that was leavened</b> with a <i>teruma</i> leavening agent was intermingled with non-sacred dough, it <b>leavens only</b> according to the calculation. <b>Rabbi Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer.</b>

### Part 13
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Orla</i> 2:11): In a case of <b>non-sacred leaven and</b> leaven <b>of <i>teruma</i> that fell</b> together <b>into</b> a non-sacred batch of <b>dough,</b> and <b>this one</b> alone was <b>not</b> potent enough <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to become leavened, and that one</b> alone was <b>not</b> potent enough <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to become leavened, and they combined and caused</b> the dough <b>to become leavened, Rabbi Eliezer says: I follow the final</b> element to fall into the dough. If the <i>teruma</i> fell in last, the dough is prohibited to non-priests. <b>And the Rabbis say: Whether the forbidden item,</b> i.e., the <i>teruma</i>, <b>fell</b> in <b>first or the forbidden item fell</b> in <b>last, it is prohibited only if there is enough of</b> the prohibited leaven itself <b>to cause</b> the dough <b>to leaven.</b>

### Part 14
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>And drawn water invalidates the ritual bath only</b> according to calculation. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> whose opinion is reflected in this ruling? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: It is Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Mikvaot</i> 4:3) that <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> If <b>a ritual bath contains twenty-one <i>se’a</i> of rainwater,</b> the majority of a valid ritual bath of forty <i>se’a</i>, what can one do to render it valid? <b>One fills</b> drawn water <b>in</b> a bucket carried on <b>the shoulder</b> in the amount of <b>nineteen <i>se’a</i>,</b> and with it fills a pit adjacent to the ritual bath, <b>and</b> one <b>lets</b> the water <b>flow [<i>ufotekan</i>]</b> through a passage from the pit <b>into the ritual bath,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC