
### Part 1
Rabbi Zeira answered that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying: One consecrates</b> certain animal’s <b>limbs,</b> and the sanctity extends to the entire animal. <b>And</b> therefore, <b>one substitutes</b> these animals despite the fact that he initially consecrated only the limbs. <b>But one does not substitute</b> the limbs alone of non-sacred animals <b>for</b> consecrated animals or their limbs, since sanctity cannot be transferred to a limb through substitution. <b>And</b> as for <b>fetuses that were consecrated in their mother’s womb</b> through consecration of the mother, <b>one does not substitute for them</b> as long as they are in their mother’s womb. In other words, the clause of this mishna that refers to consecration is not referring to fetuses at all.

### Part 2
Rabbi Yirmeya objected: If the mishna is referring <b>to the offspring of sacrificial</b> animals, and it is teaching that <b>it is</b> only when they are <b>in their mother’s womb that one may not render a substitute</b> for them, one can infer that once they are <b>outside</b> their mother’s womb, <b>one can render</b> a substitute for them. <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the next mishna that <b>the offspring</b> born of a consecrated animal <b>do not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for them <b>a substitute?</b> Rabbi Zeira answered: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who disagrees and maintains that one can substitute for the offspring.

### Part 3
Rabbi Yirmeya objected: <b>If</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> one encounters a difficulty. According to Rabbi Yehuda, <b>are limbs consecrated</b> in this manner, in that the sanctity extends to the whole animal? <b>But Rabbi Yehuda does not accept</b> that if <b>one says: The</b> hind <b>leg of this</b> animal is <b>a burnt offering, the entire</b> animal is <b>a burnt offering.</b>

### Part 4
Rabbi Zeira <b>said to</b> him: <b>What are we dealing with here?</b> We are dealing <b>with an item whose</b> removal <b>renders it a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> i.e., will cause it to die within twelve months. Rabbi Yehuda’s ruling that the consecration of a limb does not extend to the entire animal applies only to limbs whose removal would not render the animal a <i>tereifa</i>. He concedes that the consecration of limbs which would render an animal <i>tereifa</i> were they removed does extend to the whole animal. In sum, bar Padda’s opinion that fetuses cannot be consecrated has not been refuted.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara suggests. <b>Let us say</b> that the dispute between bar Padda and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>is parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as we learned: If <b>one slaughtered</b> a pregnant animal that was consecrated as <b>a sin offering, and he found inside it</b> a female fetus <b>four</b> months <b>old,</b> which is <b>alive,</b> despite the fact that the mother usually carries its young for five months, <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches:</b> This animal is treated as a sin offering, and therefore <b>it is eaten only by the males of the priesthood, and</b> it <b>is eaten only within the hangings,</b> i.e., within the Temple courtyard, <b>and</b> it <b>is eaten only for one day</b> and night.

### Part 6
<b>And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that it is treated as a non-sacred animal, which means <b>it is eaten by any person,</b> not only priests, <b>and</b> such animals <b>may be eaten anywhere</b> outside the Temple courtyard, <b>but they may not be eaten in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard. What, is it not</b> correct that the dispute between bar Padda and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the first <i>baraita</i>, <b>holds</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan, that <b>fetuses are imbued with sanctity, and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the second <i>baraita</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b>fetuses are not imbued with sanctity,</b> as maintained by bar Padda?

### Part 7
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> of both <i>baraitot</i> agree that sanctity can apply to fetuses if the animal was consecrated while pregnant. Rather, the <i>baraitot</i> are dealing with an animal that was consecrated and then became pregnant, and <b>these <i>tanna’im</i> disagree about this, as</b> one <b>Sage,</b> in the second <i>baraita</i>, <b>holds</b> that with regard to the <b>offspring of sacrificial</b> animals, only <b>when they come into being,</b> at the time of their birth, <b>are they sanctified.</b> Since this fetus was never born, it is not sacred. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> in the first <i>baraita</i>, <b>holds</b> that the <b>offspring of sacrificial</b> animals <b>are sanctified</b> already <b>in their mother’s womb,</b> and therefore all the <i>halakhot</i> of a sin offering apply to the fetus immediately.

### Part 8
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that there is no contradiction between these two <i>baraitot</i> at all, and <b>it is one <i>tanna</i></b> who taught both of them, in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan that fetuses are imbued with sanctity. And the second <b>one of these <i>baraitot</i></b> is referring <b>to</b> a case where <b>one consecrates an animal</b> as a sin offering <b>and it became pregnant</b> only <b>afterward.</b> Since the fetus did not exist at the moment of consecration, it is not sacred. <b>And</b> the first <b>one of</b> the <i>baraitot</i> is referring to a case <b>where he consecrated</b> the animal when it was already <b>pregnant,</b> and therefore its fetus is imbued with its sanctity.

### Part 9
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> An animal crossbred from <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tereifa</i>, and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section,</b> and an animal <b>whose sexual organs are indeterminate [<i>tumtum</i>], and</b> an animal that is <b>a hermaphrodite [<i>ve’androginos</i>] are neither sacred nor do they sanctify</b> another animal. <b>And Shmuel says,</b> in explanation of the <i>baraita</i>: These animals <b>are not sacred as a substitute,</b> i.e., if one of these was non-sacred it cannot be consecrated as a substitute for a sacred animal. <b>And</b> they <b>do not sanctify</b> another animal <b>to render</b> it <b>a substitute;</b> that is, if one of these animals was sacred, no non-sacred animal can be consecrated as a substitute for them.

### Part 10
<b>And it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir said:</b> Why is it necessary for Rabbi Eliezer to state that one cannot substitute for these animals? After all, <b>since</b> he has already said that <b>they are not sanctified, how could they sanctify</b> another animal exchanged for them? Rabbi Meir himself responded: <b>You find</b> that these animals can be sacred, but <b>only</b> in specific situations, for example, <b>where one consecrated an animal and subsequently it became a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> or <b>where one consecrated</b> an animal’s <b>offspring and it was</b> then <b>born by caesarean section.</b> One can infer from Rabbi Meir’s statement that <b>evidently an offspring can be sanctified</b> while in the womb, contrary to the opinion of bar Padda.

### Part 11
The Sages <b>say</b> in response: In the case <b>of an unblemished</b> animal <b>in the womb of an unblemished</b> mother, <b>even bar Padda concedes that it can be consecrated.</b> Bar Padda and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagree only with regard to an unblemished</b> animal <b>in the womb of a blemished</b> mother. <b>Bar Padda maintains</b> that <b>since its mother cannot be consecrated with inherent sanctity,</b> its offspring <b>is not consecrated either. And Rabbi Yoḥanan maintains: These are</b> considered <b>as two</b> separate <b>animals; it is its mother</b> alone <b>that is not consecrated, but</b> the fetus itself is <b>consecrated.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara cites <b>another version</b> of the above discussion, which cites the continuation of Rabbi Meir’s statement: <b>But</b> with regard to an animal born of <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tumtum</i>, and a hermaphrodite, you find</b> that they can be consecrated <b>only when</b> they are <b>offspring of sacrificial</b> animals, i.e., a consecrated animal impregnated by an animal of a different species, or whose fetus was a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.

### Part 13
Rabbi Meir adds: <b>And</b> Rabbi Eliezer holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, who would say</b> that <b>the offspring</b> of a consecrated animal <b>renders</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute.</b> These offspring are exceptions, as they are disqualified for the altar. The Gemara infers: <b>It is</b> only for <b>these</b> disqualified offspring that one cannot substitute, <b>as they cannot have inherent sanctity, but</b> other offspring that are fit for the altar, and likewise <b>other fetuses, can be consecrated,</b> contrary to the opinion of bar Padda.

### Part 14
<b>Abaye said:</b> In the case of <b>an unblemished</b> animal <b>in the womb of an unblemished</b> mother, <b>everyone agrees that</b> the fetus <b>can have inherent sanctity. Rather, when</b> bar Padda and Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>disagree,</b> it is with regard to an unblemished animal <b>in the womb of a blemished</b> mother. <b>As bar Padda maintains: Since even its mother cannot have inherent sanctity,</b> the offspring <b>too can be consecrated only for</b> its <b>value.</b> And <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan maintains: A fetus is</b> considered <b>not the thigh of its mother</b> but a separate entity, <b>and</b> therefore <b>even though its mother’s sanctity is not inherent, the sanctity of</b> its <b>offspring can still be inherent.</b>

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches that according to the Rabbis, one cannot substitute non-sacred limbs for whole consecrated animals, but <b>Rabbi Yosei said</b> that one can substitute in this manner. He claims: <b>But isn’t</b> it so <b>with regard to sacrificial</b> animals, that if <b>one says: The</b> hind <b>leg of this</b> animal is a burnt offering, the entire animal is a burnt offering? The same should apply to substitution.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC