
### Part 1
Since it might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>granted,</b> if one does this <b>initially,</b> before the lottery, <b>we do not know if this</b> blemished animal will <b>be designated</b> as the one sacrificed <b>to the Lord</b> or sent to the wilderness. Therefore, the one who consecrated the blemished animal is flogged. <b>But here, since it is</b> already <b>clear</b> that the other animal is to be sacrificed to the <b>Lord,</b> and the one he consecrates will be sent to the wilderness, perhaps he is <b>not flogged</b> for consecrating it. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that this is also a violation of the prohibition and he is flogged.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Master said</b> above: The Sages said <b>in the name of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda:</b> One who sacrifices a blemished animal violates a prohibition against <b>the collection of the blood as well.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The verse states: “That which has its testicles bruised, or crushed, or torn, or cut,</b> you shall not offer unto the Lord” (Leviticus 22:24). The phrase “You shall not offer unto the Lord” is apparently superfluous, as the Torah already stated earlier: “But whatever has a blemish, you shall not offer” (Leviticus 22:20). Rather, <b>this</b> extra phrase is referring to <b>the collection of the blood,</b> for <b>which Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, said</b> that one is liable.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> who holds that one is not liable for collection of the blood per se, <b>why do I</b> need <b>this</b> phrase: <b>“You shall not offer,”</b> stated with regard to damaged testicles? The Gemara answers: <b>He requires</b> it <b>to</b> teach that one is liable for <b>sprinkling the blood.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>But he derives this from</b> the phrase: <b>“Upon the altar”</b> (Leviticus 22:22), which indicates that one may not sacrifice any part of such an animal on the altar, even its blood. The Gemara answers: With regard to that phrase, the first <i>tanna</i> holds that it is simply <b>the</b> normal <b>manner of the verse that it speaks like this.</b> It does not teach any additional <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara challenges: <b>But also</b> according to <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> one may claim that <b>this is the</b> normal <b>manner of the verse.</b> Why does he derive a <i>halakha</i> from this phrase? The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so.</b> He does not derive liability for sprinkling of the blood from the phrase “upon the altar.” <b>Rather, from where does he</b> derive the prohibition against <b>collection of the blood? He derives it from this</b> verse: <b>“Neither from the hand of a foreigner shall you offer</b> the bread of your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them; there is a blemish in them; they shall not be accepted for you” (Leviticus 22:25). <b>This</b> verse <b>is</b> referring to <b>the collection of the blood</b> when sacrificing a blemished animal, for <b>which Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, said</b> that one is liable.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> who holds that one is not liable for collection of the blood, <b>why do I</b> need <b>this</b> phrase: <b>Neither</b> from the hand of a foreigner <b>shall you offer?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He requires</b> it <b>to</b> teach <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>: It may <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since the descendants of Noah are commanded only with regard to</b> the sacrifice of an animal <b>lacking limbs</b> but they are permitted to sacrifice animals with minor blemishes, perhaps <b>there is no difference</b> if this is performed <b>on their altar</b> outside the Temple <b>or</b> if it is done <b>on our altar</b> in the Temple. Accordingly, one might claim that a gentile may sacrifice a blemished animal in the Temple in Jerusalem. The verse therefore <b>teaches us</b> that they may not sacrifice a blemished animal in such a manner.

### Part 6
The Gemara presents <b>an alternative version</b> of the discussion. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> One violates a prohibition <b>for the collection of the blood as well.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning</b> of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda? The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written: “That which has its testicles bruised, or crushed,</b> or torn, or cut, <b>you shall not offer</b> unto the Lord” (Leviticus 22:24). <b>This</b> verse is referring to <b>the collection of the blood. And he derives</b> the prohibition against <b>sprinkling</b> the blood <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“Upon the altar”</b> (Leviticus 22:22).

### Part 7
The Gemara objects: <b>And according to the Rabbis as well,</b> who hold that one is not liable for collection of the blood, <b>let them derive</b> liability for <b>sprinkling</b> the blood <b>from</b> the phrase <b>“upon the altar.”</b> The Gemara explains that it is <b>indeed</b> so, that they derive it from that phrase. <b>But for what</b> purpose <b>comes</b> the phrase <b>“You shall not offer” with regard to bruised</b> testicles? <b>We learn</b> from this phrase the prohibition <b>of</b> the sacrifice of a blemished animal even on <b>a private altar,</b> where offerings were sacrificed before the construction of the Temple.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But according to Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> how can he then derive the prohibition against collection of the blood of a blemished animal from the phrase “You shall not offer”? After all, <b>he requires this</b> phrase <b>to</b> render prohibited sacrifice on <b>a private altar.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> it <b>is indeed so. Rather, where does he</b> find another instance of the term <b>“shall offer” for</b> prohibiting <b>collection</b> of the blood? From the following verse: <b>“Neither from the hand of a foreigner shall you offer</b> the bread of your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them; there is a blemish in them; they shall not be accepted for you” (Leviticus 22:25). <b>This</b> verse is referring to <b>the collection of the blood.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And the Rabbis</b> maintain that this verse is <b>necessary</b> for a different <i>halakha</i>, as it <b>may enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since the descendants of Noah are commanded only with regard to</b> sacrificing an animal <b>lacking a limb on their</b> private <b>altar</b> but are permitted to sacrifice animals with minor blemishes, <b>perhaps we</b> should <b>accept</b> blemished offerings <b>from them</b> in the Temple <b>as well.</b> Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> by the use of the phrase <b>“of any of these” that we do not accept</b> them.

### Part 10
§ The <i>baraita</i> cited earlier stated that one who consecrates a blemished animal violates several prohibitions, but it did not differentiate between animals born with blemishes and those that acquired them during their lives. <b>Reish Lakish objects to this: Perhaps we learned</b> the prohibition <b>only with regard to an unblemished</b> animal <b>that became blemished, and</b> only one who consecrates such an animal <b>transgresses</b> the prohibition. <b>As, if</b> he consecrated an animal that was <b>blemished from the outset, it is</b> akin to consecrating <b>a mere date palm,</b> and his presumed intention is to consecrate its value, with the proceeds from its sale being used to purchase an offering. This would be permitted.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Yosef said to</b> Reish Lakish: The blemishes mentioned in the phrase in the verse that states: “Either a bull or a lamb <b>that has anything too long or too short”</b> (Leviticus 22:23), <b>are written in the passage</b> that prohibits the sacrifice of blemished animals, <b>and</b> animals such as <b>these are blemished from the outset.</b>

### Part 12
Reish Lakish <b>said to</b> Rav Ḥiyya bar Yosef: <b>Perhaps</b> in the case of animals born with blemishes, <b>we learned</b> the prohibition <b>only with regard to substitution, as we learned</b> in a mishna (16b): There is <b>greater stringency with regard to a substitute than</b> there is <b>with regard to</b> the initial consecration of <b>an offering, as,</b> if one substituted a non-sacred animal <b>with a permanent blemish</b> for a consecrated unblemished animal, the blemished animal <b>is imbued with sanctity.</b> But initial consecration of an animal with such a blemish is effective only with regard to its value, so perhaps one who does so is exempt from punishment.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>Didn’t you hear that which Rabbi Yannai says,</b> that when the Sages sat <b>in a group,</b> their opinions <b>were counted and they concluded: One who consecrates blemished</b> animals <b>for</b> sacrifice <b>on the altar violates five</b> separate <b>categories</b> of prohibition. <b>But if</b> the <i>baraita</i> is <b>also</b> referring to a case of <b>substitution, there are six</b> categories, <b>as there is</b> also <b>the prohibition of</b> performing <b>substitution.</b> Reish Lakish responded: <b>Rather, what</b> can you say? Is the <i>baraita</i> speaking <b>of</b> one who consecrated an animal that is <b>blemished from the outset? Why</b> then <b>is he flogged? It is</b> akin to one who consecrates <b>a mere date palm.</b>

### Part 14
Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> Reish Lakish: There is a difference between the cases. When one consecrates <b>a date palm, the matter is not disgraceful,</b> as <b>it is a type of wood</b> that one may burn on the altar. Therefore, he is not flogged. By contrast, when one consecrates an animal that is <b>blemished from the outset, the matter is disgraceful. Since he forsook unblemished</b> animals <b>and consecrated blemished</b> animals, <b>he is liable</b> to be flogged.

### Part 15
The Gemara presents <b>an alternative version</b> of the previous point. Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to</b> Reish Lakish: <b>Nevertheless, the matter</b> of consecrating an animal blemished from the outset <b>is disgraceful. For</b> in the case of <b>a date palm,</b> as <b>there is no</b> item <b>of its type</b> that can be sacrificed as an offering, <b>he is not flogged</b> for consecrating it. This is <b>to the exclusion of a blemished</b> animal; <b>since there are</b> items <b>of its type</b> that can be sacrificed as offerings, i.e., unblemished animals, <b>he is flogged</b> for consecrating it.

### Part 16
<b>Rava said: Now that it has been said</b> that <b>the reason that</b> one who consecrates <b>a blemished</b> animal <b>is flogged</b> is <b>due to</b> the fact that <b>the matter is disgraceful,</b> then <b>even one who consecrates it to</b> be sold and its <b>money</b> used <b>for</b> purchasing <b>libations</b> should be <b>flogged as well,</b> as consecrating a blemished animal is in and of itself a disgraceful act.

### Part 17
The Gemara notes: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC