### Part 1
<b>And</b> then, as Rabbi Yishmael holds that a firstborn definitely may not be eaten in the present, he says that second <b>tithe comes and</b> its status <b>is derived from</b> the juxtaposition to <b>the firstborn.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And can we derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>from one another? But doesn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say:</b> In <b>the entire Torah, we may derive</b> that which is <b>derived from</b> a <i>halakha</i> that was itself <b>derived</b> from another source, <b>except for</b> the case of <b>sacrificial</b> animals, <b>where</b> we <b>do not derive</b> that which is <b>derived from</b> that which was already <b>derived</b> from another source.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: Second <b>tithe is</b> considered <b>non-sacred.</b> Therefore, this derivation does not pertain to consecrated items. The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who said</b> that <b>we follow</b> the <i>halakha</i> that is <b>derived.</b> If it is a consecrated item, it may not be derived from another <i>halakha</i> that was derived from another source, but if it is non-sacred, such as second tithe, it may be derived in this manner. <b>But according to the one who said</b> that <b>we follow</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>teaches, what is there to say?</b> In this case the <i>halakha</i> that teaches, i.e., the source of the derivation, is the meat of the firstborn, which is a consecrated item that is derived itself from the status of the blood of the firstborn. The Gemara answers: The status of <b>the meat and the blood</b> of a firstborn offering <b>are one matter.</b> Therefore, the meat is not considered as derived from another <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara cites the second statement of Rabbi Yosei from the elders, in the continuation of the <i>baraita</i> above: <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a person may bring up a firstborn from outside Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>to Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>when the Temple is standing and sacrifice it.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall eat before the Lord your God,</b> in the place which He shall choose to cause His name to dwell there, <b>the tithe of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and of your flock”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:23). Rabbi Akiva derives from here that only <b>from the place that you bring up the tithe of grain</b> to Jerusalem, i.e., from Eretz Yisrael, <b>may you bring up a firstborn</b> to the Temple as an offering.

### Part 4
<b>But from a place that you may not bring up the tithe of grain,</b> i.e., outside Eretz Yisrael, <b>you may not bring up a firstborn</b> from there. Therefore, the statement of the mishna that if one did bring up an unblemished firstborn from outside Eretz Yisrael it may be sacrificed, is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yishmael. By contrast, the statement that ben Antigonus brought firstborn offerings from Babylonia and they were not accepted as offerings is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara relates the third statement in the <i>baraita</i>, which discusses second tithe: <b>Ben Azzai says</b> that one <b>might</b> have thought that he may <b>bring up second tithe and eat it in any</b> place <b>that overlooks</b> Jerusalem.<b>But</b> could this matter not be derived through <b>logical inference: A firstborn</b> offering <b>requires</b> that it be <b>brought</b> to the <b>place,</b> i.e., Jerusalem, <b>and</b> a second <b>tithe requires</b> that it be <b>brought</b> to the <b>place. Just as a firstborn</b> animal <b>is eaten only within the walls</b> of Jerusalem, <b>so too,</b> second <b>tithe is eaten only within the walls</b> of Jerusalem.

### Part 6
This inference may be refuted: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about a firstborn?</b> It is unique in <b>that it requires the placement of the blood and sacrificial portions upon the altar. Shall you</b> also <b>say</b> that this is the case <b>with regard to</b> second <b>tithe, where</b> that <b>is not</b> required? Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall eat before the Lord your God,</b> in the place which He shall choose to cause His name to dwell there, <b>the tithe of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil, and the firstborn of your herd and of your flock.”</b> The verse <b>juxtaposes</b> second <b>tithe</b> and the <b>firstborn,</b> to teach that <b>just as the firstborn is eaten only within the walls, so too,</b> second <b>tithe is eaten only within the walls.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>What is difficult for</b> ben Azzai <b>that</b> prompted him to <b>say:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that it is permitted to eat second tithe in any place that overlooks Jerusalem? The Gemara explains: <b>You</b> can <b>say</b> that it is difficult for him <b>since we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Megilla</i> 9b): <b>The difference between</b> the Tabernacle in <b>Shiloh and</b> the Temple in <b>Jerusalem is only that in Shiloh one eats offerings of lesser sanctity,</b> e.g., individual peace offerings, thanks offerings, and the Paschal lamb, <b>and</b> also <b>the second tithe, in any place that overlooks</b> Shiloh,<b>but in Jerusalem</b> one eats those consecrated items only <b>within the walls.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And likewise, offerings of the most sacred order</b> are eaten only in the area <b>within the hangings,</b> which surrounded the courtyard in the Tabernacle in Shiloh, which was equivalent to the area within the surrounding wall in the Temple courtyard in Jerusalem. <b>Lest you say</b> that even <b>in Jerusalem, they may bring second tithe</b> and eat it <b>in any</b> location <b>that overlooks</b> the walls, since, unlike the firstborn animal, second tithe does not possess any unique stringency, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so, as taught in the mishna.

### Part 9
§ Rabbi Yosei cites one more statement in the <i>baraita</i> with regard to a firstborn: The mishna (<i>Bekhorot</i> 26b) states that a firstborn animal is eaten from one year to the next, i.e., within its first year, as it is stated: “You shall eat it before the Lord your God year by year” (Deuteronomy 15:20). Rabbi Yosei adds that <b>others say:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a firstborn whose first year has passed should</b> have the same status <b>as disqualified consecrated</b> animals <b>and</b> therefore <b>be disqualified.</b>

### Part 10
Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And you shall eat before the Lord your God…<b>the tithe of your grain, of your wine, and of your oil,</b> and the firstborn of your herd and of your flock.” The verse thereby <b>juxtaposes a firstborn</b> animal <b>to</b> second <b>tithe,</b> which teaches that <b>just as</b> second <b>tithe is not disqualified from</b> one <b>year to the next, so too, a firstborn</b> animal <b>is not disqualified from</b> one <b>year to the next.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to the Rabbis,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yishmael, Rabbi Akiva, and ben Azzai, <b>who expound</b> this verse <b>for another explanation, from where do they</b> derive that a firstborn animal is not disqualified <b>from</b> one <b>year to the next?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They derive it from</b> the verse <b>“You shall eat it before the Lord your God year by year.”</b> The formulation “year by year” indicates two years, thereby <b>teaching with regard to a firstborn</b> animal <b>that it is not disqualified from</b> one <b>year to the next.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>the others,</b> who derive this <i>halakha</i> from the juxtaposition of the firstborn and second tithe, with regard to <b>what do they interpret</b> the verse: <b>“You shall eat it before the Lord your God year by year”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the time for the consumption of a firstborn animal: The phrase “year by year” teaches that there is a manner in which it may be eaten over two years: During <b>one day of this year, and</b> during <b>one day of the next year.</b> The verse therefore <b>teaches with regard to a firstborn</b> offering <b>that it may be eaten for two days and one night</b> in between.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> Rabbi Yishmael, Rabbi Akiva, and ben Azzai, <b>from where do they</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> a firstborn offering <b>may be eaten for two days and one night?</b> The Gemara answers that <b>the verse states</b> with regard to the firstborn: “And their flesh <b>shall be yours, like the breast of the waving</b> and the right thigh, it shall be yours” (Numbers 18:18). The repetition of the expression “It shall be yours” teaches that one may eat the firstborn for one more day than a standard thanks offering, which may be eaten only for one day and one night.

### Part 14
end of chapter

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The offspring of a sin offering and the substitute for a sin offering, and a sin offering whose owner has died shall</b> be sequestered and left to <b>die. And</b> with regard to a sin offering that is unfit for sacrifice because <b>its</b> first <b>year</b> from birth <b>has passed, and</b> a sin offering <b>that was lost and</b> when it was <b>found,</b> it was <b>blemished, if</b> it was <b>after the owner achieved atonement</b> through sacrifice of another animal as a sin offering, the blemished animal <b>shall die, and it does not render</b> a non-sacred animal exchanged for it <b>a substitute.</b>