
### Part 1
in terms of it being permitted <b>to shear</b> its wool <b>and to perform labor</b> with it. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says</b> that there is an additional stringency that applies to substitution but not to consecration: The Torah <b>rendered</b> the status of one who acts <b>unwittingly like</b> that of one who acts <b>intentionally with regard to substitution,</b> as in both cases the substitute is consecrated. <b>But</b> it <b>did not render</b> the status of one who acts <b>unwittingly like</b> that of one who acts <b>intentionally with regard to consecrated</b> items, since unwitting consecration is ineffective.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> An animal crossbred from <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tereifa</i>, and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section, and a <i>tumtum</i></b> animal, <b>and a hermaphrodite</b> animal are <b>not sacred</b> through consecration, <b>and</b> if they were sacred beforehand, e.g., one consecrated an animal and it subsequently became a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>they do not sanctify</b> non-sacred animals by means of substitution.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> that substitution applies whether one substitutes unwittingly or intentionally? The Gemara answers that <b>the verse states:</b> “He shall not alter it, nor substitute it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good; and if he shall substitute his animal for an animal, then both it and that for which it is changed <b>shall be holy”</b> (Leviticus 27:10). The apparently superfluous term “shall be” serves <b>to include</b> the case of one who acts <b>unwittingly like</b> that of one who acts <b>intentionally,</b> with regard to substitution.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> in which one who acts <b>unwittingly</b> is considered <b>like</b> one who acts <b>intentionally</b> with regard to substitution? <b>Ḥizkiyya said:</b> The circumstances are <b>of</b> one <b>who thinks that it is permitted to substitute</b> one animal for another. <b>With regard to a substitute,</b> the animal becomes consecrated, and the individual is liable to receive <b>lashes</b> for transgressing the Torah’s prohibition, due to the inclusion of “shall be,” despite the fact that he acted unwittingly. But <b>in</b> the equivalent case, where one unwittingly <b>sanctified</b> an animal that was unfit to be an offering, he is <b>not</b> liable to receive <b>lashes,</b> as in this case one is liable to receive lashes only if he acted intentionally and with prior warning.

### Part 5
The Gemara cites <b>an alternative version</b> of Ḥizkiyya’s statement: <b>With regard to</b> a non-sacred animal that was declared <b>a substitute,</b> the animal becomes <b>consecrated,</b> despite the fact that one acted unwittingly. But <b>with regard to sacrificial</b> animals, if it was consecrated unwittingly it is <b>not consecrated.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Reish Lakish and Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> both <b>state</b> a different example of the ruling discussed by Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda. They say that the case is of one <b>who thinks to say:</b> This animal shall be <b>a substitute for a burnt offering</b> that I own, <b>but</b> he unwittingly <b>said:</b> This animal shall be <b>a substitute for a peace offering</b> that I own. In such a case involving substitution he is liable to receive lashes, but if he erred in this manner with regard to consecration, he is exempt from lashes. The Gemara cites <b>an alternative version: With regard to a substitute of a peace offering,</b> if one unwittingly declared it a substitute, it <b>is consecrated. With regard</b> to <b>sacrificial</b> animals, if the animal was unwittingly consecrated, it is <b>not consecrated.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara cites another <b>alternative version</b> of the difference between substitution and consecration of an animal: The case is <b>of</b> one <b>who thinks to say:</b> The first <b>black</b> animal that comes out of my house will be a substitute, <b>but he</b> unwittingly <b>said:</b> The first <b>white</b> animal that comes out of my house will be a substitute. <b>With regard to a substitute,</b> the white animal is consecrated, and the individual therefore is liable to receive <b>lashes</b> for transgressing the Torah’s prohibition, despite the fact that he acted unwittingly. Conversely, <b>in</b> a similar case of <b>sacrificial</b> animals, e.g., one meant to say: The first blemished black animal that comes out of my house shall be consecrated, but he unwittingly said: The first blemished white animal shall be consecrated, if a white animal came out of his house, the animal is not consecrated, and therefore he is <b>not</b> liable to receive <b>lashes.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> another case of unwitting substitution of an animal. This is referring to a case <b>of</b> one who <b>says:</b> Let <b>this</b> animal <b>emerge</b> from its sanctity and become non-sacred, <b>and</b> let <b>that</b> animal <b>enter</b> in its place and become consecrated. This person acted unwittingly, because he mistakenly thought that in this manner the consecrated animal would no longer be sacred. <b>With regard to</b> a similar case involving <b>sacrificial</b> animals, <b>where he</b> has a sacrificial animal that developed a blemish and he incorrectly <b>says:</b> Any animals <b>that have developed a blemish may be eaten without redemption,</b> and he proceeded to eat the animal without first redeeming it, he is <b>not</b> liable to <b>receive lashes.</b> But <b>with regard to a substitute,</b> if he did this he would be liable to <b>receive lashes,</b> as stated above.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Sheshet says</b> yet another example of unwittingly performing substitution: It is referring to a case <b>of</b> one who <b>says: I will enter this house and consecrate</b> an animal intentionally, or: I will enter this house <b>and substitute</b> an animal <b>intentionally, and he entered and substituted or consecrated unintentionally,</b> i.e., he acted absentmindedly. For his transgression <b>with regard to substitution</b> he is liable to <b>receive lashes,</b> and for his transgression <b>with regard to sacrificial</b> animals he is <b>not</b> liable to <b>receive lashes.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna taught that <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> An animal crossbred from <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> and an animal born by caesarean section, and a <i>tumtum</i> animal, and a hermaphrodite animal, are neither sacred through consecration nor do they sanctify non-sacred animals by means of substitution. <b>Shmuel says</b> in explanation: They <b>are not sanctified by substitution,</b> i.e., if one said that an animal in any of these categories should be a substitute for a sacrificial animal, it does not become sanctified. <b>And</b> the clause that they <b>do not sanctify</b> non-sacred animals means that if one of these types of animal was sanctified and one attempted <b>to render</b> a non-sacred animal <b>a substitute</b> for it, that non-sacred animal does not become sanctified.

### Part 11
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir said: But since</b> these animals <b>do not become sanctified, how can</b> it even be suggested that <b>they</b> could <b>sanctify</b> another non-sacred animal? <b>Rather, you find</b> that the ruling of Rabbi Elazar applies <b>only when</b> one <b>sanctifies an animal and afterward it became a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> or <b>when</b> one <b>sanctifies a fetus and it emerged</b> from the womb <b>by caesarean section. But</b> with regard to an animal crossbred from <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tumtum</i>, and a hermaphrodite, you can find</b> this ruling <b>only in</b> a case of <b>the offspring of consecrated</b> female animals, which have sanctity without an act of consecration. <b>And</b> this is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> that <b>the offspring</b> of a consecrated animal <b>renders</b> a non-sacred animal that is exchanged for it consecrated as <b>a substitute.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rav Pappa said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar?</b> He holds that the <i>halakhot</i> of these categories of animal is <b>like</b> that of <b>a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal: Just as a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal is not sacrificed</b> as an offering <b>and inherent sanctity does not rest upon it, so too, these</b> animals in the categories of a <i>tereifa</i>, an animal born by caesarean section, a <i>tumtum</i>, or a hermaphrodite <b>may not be sacrificed</b> as offerings <b>and inherent sanctity does not rest upon them.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rav Pappa said to Rava: But</b> why aren’t animals in these categories compared to <b>a blemished</b> animal, <b>which may not be sacrificed</b> as an offering <b>but</b> nevertheless <b>inherent sanctity</b> does <b>rest upon it?</b> Rava <b>said to</b> Rav Pappa in response: Although <b>a blemished</b> animal is not sacrificed on the altar, another animal of <b>its</b> same <b>type,</b> i.e., an unblemished animal, <b>is sacrificed</b> as an offering. By contrast, an animal born by caesarean section, a <i>tumtum</i>, and a hermaphrodite may never be sacrificed. Rav Pappa said to Rava: <b>If so,</b> what will you say about <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> as other animals <b>of its type are sacrificed.</b> According to your explanation, why doesn’t inherent sanctity rest upon a <i>tereifa</i>?

### Part 14
<b>Rather, Rava</b> retracts his previous answer and instead <b>says:</b> The <i>halakhot</i> of animals in these categories are <b>like</b> those of <b>a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal,</b> in the following manner: <b>Just as</b> the category of <b>a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal is an inherent disqualification,</b> and such an animal cannot be sanctified or render another animal sanctified, <b>so too</b> the same applies to <b>any</b> other category of animal that <b>is an inherent disqualification,</b> such as a <i>tereifa</i>, an animal born by caesarean section, a <i>tumtum</i> animal, and a hermaphrodite. This serves <b>to exclude blemished</b> animals, <b>which are disqualified</b> only because they <b>lack</b> certain limbs.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Adda</b> raised a difficulty with regard to this answer and <b>said to Rava:</b> Is the disqualification of a blemished animal always because it is lacking a limb? <b>But isn’t</b> the phrase: <b>Too long or closed</b> hooves, <b>written in the passage</b> of the Torah addressing blemishes that disqualify an animal; <b>and these are inherent disqualifications.</b> The verse states: “Either a bull or a lamb that has any limb too long or closed hooves, you may offer for a voluntary offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted” (Leviticus 22:23).

### Part 16
<b>Rather, Rava</b> again retracted his previous answer and <b>said:</b> The explanation of Rabbi Elazar’s opinion is as I explained initially. The <i>halakhot</i> of animals in these categories are <b>like</b> those of <b>a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal: Just as a non-kosher</b> domesticated <b>animal is not</b> sacrificed on the altar and neither are any animals <b>of its type, so too</b> these <i>halakhot</i> apply to <b>any</b> animal that <b>is not</b> sacrificed on the altar and neither are any animals <b>of its type.</b> This serves <b>to exclude a blemished</b> animal, <b>because</b> other animals of <b>its type are</b> sacrificed on the altar.

### Part 17
<b>What</b> did <b>you say</b> to challenge this explanation? You said that in the case of <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, there are</b> other animals <b>of its type</b> that are sacrificed, and if so, why doesn’t inherent sanctity rest upon a <i>tereifa</i>? The answer is that a <i>tereifa</i> <b>is not similar to a blemished animal,</b> as <b>a non-kosher animal is forbidden for consumption, and a <i>tereifa</i> is forbidden for consumption.</b> This serves <b>to exclude a blemished</b> animal, <b>which is permitted for consumption.</b>

### Part 18
§ With regard to a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>Shmuel says:</b> One <b>who consecrates</b> an animal that is <b>a <i>tereifa</i> is required</b> to wait until it develops <b>a permanent blemish,</b> on account <b>of which he may redeem it.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty with regard to this statement of Shmuel. Since the meat of a <i>tereifa</i> is unfit for consumption and may only be fed to the dogs, why does it require redemption? Should one <b>learn from</b> this that one <b>redeems sacrificial</b> animals in order <b>to feed them to the dogs?</b> But this is contrary to the accepted <i>halakha</i> (see 31a).

### Part 19
<b>Rather, say</b> that the statement of Shmuel was as follows: If one consecrates an animal that is a <i>tereifa</i>, it <b>becomes sanctified</b> until it is time for the animal <b>to die,</b> so that even after its death it must be buried and may not be redeemed. <b>And Rabbi Oshaya says:</b> If one consecrates an animal that is a <i>tereifa</i>, this is <b>like nothing other than</b> one who <b>consecrates mere wood and stones,</b> which cannot become sanctified with inherent sanctity but only for their value, and which therefore can be redeemed. Consequently, a consecrated <i>tereifa</i> animal may be redeemed even if it is going to be fed to the dogs.

### Part 20
The Gemara raises a difficulty against the opinion of Shmuel. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna (31a): With regard to <b>all sacrificial</b> animals <b>that became <i>tereifa</i>, one may not redeem them</b> and render them non-sacred, <b>because</b> their consumption is forbidden; and <b>one does not redeem sacrificial</b> animals <b>to feed them to</b> the <b>dogs.</b> The Gemara analyzes this ruling: <b>The reason</b> that they may not be redeemed is because <b>they became</b> <i>tereifa</i> after they had already been consecrated. <b>Consequently,</b> if <b>they were</b> already <i>tereifa</i> <b>from the outset,</b> when they were consecrated, one <b>may redeem them.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Perhaps this <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>anywhere that</b> an animal <b>itself</b> is <b>not fit</b> for sacrifice, <b>inherent sanctity does not rest upon it</b> at all.

### Part 21
The Gemara raises another challenge to Shmuel’s opinion from the mishna. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear,</b> as <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> An animal crossbred from <b>diverse kinds, and a <i>tereifa</i>, and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section, and a <i>tumtum</i></b> animal, <b>and a hermaphrodite</b> animal are <b>not sacred</b> through consecration <b>and they do not sanctify</b> non-sacred animals by means of substitution. <b>And Shmuel says</b> in explanation: They <b>are not sacred with regard to substitution,</b> i.e., if one said that any of these animals should be a substitute for a sacrificial animal it does not become sanctified; <b>and</b> they <b>do not sanctify</b> non-sacred animals, i.e., if one of these types of animal was sanctified and one attempted <b>to render</b> a non-sacred animal <b>a substitute</b> for it, that non-sacred animal does not become sanctified.

### Part 22
<b>And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir said: But since they do not become sanctified, how can they sanctify</b> another non-sacred animal? <b>Rather, you find</b> the ruling of Rabbi Elazar applies <b>only when</b> one <b>sanctifies an animal and afterward it becomes a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>This</b> indicates that if it <b>was a <i>tereifa</i> from the outset,</b> then <b>inherent sanctity does not rest upon it;</b> this ruling contradicts the opinion of Shmuel, who says that such an animal must be buried when it dies.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC