
### Part 1
You, who are as great in this generation as <b>Moses, did you speak well?</b> It is not so; <b>rather,</b> both <b>there and here,</b> whether he recites it with or without pause, the latter part of the verse <b>is the conclusion of the matter, and we have no</b> problem <b>with it,</b> as it is clear that his intention is to recite the entire verse: “Blessed is one who comes in the name of the Lord.” <b>Rava said: Let a person not recite</b> in the <i>kaddish</i> prayer: <b>May His great name, and then,</b> after pausing, recite: <b>Be blessed. Rather,</b> let him recite without pause: <b>May His great name be blessed. Rav Safra said to</b> Rava: You, who are as great in this generation as <b>Moses, did you speak well?</b> It is not so, <b>rather,</b> both <b>there and here,</b> whether he recites it with or without pause, the latter part of the verse <b>is the conclusion of the matter, and we have no</b> problem <b>with it.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna continues: <b>In a place where they were accustomed to repeat</b> certain verses he too should repeat them. It was <b>taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>repeats</b> certain <b>matters in</b> <i>hallel</i>. <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Perata adds</b> certain <b>matters in</b> <i>hallel</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does <b>he add? Abaye said: He continues repeating</b> additional verses in <i>hallel</i>, those <b>from: I will thank You, and onward</b> until the end of the psalm, as is the custom even today.

### Part 3
§ The mishna continues: In a place where the custom is <b>to recite a blessing</b> when reciting hallel, <b>he should recite a blessing. Abaye said:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that the obligation to recite a blessing is dependent on custom <b>only</b> with regard to the blessing recited <b>after</b> <i>hallel</i>. <b>However, before</b> <i>hallel</i>, there is <b>a mitzva to recite a blessing, as Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>all</b> the mitzvot, <b>one recites a blessing over them prior to [<i>over</i>] their performance.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where may it be inferred that</b> the word <b><i>over</i> is the language of priority?</b> It is <b>as Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said that it is written: “And Ahimaaz ran by the way of the plain and overtook [<i>vaya’avor</i>] the Cushite”</b> (II Samuel 18:23). <b>Abaye said:</b> It is derived <b>from here: “And he passed [<i>avar</i>] before them” (</b>Genesis 33:3). <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the proof is <b>from here: “And their king passed [<i>vaya’avor</i>] before them and the Lord at their head”</b> (Micah 2:13).

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who purchases a <i>lulav</i> from another</b> who is an <i>am ha’aretz</i> <b>during the Sabbatical Year,</b> the seller <b>gives him an <i>etrog</i></b> along with it <b>as a gift, as he is not permitted to purchase</b> the <i>etrog</i> <b>during the Sabbatical Year</b> because it is prohibited to engage in commerce with Sabbatical-Year produce.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: If, the seller <b>did not want to give him</b> the <i>etrog</i> <b>as a gift, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? How should the buyer purchase the <i>etrog</i>? <b>Rav Huna said: He incorporates the cost of the <i>etrog</i> into</b> the price of the <b><i>lulav</i>.</b> He should purchase the <i>lulav</i> at an inflated price to cover the cost of the <i>etrog</i> as well. The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the buyer <b>give</b> the seller the money for the <i>etrog</i> <b>directly;</b> why employ artifice in the transaction?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: That is necessary <b>because one may not transfer money</b> used to purchase <b>Sabbatical-Year produce to an <i>am ha’aretz</i>,</b> lest he make improper use of money that has sanctity of the Sabbatical Year. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> may <b>not transfer to an <i>am ha’aretz</i> money</b> used to purchase <b>Sabbatical-Year produce</b> that is worth <b>more than</b> the value of <b>food</b> sufficient for <b>three meals.</b> One may use money that has sanctity of the Sabbatical Year to purchase food for his personal use. If the money is sufficient for three meals, presumably the seller will use it in a permitted manner. <b>And if</b> the buyer <b>transferred</b> more money than that, <b>he</b> should <b>say: This money is deconsecrated</b> by my redeeming it in exchange for non-Sabbatical-Year <b>produce that I have in my house.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC