
### Part 1
The mishna summarizes that <b>this is the principle: Any</b> case <b>where,</b> were <b>the tree removed, the</b> <i>sukka</i> would <b>be able to remain standing in and of itself,</b> it <b>is fit, and one may ascend</b> and enter <b>it on</b> the <b>Festival,</b> since the tree is not its primary support.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara comments: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is <b>the mishna?</b> It <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who establishes his <i>sukka</i> at the top of the ship, Rabban Gamliel deems</b> it <b>unfit and Rabbi Akiva deems</b> it <b>fit.</b>

### Part 3
There was <b>an incident involving Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Akiva, who were coming on a ship. Rabbi Akiva arose and established a <i>sukka</i> at the top of the ship. The next day the wind blew and uprooted it. Rabban Gamliel said to him: Akiva, where is your <i>sukka</i>?</b> It was unfit from the start.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said: Everyone agrees that</b> in a case <b>where</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is unable to withstand a typical land wind,</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is of no consequence</b> and it is not even a temporary residence. If <b>it is able to withstand</b> even <b>an atypical land wind, everyone agrees that</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is fit. Where they disagree</b> is <b>in</b> a case <b>where</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is able to withstand a typical land wind but is unable to withstand an atypical land wind,</b> which is the equivalent of a typical sea wind. <b>Rabban Gamliel holds:</b> In order to fulfill the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>, we require a permanent residence, and since it is not able to withstand</b> an atypical land wind, which is like <b>a typical sea wind, it is of no consequence</b> and is not a <i>sukka</i> at all. <b>Rabbi Akiva holds:</b> In order to fulfill the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>, we require a temporary residence, and since it is able to withstand a typical land wind,</b> it <b>is fit,</b> although it is unable to withstand a typical sea wind.

### Part 5
§ The mishna continues: <b>Or</b> if one establishes his <i>sukka</i> <b>atop a camel,</b> the <i>sukka</i> is fit. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> of <b>the mishna? It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who establishes his <i>sukka</i> atop an animal, Rabbi Meir deems</b> it <b>fit and Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> it <b>unfit.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda?</b> The Gemara answers that it is as <b>the verse states: “You shall prepare for yourself the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> for seven days”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:13), from which Rabbi Yehuda derives: <b>A <i>sukka</i> that is suitable for seven</b> days <b>is called a <i>sukka</i>,</b> while <b>a <i>sukka</i> that is not suitable for seven</b> days <b>is not called a <i>sukka</i>.</b> It is prohibited to climb upon an animal on the first day of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, and therefore a <i>sukka</i> atop an animal is unfit, as it cannot be used all seven days.

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that the <i>sukka</i> is fit, would say: <b>By Torah law, this</b> <i>sukka</i> <b>is also suitable</b> for use on a Festival and on Shabbat, as there is no Torah prohibition against using an animal on those days, <b>and it is the Sages who issued a decree</b> prohibiting <b>it.</b> The fact that it is prohibited by rabbinic decree does not render the <i>sukka</i> unfit.

### Part 7
However, if <b>one utilized</b> his <b>animal</b> as <b>a wall for a <i>sukka</i></b> and did not establish the entire <i>sukka</i> atop the animal, <b>Rabbi Meir deems</b> it <b>unfit and Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> it <b>fit, as Rabbi Meir would say:</b> With regard to <b>any animate object, one</b> may <b>neither establish it as a wall for</b> the <b><i>sukka</i>, nor</b> as <b>a side post</b> placed at the entrance to <b>an alleyway</b> to render it permitted to carry in the alleyway on Shabbat, <b>nor</b> as one of the upright <b>boards</b> placed around <b>wells</b> to render the area a private domain and permit one to draw water from the well on Shabbat, <b>nor</b> as the <b>covering for a grave. In the name of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili</b> the Sages <b>said: Nor</b> may <b>one write bills of divorce on it.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir,</b> who rules that an animal is unfit for use as a partition in areas of <i>halakha</i> where a partition is required? <b>Abaye said:</b> It is due to the concern <b>lest</b> the animal <b>die,</b> leaving the <i>sukka</i> without a wall. <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> It is due to the concern <b>lest it flee.</b> The Gemara explains the practical halakhic differences between the two opinions. <b>In</b> the case where one established a wall with <b>a tied elephant, everyone agrees</b> that the <i>sukka</i> is fit, <b>as even if it dies</b> and falls, <b>its carcass</b> still <b>has</b> a height of <b>ten</b> handbreadths and is fit for the wall of a <i>sukka</i>. <b>Where they disagree</b> is <b>in</b> the case of <b>an elephant that is not tied. According to the one who said:</b> It is due to the concern <b>lest</b> the animal <b>die, we are not concerned</b> in this case, as the carcass would remain a fit wall. <b>According to the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest it flee, we</b> remain <b>concerned.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>According to the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest it die, let us</b> also <b>be concerned lest it flee,</b> as that too is a reasonable concern. <b>Rather,</b> this is the explanation: <b>In</b> the case where one established a wall with <b>an elephant that is not tied, everyone agrees</b> that the <i>sukka</i> is unfit lest it flee. <b>Where they disagree</b> is <b>in</b> the case of <b>a tied animal. According to the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest</b> the animal <b>die, we are concerned,</b> as although it cannot flee, it might die, and the carcass of a typical animal is not ten handbreadths high. <b>And according to the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest it flee, we are not concerned.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest it flee, let us</b> also <b>be concerned lest it die.</b> The Gemara answers: That is not a concern because <b>death is not common.</b> The Sages do not issue decrees with regard to uncommon circumstances. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to all opinions, <b>isn’t there the space between</b> its legs, which is like a breach in a wall? How can one establish a partition whose breached segment exceeds its standing segment? The Gemara answers: <b>He establishes</b> a partition <b>for it</b> by filling the gaps <b>with hard palm leaves and laurel leaves,</b> sealing the breach.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks further: <b>And</b> even though there is no concern lest the animal die, <b>perhaps it will crouch,</b> leaving a wall that is less than ten handbreadths? The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where</b> the animal <b>is tied with ropes from above</b> so that it cannot crouch. Based on that explanation, the Gemara asks: <b>And according to the one who said:</b> It is due to <b>a decree lest it die,</b> there is <b>also</b> no concern since <b>it is tied with ropes from above.</b> Even if the animal died, it would remain in place as a fit partition. The Gemara answers: <b>Sometimes</b> the ten-handbreadth wall consists of the animal that is a bit higher than seven handbreadths <b>established adjacent to the roofing, less than three</b> handbreadths away.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC