
### Part 1
<b>And Rabbi Meir concedes that if</b> there is <b>between</b> one <b>board</b> and another <b>board</b> a gap the <b>complete</b> width <b>of a board,</b> then <b>one places</b> fit roofing from the <b>waste</b> of the threshing floor and the winepress, <b>and</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is fit.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted, according to the one who said: Both along the side and in the center</b> a <i>sukka</i> is rendered unfit <b>with</b> a measure of <b>four cubits</b> of unfit roofing, it is <b>due to that</b> reason that the <i>sukka</i> under discussion is <b>fit,</b> as none of the boards is four cubits wide. <b>However, according to the one who said</b> that a <i>sukka</i> is rendered unfit <b>with</b> a measure of <b>four</b> handbreadths of unfit roofing <b>in the center, why</b> is the <i>sukka</i> <b>fit?</b> Each board is capable on its own of rendering the <i>sukka</i> unfit.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: Here, we are dealing with a <i>sukka</i> that is exactly eight</b> cubits, i.e., forty-eight handbreadths, wide, and one began placing the roofing from the side. <b>And he places</b> a four-handbreadth <b>board and</b> then four handbreadths of <b>waste, and</b> another <b>board and waste, and a board and waste, from this side,</b> so that the total measure of roofing from that side is twenty-four handbreadths. <b>And</b> then <b>a beam and waste, a beam and waste, and a beam and waste, from that side,</b> so that the total measure of roofing from that side is twenty-four handbreadths.

### Part 4
The result is <b>that</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>has two</b> four-handbreadth stretches of <b>waste in the middle</b> of the <i>sukka</i>, totaling eight handbreadths. In that case, <b>there is</b> the minimum measure of fit roofing required for <b>fitness of a <i>sukka</i> in the middle,</b> and everyone agrees that the unfit roofing in the rest of the <i>sukka</i> cannot render it unfit. Since the unfit roofing measures less than four cubits on either side, the <i>sukka</i> is fit both according to the principle of curved wall and according to the opinion that unfit roofing renders the <i>sukka</i> unfit with four cubits.

### Part 5
§ <b>Abaye said:</b> If there is <b>space</b> measuring <b>three</b> handbreadths <b>in a large <i>sukka</i>,</b> which is defined as one larger than seven by seven handbreadths, <b>and one diminished</b> the space, <b>whether</b> he did so <b>with branches,</b> fit for roofing, or <b>whether</b> he did so <b>with</b> metal <b>skewers,</b> unfit roofing, <b>it is</b> an effective <b>diminution,</b> as there is neither sufficient space nor sufficient unfit roofing to render the <i>sukka</i> unfit. However, <b>in a small <i>sukka</i>,</b> if one diminished the space <b>with branches it is</b> an effective <b>diminution;</b> if he diminished the space <b>with skewers, it is not</b> an effective <b>diminution</b> and the <i>sukka</i> is unfit. The three handbreadths of skewers, while insufficient to render the <i>sukka</i> unfit, diminish the fit area of the <i>sukka</i> to the point that the measure that remains does not constitute a fit <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara notes: <b>And this applies only</b> if the space is <b>along the side</b> of the <i>sukka</i>, in which case the principle of <i>lavud</i> applies. <b>However,</b> if the space is <b>in the center</b> of the <i>sukka</i>, <b>Rav Aḥa and Ravina disagree</b> with regard to the ruling. <b>One said:</b> The principle of <b><i>lavud</i> is</b> applied even <b>in the center</b> of the <i>sukka</i>. <b>And one said:</b> The principle of <b><i>lavud</i> is not</b> applied <b>in the center</b> of the <i>sukka</i>. Even if one diminished the space, the two sides of the roofing are not considered joined.

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of the one who said:</b> The principle of <b><i>lavud</i> is</b> applied even <b>in the center</b> of the <i>sukka</i>? It is <b>as it is taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: With regard to a cross <b>beam</b> of the merging of alleyways <b>that projects from this wall</b> of an alleyway <b>but does not touch the other</b> opposite <b>wall, and similarly,</b> with regard to <b>two</b> cross <b>beams, one projecting from this wall and one projecting from the other</b> opposite <b>wall and they do not touch each other,</b> if there is a gap of <b>less than three</b> handbreadths between the beam and the wall or between the two beams respectively, <b>one need not bring another</b> cross <b>beam</b> to render the alleyway fit for one to carry within it, as they are considered joined based on the principle of <i>lavud</i>. However, if there is a gap of <b>three</b> handbreadths, <b>one must bring another</b> cross <b>beam.</b> Apparently, the principle of <i>lavud</i> is applied even in the center.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> Sage, who holds that <i>lavud</i> does not apply in the center, how would he explain the <i>Tosefta</i>? The Gemara clarifies that he would say that <b>beams are different</b> because the prohibition against carrying in an alleyway is a decree <b>by rabbinic</b> law, and it is a rabbinic ordinance that beams may be placed at the entrance to the alleyway to permit carrying therein, the Sages were lenient. Therefore, proof cannot be cited from the case of the beams with regard to other situations.

### Part 9
<b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the one who said:</b> The principle of <b><i>lavud</i> does not</b> apply <b>in the center?</b> It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: In the case of <b>a skylight in the</b> roof of a <b>house whose opening is one</b> square <b>handbreadth,</b> if there is a source of <b>ritual impurity</b> imparted by a corpse <b>inside the house,</b> all the objects in <b>the entire</b> house become <b>ritually impure,</b> as the legal status of the roof is that of a tent over a corpse. However, the objects <b>that are</b> directly <b>opposite the skylight are ritually pure,</b> as the roof does not cover that part of the house. If the source of <b>ritual impurity</b> is itself situated <b>aligned with the skylight,</b> all the objects in <b>the entire house are ritually pure,</b> as there is no roof over the source of impurity.

### Part 10
<b>If the skylight does not have</b> an opening of <b>a square handbreadth</b> and <b>there is ritual impurity in the house,</b> the objects <b>opposite the skylight</b> remain <b>ritually pure.</b> If the source of <b>ritual impurity is aligned with the skylight,</b> the objects in <b>the entire house are ritually pure.</b> Apparently, the principle of <i>lavud</i> is not applied in the center; if it were, all the objects in the house would become ritually impure regardless of the location of the source of impurity. The opening of the skylight should be considered closed, as the distance between the two sides of its opening is less than three handbreadths.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> Sage, who holds that <i>lavud</i> applies in the center, how would he explain the mishna? The Gemara answers: <b>The <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity are different, as that</b> is the way <b>they learned them</b> through tradition. The <i>halakhot</i> of tents and ritual impurity are <i>halakhot</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai. Therefore, their details are unique, and other areas of <i>halakha</i> cannot be derived from them.

### Part 12
§ <b>Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai taught: A house that was breached and one roofed over it</b> is a <b>fit</b> <i>sukka</i>. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said to him: My teacher, explain</b> your opinion. Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai said that <b>this is how</b> my <b>father explained</b> it: If the ceiling between the wall and the breach is <b>four cubits</b> long, the <i>sukka</i> is <b>unfit.</b> If it is <b>less than four cubits,</b> the <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai taught:</b> With regard to the <b>abramis [<i>avroma</i>],</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to eat it, despite the fact that it is a very small fish that is typically caught in a net with many similar, non-kosher, fish, and it is difficult to distinguish between them. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said to him: My teacher, explain</b> your opinion. Rabbi Yehuda bar Elai said that <b>this is how</b> my <b>father explained it:</b> The abramis found in the rivers <b>of place so-and-so,</b> where there are also non-kosher fish, is <b>prohibited;</b> however, the abramis <b>of</b> a different <b>place so-and-so,</b> where there are no non-kosher fish, is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara notes that this is <b>similar</b> to <b>that which Abaye said: These small fish [<i>tzaḥanta</i>] of the Bav River are permitted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that Abaye unequivocally permitted eating these fish and was not concerned about the potential presence of non-kosher fish among them? <b>If we say</b> that it is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that the water flows rapidly, and these non-kosher fish, since they do not have a spinal cord, are not able to exist</b> in that water, as the current carries the non-kosher fish out of the Bav River, and consequently all the remaining fish are kosher, that is not the case. <b>Don’t we see that</b> non-kosher fish <b>exist</b> in rivers with strong currents?

### Part 15
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps Abaye permitted it <b>because the water is salty, and these non-kosher fish are not able to exist</b> in that water <b>because they do not have scales.</b> This, too, is not the case, as <b>don’t we see that</b> non-kosher fish <b>exist</b> in salty water? <b>Rather,</b> Abaye permitted the small fish in the Bav River <b>because the mud in that</b> river <b>is not</b> suited for <b>non-kosher fish to reproduce.</b> The conditions in the river render it an unproductive habitat for non-kosher fish. <b>Ravina said: And today, since</b> the government built canals between the rivers, and the <b>Eitan River and</b> the <b>Gamda River spill into</b> the Bav, it is <b>prohibited</b> to eat the small fish without thorough inspection.

### Part 16
§ <b>It was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disagree: <b>If one roofed a portico that has posts</b> on its open side, the <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit.</b> If one roofed a portico <b>that does not have posts</b> on its open side, <b>Abaye said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit,</b> and <b>Rava said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>unfit.</b> The Gemara elaborates: <b>Abaye said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC