
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: And <b>these two</b> extra loaves received by the incoming watch, <b>what is their purpose? Rabbi Yitzḥak says:</b> They are <b>as compensation</b> for <b>locking</b> the <b>doors</b> of the Temple. The Gemara asks: <b>Let</b> the outgoing watch <b>say to</b> the incoming one: <b>Remove</b> your claim to the extra loaves this week and divide the loaves equally and next week’s incoming watch <b>will remove</b> its claim next week. <b>Abaye said:</b> A ripe <b>cucumber</b> now <b>is better than a gourd</b> that has yet to ripen. A small, immediate profit is preferable to a large, potential profit.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yehuda said: And they divide</b> the hides <b>of the additional offerings</b> between them. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The outgoing watch performs the</b> rite of the <b>daily morning offering and the additional offerings, and the incoming watch performs</b> the rite of <b>the daily afternoon offering and</b> the service of <b>the vessels</b> of frankincense for the shewbread. <b>And</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches nothing about dividing</b> the hides of <b>the additional offerings.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This <i>tanna</i> is not speaking of division</b> of the hides, but is addressing the division of the Temple service, so sharing the hides is not mentioned.

### Part 3
<b>Rava said: But didn’t the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Shmuel, who speaks of division</b> between the incoming and the outgoing watches, <b>fail to teach division of the hides of the additional offerings</b> mentioned by Rabbi Yehuda, <b>as the school of Shmuel taught: The outgoing watch performs the daily morning offering and the additional offerings; the incoming watch performs the daily afternoon offerings and</b> the service of <b>the vessels.</b> And how was this service performed? <b>Four priests would enter</b> the Sanctuary, <b>two from this</b> outgoing <b>watch and two from that</b> incoming <b>watch, and they divide the shewbread. But it teaches nothing about dividing</b> the hides of <b>the additional offerings.</b> The Gemara suggests: This is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rav Yehuda.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna continues: Members of <b>the incoming</b> watch <b>divide</b> the shewbread <b>in the north</b> section of the courtyard, and members of the outgoing watch in the south. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Members of <b>the incoming watch divide</b> the shewbread <b>in the north,</b> which was an area of greater sanctity in the Temple courtyard, <b>so that it would be seen that they are incoming, and</b> members of <b>the outgoing</b> watch <b>divide</b> the shewbread <b>in the south, so it would be seen that they are outgoing.</b>

### Part 5
We learned in the mishna that <b>Bilga always divides</b> the shewbread <b>in the south,</b> even when it is the incoming watch. The Gemara elaborates: <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There was an <b>incident involving Miriam, the daughter</b> of a member of the <b>Bilga</b> watch, <b>who apostatized and went and married a soldier [<i>sardeyot</i>]</b> serving in the army <b>of the Greek kings. When the Greeks entered the Sanctuary,</b> she entered with them and <b>was kicking with her sandal on the altar and said: Wolf, wolf [<i>lokos</i>], until when will you consume the property of the Jewish people, and</b> yet <b>you do not stand with them when</b> they face <b>exigent circumstances? And</b> after the victory of the Hasmoneans over the Greeks, <b>when the Sages heard about this matter</b> and how she denigrated the altar, <b>they fixed the ring</b> of the Bilga watch in place, rendering it nonfunctional, <b>and sealed its niche.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And some say</b> that the watch was penalized for a different reason. It happened once that some members of the Bilga <b>watch tarried in arriving</b> at the Temple. The members of the previous watch, the watch of <b>Yeshevav, his brother, entered together with</b> the members of the Bilga watch who had arrived, <b>and served in</b> the <b>place</b> of the absent members of <b>his</b> brother’s watch. The Gemara notes: <b>Although neighbors of the wicked do not</b> typically <b>profit,</b> according to the principle: Woe unto the wicked, woe unto his neighbor, <b>Bilga’s neighbors profited, as Bilga always divides</b> the shewbread <b>in the south,</b> even when the watch is incoming, <b>and his brother Yeshevav</b> always divides <b>in the north,</b> even when the watch is outgoing.

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that Bilga was penalized because members of <b>his watch tarried in arriving</b> at the Temple; <b>that is why the entire watch is penalized. However, according to the one who said</b> it is due to <b>Miriam, daughter of Bilga, who apostatized, do we penalize</b> the entire watch of Bilga <b>because of his daughter? Abaye said: Yes, as people say, the speech of a child in the marketplace is</b> learned <b>either from that of his father or from that of his mother.</b> Miriam would never have said such things had she not heard talk of that kind in her parents’ home.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And due to</b> Miriam’s <b>father and mother, do we penalize an entire watch? Abaye said: Woe unto the wicked, woe unto his neighbor.</b> To conclude the tractate on a positive note, the Gemara says: <b>Good for the righteous, good for his neighbor, as it is stated: “Say you of the righteous that it shall be good for him, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings”</b> (Isaiah 3:10); the neighbors of a righteous man who witness and acknowledge the good that befalls him will benefit from their proximity to him.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC