
### Part 1
is <b>a Festival in and of itself</b> with regard <b>to the matter</b> of: <b><i>Peh</i>, <i>zayin</i>, <i>reish</i>; <i>kuf</i>, <i>shin</i>, <i>beit</i>.</b> This is an acronym for: <b>A lottery [<i>payis</i>] in and of itself,</b> i.e., a new lottery is performed on that day to determine which priests will sacrifice the offerings that day, and the order established on <i>Sukkot</i> does not continue; the blessing of <b>time [<i>zeman</i>],</b> i.e., Who has given us life, sustained us, and brought us to this time, <b>in and of itself,</b> as it is recited just as it is recited at the start of each Festival; <b>a Festival [<i>regel</i> ] in and of itself,</b> and there is no mitzva to sit in the <i>sukka</i> (see <i>Tosafot</i>); <b>an offering [<i>korban</i>] in and of itself,</b> as the number of offerings sacrificed on the Eighth Day is not a continuation of the number sacrificed on <i>Sukkot</i> but is part of a new calculation; <b>a song [<i>shira</i>] in and of itself,</b> since the psalms recited by the Levites as the offerings are sacrificed on the Eighth Day are not a continuation of those recited on <i>Sukkot</i>; <b>a blessing [<i>berakha</i>] in and of itself,</b> as the addition to the third blessing of Grace after Meals and to the <i>Amida</i> prayer (see <i>Tosafot</i>) is phrased in a manner different from that of the addition recited on <i>Sukkot</i>.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> This mishna elaborates upon the first mishna in this chapter. <b>The</b> obligation to recite <b><i>hallel</i> and the</b> mitzva of <b>rejoicing</b> on the Festival by sacrificing and eating the meat of peace-offerings <b>are</b> always for <b>eight</b> days. The mishna explains: <b>How so?</b> This <b>teaches that a person is obligated in <i>hallel</i>, and in the</b> mitzva of <b>rejoicing, and in reverence for the last day of the Festival like</b> he is for <b>all the other days of the Festival.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters,</b> that on the eighth day of the Festival one is obligated to rejoice, derived? It is <b>as the Sages taught</b> that the verse states with regard to <i>Sukkot</i>: <b>“And you shall be altogether joyful”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:15). The verse comes <b>to include the evenings of the last day of the Festival,</b> i.e., then too, one is obligated to rejoice by partaking of the meat of the peace-offerings sacrificed the previous day. The Gemara asks: Does the verse come to include the evening of the eighth day? <b>Or</b> perhaps <b>it</b> comes to include <b>only the</b> evening of <b>the first day of the Festival.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>When</b> the verse <b>says: Altogether,</b> it is exclusionary, and <b>it</b> has <b>distinguished</b> this night from the other nights of the Festival.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>What did you see</b> that led you <b>to include the evenings of the last day of the Festival</b> in the mitzva of rejoicing <b>and to exclude the evenings of the first day of the Festival?</b> Why not require one to sacrifice peace-offerings on the afternoon preceding the Festival to be eaten on the first night? The Gemara answers: <b>I include the evenings of the last day of the Festival, before which there is</b> a day of <b>rejoicing,</b> as it is reasonable that the rejoicing should continue, <b>and I exclude the evenings of the first day of the Festival, before which there is not</b> a day of <b>rejoicing,</b> as there is no obligation to sacrifice offerings on the afternoon preceding the Festival.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i></b> is <b>seven</b> days. <b>How</b> does one fulfill this obligation for seven full days? When <b>one finished eating</b> on the seventh day, <b>he</b> should <b>not dismantle his <i>sukka</i></b> immediately, because the obligation continues until the end of the day. <b>However, he takes the vessels down</b> from the <i>sukka</i> into the house <b>from <i>minḥa</i></b> time <b>and onward in deference to the last day of the Festival,</b> when he will require the vessels in the house.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: If <b>one does not have vessels to take down</b> from the <i>sukka</i>, <b>what</b> should he do? The Gemara asks: <b>One does not have vessels? But when he utilized</b> his <i>sukka</i> during the Festival, <b>with what</b> vessels <b>did he</b> eat when <b>he utilized</b> the <i>sukka</i>? <b>Rather,</b> this is the question: <b>If he has no place</b> into which <b>he</b> can <b>take down his vessels</b> and he must continue eating in the <i>sukka</i>, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? What can he do to underscore the fact that he is eating there not to fulfill a mitzva, thereby violating the prohibition against adding to the mitzvot of the Torah, but only due to the lack of an alternative? <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Rav said: He reduces</b> the roofing of the <i>sukka</i> by <b>four</b> handbreadths, thereby rendering the <i>sukka</i> unfit. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: He lights a lamp inside</b> the <i>sukka</i>, which is prohibited during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara notes: <b>And they do not disagree</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i>. Instead, they are providing different solutions for different locations. <b>This is for us,</b> who live outside Eretz Yisrael, <b>and this is for them,</b> who live in Eretz Yisrael. Those who live in Eretz Yisrael reduce the roofing, since the obligation to sit in the <i>sukka</i> no longer applies. However, those who live outside of Eretz Yisrael, who are obligated to sit in the <i>sukka</i> on the eighth day with regard to which there is uncertainty that it might be the seventh day, must find another way to distinguish the eighth day from the days of the Festival of <i>Sukkot</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> works out <b>well</b> with regard to <b>a small <i>sukka</i>,</b> since it is prohibited to light a lamp due to the danger of a conflagration, and lighting a lamp will underscore the distinction. However, with regard to <b>a large <i>sukka</i>,</b> in which there is no prohibition and therefore no distinction, <b>what can be said?</b> The Gemara answers: One underscores the distinction in <b>that he brings eating vessels,</b> e.g., pots in which food was cooked, <b>into</b> the <i>sukka</i>, <b>as Rava said: Eating vessels</b> are taken <b>out of the <i>sukka</i>; drinking vessels</b> remain <b>in the <i>sukka</i>.</b> By leaving the pots and pans in the <i>sukka</i>, he indicates that the <i>sukka</i> is no longer involved in fulfillment of the mitzva.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to the rite of <b>water libation</b> performed in the Temple during the Festival, <b>how</b> was it performed? <b>One would fill a golden jug with a capacity of three <i>log</i></b> with water <b>from the Siloam</b> pool. When those who went to bring the water <b>reached the Gate of the Water,</b> so called because the water for the libation was brought through this gate leading to the Temple courtyard, <b>they sounded a <i>tekia</i>, sounded a <i>terua</i>, and sounded</b> another <b><i>tekia</i></b> as an expression of joy. The priest <b>ascended the ramp</b> of the altar <b>and turned to his left. There were two silver basins there</b> into which he poured the water. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said: They were limestone</b> basins, <b>but they would blacken due to the wine</b> and therefore looked like silver. The two basins were <b>perforated</b> at the bottom

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC