
### Part 1
<b>What, is it not</b> that the blessing mentioned is the blessing of <b>time,</b> in support of the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan? The Gemara rejects this possibility: <b>No,</b> the blessing here is <b>Grace after Meals and</b> the <i>Amida</i> <b>prayer,</b> where mention is made of the Eighth Day of Assembly and not of <i>Sukkot</i>. Therefore, there is no support for the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan that one recites the blessing of time on the Eighth Day of Assembly.

### Part 2
The Gemara says: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> that this is the proper understanding of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>as should it enter your mind</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to the blessing of <b>time, is there</b> a blessing of time <b>all seven</b> days of <i>Sukkot</i>? One recites the blessing only on the first day. The Gemara responds: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> and that is no proof that the <i>baraita</i> is not referring to the blessing of time, as the <i>baraita</i> could mean that <b>if one did not recite the blessing today,</b> on the first day, <b>he recites the blessing on the next day or on another day</b> of the Festival. Under those circumstances the blessing of time may be recited on any of the seven days.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: How could one recite the blessing of time on each of the days of <i>Sukkot</i> if <b>in any case we require</b> the blessing to be recited over <b>a cup</b> of wine, and not everyone has access to wine during the intermediate days of the Festival? From the fact that the Gemara does not consider this factor, <b>let us say</b> that this <i>baraita</i> <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Naḥman, as Rav Naḥman said: One recites</b> the blessing of <b>time even in the marketplace,</b> without wine, <b>as, if you say that we require a cup</b> of wine in order to recite the blessing of time, <b>is there a cup of wine</b> available <b>every day</b> that would enable one to recite the blessing during the intermediate days of the Festival? The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case where <b>a cup</b> of wine <b>happened to</b> become available to <b>him.</b> The <i>baraita</i> is not describing the preferred method of reciting the blessing but merely a possibility.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And does Rabbi Yehuda</b> really <b>hold</b> that the <b>Eighth</b> Day of Assembly <b>requires</b> one to <b>stay overnight</b> at its conclusion? <b>But wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>,</b> when the Paschal lamb is brought by those who were impure and unable to sacrifice it on the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>does not require staying overnight</b> at its conclusion? <b>As it is stated</b> with regard to the first <i>Pesaḥ</i>: <b>“And you shall turn in the morning and go unto your tents”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:7), and immediately thereafter it is <b>written: “Six days you shall eat <i>matzot</i>”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:8). From the juxtaposition of these two verses Rabbi Yehuda derives the following: <b>That which requires</b> observance of the <b>six</b> subsequent days <b>requires staying overnight; that which does not require</b> observance of the <b>six</b> subsequent days <b>does not require staying overnight. What</b> does this juxtaposition come <b>to exclude? Is it not to exclude</b> the <b>eighth day of the Festival,</b> as it is not followed by the observance of six days?

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it comes <b>to exclude the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, which is similar to</b> the first <i>Pesaḥ</i> in terms of its offering, and it teaches that since it is not followed by the observance of six days there is no obligation to stay overnight. The Gemara says: <b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to say that Rabbi Yehuda is excluding the second <i>Pesaḥ</i>, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>The first fruits require</b> a peace-<b>offering</b> to be brought with them, <b>a song</b> unique to the occasion, sung by the Levites, <b>waving, and staying overnight. Whom did you hear who said</b> that first fruits require <b>waving?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and</b> the mishna <b>is saying</b> that first fruits <b>require staying overnight.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yehuda excludes only the second <i>Pesaḥ</i> from the requirement of staying overnight.

### Part 6
Rabbi Yehuda holds that first fruits require waving, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that it is stated with regard to first fruits: <b>“And you shall set it down</b> before the Lord your God,” (Deuteronomy 26:10), and <b>this is</b> referring to <b>waving</b> before the altar the basket containing the first fruits. Do <b>you say</b> that <b>this is</b> referring to <b>waving, or</b> perhaps it is referring <b>only to actually setting it down</b> adjacent to the altar? <b>When</b> the Torah <b>says:</b> “And the priest shall take the basket from your hand <b>and set it down</b> before the altar of the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 26:4), <b>setting it down is already stated. How,</b> then, <b>do I establish</b> the meaning of the verse: <b>“And you shall set it down”? This is</b> referring to <b>waving.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And perhaps</b> the <i>baraita</i> that requires one to stay overnight when bringing first fruits to Jerusalem is not in accordance with Rabbi Yehuda’s opinion. Rather, <b>it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> who also holds that first fruits require waving. <b>As it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“And the priest shall take the basket from your hand”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:4), which <b>taught concerning first fruits that they require waving.</b> This is the <b>statement of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov?</b> How does he derive the waving of the first fruits from this verse? The Gemara answers: This <b>is derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the term <b>“hand”</b> written with regard to first fruits and the term <b>“hand”</b> written with regard to <b>a peace-offering. It is written here,</b> with regard to first fruits: <b>“And the priest shall take the basket from your hand,” and it is written there,</b> with regard to a peace-offering: <b>“His own hands shall bring the offerings of the Lord made by fire;</b> the fat with the breast shall he bring, that the breast may be waved before the Lord” (Leviticus 7:30).

### Part 9
In addition, one can derive by means of the verbal analogy that <b>just as here,</b> with regard to first fruits, <b>a priest</b> performs the waving, <b>so too,</b> with regard to a peace-offering, <b>a priest</b> performs the waving. <b>And just as there,</b> with regard to a peace-offering, the <b>owner</b> performs the waving, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to first fruits, the <b>owner</b> performs the waving. <b>How so?</b> How can both the priest and the owner perform the waving? The owner places his hands beneath the peace-offering or under the first fruits, and the <b>priest places his hand under the hand of the owner and waves</b> it together with him. In any event, Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov requires waving of the first fruits. Therefore, it is possible that the <i>baraita</i> is stated in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov and no conclusive proof can be cited with regard to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 10
<b>What</b> halakhic conclusion <b>was reached concerning</b> the blessing of time? <b>Rav Naḥman said: One recites</b> the blessing of <b>time on the eighth</b> day <b>of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>. <b>And Rav Sheshet said: One does not recite</b> the blessing of <b>time on the eighth</b> day <b>of the Festival.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is</b> that <b>one recites</b> the blessing of <b>time on the eighth</b> day <b>of the Festival.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara notes: <b>It was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Naḥman:</b> The <b>eighth</b> day

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC