
### Part 1
<b>of</b> a bird called <b><i>bar Yokhani</i>,</b> whose face is significantly larger than a handbreadth? The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If you grasped many, you did not grasp anything; if you grasped few, you grasped something.</b> The Gemara asks: If so, <b>say that it is like the face of a bird, which is extremely small? Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: Rav Huna derives</b> that the thickness of the Ark cover was one handbreadth not through an actual comparison to the real faces of different creatures but rather by means of a verbal analogy between the terms <b><i>penei</i></b> and <b><i>penei</i></b> written in different places in the Torah. <b>It is written here: “Before [<i>penei</i>] the Ark cover”</b> (Leviticus 16:2), <b>and it is written there: “From the presence of [<i>penei</i>] Isaac his father”</b> (Genesis 27:30). The dimension of the Ark cover is like that of the face of a person, a handbreadth.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>And let us derive</b> a verbal analogy <b>from the face of God, as it is written:</b> “For I have seen your face <b>as one sees the face of [<i>penei</i>] God, and you were pleased with me”</b> (Genesis 33:10). The term <i>penei</i> is used with regard to the face of God as well. The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If you grasped many, you did not grasp anything; if you grasped few, you grasped something.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>And let us derive</b> a verbal analogy <b>from</b> the face of the <b>cherub</b> in the Tabernacle and the Temple, <b>as it is written: “Toward the Ark cover shall be the faces of [<i>penei</i>] the cherubs”</b> (Exodus 25:20), and their faces were presumably smaller than one handbreadth.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: We have learned</b> through tradition that <b>the faces of the cherubs were not smaller than a handbreadth,</b> and indeed <b>Rav Huna derived</b> the thickness of the Ark cover <b>from here as well,</b> i.e., from the verbal analogy between the instances of the word <i>penei</i> in the verses: “Upon the face of [<i>penei</i>] the Ark cover on the east” and: “The faces [<i>penei</i>] of the cherubs,” indicating that both are the same size.

### Part 5
Apropos the cherubs, the Gemara asks: <b>And what is</b> the form of the face of <b>a cherub [<i>keruv</i>]? Rabbi Abbahu said: Like</b> that of <b>a child [<i>keravya</i>], as in Babylonia one calls a child <i>ravya</i>.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Abaye said to him: But if</b> what you say is <b>so,</b> what is the meaning of <b>that</b> which <b>is written</b> about the faces of the celestial beasts drawing the celestial chariot: <b>“The face of the first was the face of the cherub, and the face of the second was the face of a man”</b> (Ezekiel 10:14)? According to your explanation, <b>this</b> face of the <b>cherub is</b> the same as <b>that</b> face of a <b>man.</b> The Gemara answers: Although two of the celestial beasts drawing that chariot had the face of a man, the difference between them is that one was <b>a large face and</b> one was <b>a small face.</b> In other words, the face described as the face of a man was the face of an adult, and the face described as the face of a cherub was that of a child. This is the source that the Ark and the Ark cover were ten handbreadths high.

### Part 7
However, with regard to the application of this measure to the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>sukka</i>, the Gemara asks: <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the <b>interior space</b> of the <i>sukka</i> must be <b>ten</b> handbreadths high <b>without the</b> thickness of the <b>roofing? Say</b> that the ten handbreadths of the <i>sukka</i> are <b>with the</b> thickness of the <b>roofing.</b> Just as the ten handbreadths of the Ark are measured from the bottom of the Ark to the top of the Ark cover, let the <i>sukka</i> be measured to the top of the roofing.

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the dimension of the <i>sukka</i> is not derived from the Ark; one instead <b>derived it from</b> the dimensions of <b>the eternal Temple, as it is written: “And the house which King Solomon built for the Lord, its length was sixty cubits, and its breadth twenty cubits, and its height thirty cubits”</b> (I Kings 6:2). <b>And it is written: “The height of the first cherub was ten cubits, and likewise was the second cherub”</b> (I Kings 6:26). <b>And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Just as we find in the eternal Temple</b> that the <b>cherubs stand</b> reaching <b>one-third</b> the height <b>of the Temple,</b> as each cherub was ten cubits high and the Temple was thirty cubits high, <b>in the Tabernacle as well,</b> the <b>cherubs stand</b> reaching <b>one-third</b> the height of the Tabernacle.

### Part 9
And to calculate: <b>How many</b> cubits high <b>was the Tabernacle?</b> It was <b>ten cubits, as it is written: “Ten cubits shall be the length of a beam”</b> (Exodus 26:16). <b>How many</b> handbreadths <b>do these</b> ten cubits contain? They contain <b>sixty handbreadths. And one third of that</b> total <b>is how many?</b> It is <b>twenty handbreadths. Subtract</b> from this figure <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>of the Ark and the Ark cover</b> upon which the cherubs stood, and <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>remain,</b> which was the height of each individual cherub. <b>And it is written: “And the cherubs shall spread out their wings upward, screening [<i>sokhekhim</i>] the Ark cover with their wings”</b> (Exodus 25:20). Here <b>the Merciful One is referring to</b> the wings using the terminology of <b>roofing [<i>sekhakha</i>]</b> specifically <b>when</b> they are <b>ten</b> handbreadths <b>above</b> the Ark cover. This is a source that the roofing of the <i>sukka</i> is placed at least ten handbreadths high.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And from where</b> is it known <b>that their wings were</b> spread <b>above their heads,</b> from which it is derived that roofing is ten handbreadths high? <b>Perhaps they were</b> spread <b>level with their heads.</b> In that case, the ten handbreadths derived would include the roofing, leaving the interior space of the <i>sukka</i> less than ten handbreadths high. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that <b>it is written:</b> “Spread out their wings <b>upward,”</b> indicating that the wings were above their heads. The Gemara asks: If so, <b>say</b> that the wings <b>were extremely high</b> to an unspecified height. The Gemara answers: <b>Does the verse say: Upward, upward?</b> It says upward only once, meaning slightly over their heads. There is proof from the verses that the roofing was at least ten handbreadths off the ground.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> calculation works out <b>well according to Rabbi Meir, who said</b> that <b>all the cubits</b> in the Tabernacle and the Temple <b>were intermediate</b> cubits, consisting of six handbreadths; <b>however, according to Rabbi Yehuda, who said</b> that the <b>cubit</b> used in the dimensions <b>of a building</b> in the Temple <b>was</b> a cubit consisting of <b>six handbreadths,</b> but the cubit used in the dimensions <b>of vessels was</b> a cubit consisting of only <b>five</b> handbreadths, <b>what is there to say?</b>

### Part 12
Based on that calculation, <b>how many</b> handbreadths <b>was</b> the height of the <b>Ark and</b> the <b>Ark cover?</b> They totaled <b>eight and a half</b> handbreadths. The height of the Ark was one and a half cubits, which, based on a five-handbreadth cubit, equals seven and a half handbreadths. Including the additional handbreadth of the Ark cover, the total height is eight and a half handbreadths. If the cherubs were one third of the height of the Tabernacle, which is twenty handbreadths, <b>eleven and a half</b> handbreadths <b>remain</b> for the height of the cherubs, over which their wings were spread. Therefore, <b>say</b> that for <b>a <i>sukka</i></b> to be fit for use its interior space must be <b>eleven and a half</b> handbreadths high. However, there is no recorded opinion that requires a <i>sukka</i> with that dimension.

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> according <b>to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> the Sages <b>learned</b> the minimum height of a <i>sukka</i> as a <b><i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai. <b>As Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: The measures</b> in various areas of <i>halakha</i>, e.g., olive-bulk, dried fig-bulk, egg-bulk, <b>and</b> the various <i>halakhot</i> of <b>interpositions</b> that serve as a barrier between one’s body and the water in a ritual bath and invalidate immersions, <b>and</b> the dimensions and nature of halakhic <b>partitions</b> are all <b><i>halakhot</i></b> transmitted <b>to Moses from Sinai.</b> They were not written in the Torah; rather, they were received in the framework of the Oral Law.

### Part 14
The Gemara questions this assertion: Are <b>measures</b> a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai? <b>They are</b> written <b>in the Torah, as it is written: “A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and figs, and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey”</b> (Deuteronomy 8:8), <b>and Rav Ḥanin said: This entire verse is stated for</b> the purpose of teaching <b>measures</b> with regard to different <i>halakhot</i> in the Torah.

### Part 15
<b>Wheat</b> was mentioned as the basis <b>for</b> calculating the time required for one to become ritually impure when entering <b>a house afflicted with leprosy, as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>one who enters a house afflicted with leprosy</b> of the house (see Leviticus, chapter 14), <b>and his clothes</b> are draped <b>over his shoulders, and his sandals and his rings are in his hands,</b> both <b>he and they,</b> the clothes, sandals, and rings, <b>immediately</b> become <b>ritually impure.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC