
### Part 1
<b>Here,</b> where Rabbi Yoḥanan said that it is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai, he is referring to the mitzva of the willow branch <b>in the Temple; there,</b> where he said that it was established by the prophets, he was referring to the taking of the willow branch <b>in the outlying areas.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>Rabbi Ami said:</b> The <b>willow branch</b> taken to fulfill the mitzva <b>requires a</b> certain <b>measure, and it is taken only in and of itself</b> and not with the <i>lulav</i>, <b>and a person does not fulfill his obligation with the willow branch that is</b> bound <b>with the <i>lulav</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Since the Master said: It is taken only in and of itself,</b> it is <b>obvious that a person does not fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with the willow branch that is</b> bound <b>with the <i>lulav</i>.</b> Why are both statements necessary?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>lest you say that this applies</b> only to a case <b>where he did not lift</b> the willow branch bound with the <i>lulav</i> <b>and then lift it</b> again to fulfill the mitzva of the willow branch; <b>however,</b> in a case <b>where he lifted</b> the <i>lulav</i> <b>and then lifted it</b> again, <b>say no,</b> he fulfills his obligation with the willow branch in the <i>lulav</i>. Therefore, <b>he teaches us</b> that even if one takes the four species a second time with the express intent of fulfilling the mitzva of the willow branch, he did not fulfill his obligation, as he must take the willow branch by itself. <b>And Rav Ḥisda</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: A person fulfills his obligation with the willow branch that is</b> bound <b>with the <i>lulav</i> on the first day of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>.

### Part 4
Rabbi Ami said that the willow branch requires a certain measure. The Gemara asks: <b>And what is its</b> requisite <b>measure? Rav Naḥman said:</b> It is <b>three branches of moist leaves. And Rav Sheshet said:</b> It is <b>even one leaf and one branch.</b> The Gemara wonders about the statement of Rav Sheshet: <b>Does it enter your mind</b> that one takes <b>a single leaf and a single branch</b> separately? <b>Rather,</b> emend Rav Sheshet’s statement and <b>say:</b> One fulfills his obligation <b>even with one leaf on one branch.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara relates that <b>Aivu,</b> father of the <i>amora</i> Rav, <b>said: I was standing before Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok, and a certain man brought a willow branch before him</b> to fulfill the mitzva. <b>He took it</b> and <b>waved</b> it; <b>he waved</b> it <b>and did not recite a blessing.</b> This indicates that <b>he holds</b> that the mitzva of the willow branch <b>is a custom of the prophets</b> and is therefore performed without a blessing. Similarly, the Gemara relates that <b>Aivu and Ḥizkiya, sons of the daughter of Rav, brought a willow branch before Rav</b> to fulfill the mitzva. <b>He waved</b> it; <b>he waved</b> it <b>and did not recite a blessing.</b> This indicates that <b>he,</b> too, <b>holds</b> that <b>it is a custom of the prophets.</b>

### Part 6
Apropos the exchange between Aivu and Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok, the Gemara cites another <i>halakha</i> that was transmitted in the same manner. <b>Aivu said: I was standing before Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok,</b> and <b>a certain man came before him</b> and <b>said to him: I have villages, I have</b> olive <b>groves,</b> and <b>I have olives, and the villagers come and hoe the</b> olive <b>groves</b> during the Sabbatical Year <b>and eat from the olive</b> trees. Is it <b>appropriate or inappropriate</b> to allow this to continue? <b>He said to him:</b> It is <b>inappropriate.</b> As the man <b>was leaving him and going</b> on his way, Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok <b>said: I have already resided in this land for forty years and I have not seen a person walk in a path as straight as this</b> man does. The man <b>came back</b> to Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok <b>and said to him: What should I do</b> to ameliorate the situation? <b>He said to him: Declare the olives ownerless for the poor, and give <i>perutot</i></b> coins to hired laborers as payment <b>to hoe the olive groves.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Is hoeing</b> olive groves <b>permitted</b> during the Sabbatical Year? <b>But wasn’t</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that it is written: <b>“But the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow”</b> (Exodus 23:11); meaning <b>you shall let it rest from hoeing, and lie fallow from clearing</b> the field of <b>rocks?</b> Apparently, hoeing is prohibited during the Sabbatical Year. <b>Rav Ukva bar Ḥama said: There are two</b> types of <b>hoeing, one</b> whose objective is <b>to seal cracks</b> in the ground <b>and one to enhance the trees’ health. Enhancing the trees’ health is prohibited; sealing cracks is permitted,</b> as it is merely to prevent the trees from dying and not to accelerate their growth.

### Part 8
An additional <i>halakha</i> was transmitted in the same manner. <b>Aivu said in the name of Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok: A person should not walk on Shabbat eves more than</b> a distance of <b>three parasangs [<i>parsaot</i>].</b> Rather, he should reach the place where he will stay on Shabbat early enough to ensure that he will have meals prepared for Shabbat. <b>Rav Kahana said: We said</b> that restriction <b>only</b> with regard to a case where he is returning <b>to his house. However,</b> if he is going <b>to an inn, he relies on</b> the food <b>that he took</b> with him. As he cannot assume that he will find lodgings with food, he brings food sufficient for his needs. Therefore, it is permitted for him to travel a greater distance.

### Part 9
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Rav Kahana said:</b> This restriction that one may not walk a distance of more than three parasangs on Shabbat eves <b>was required even</b> with regard to one traveling <b>to his house,</b> and all the more so with regard to one traveling to an inn, as he cannot assume that he will find food there. <b>Rav Kahana said: There was an incident</b> that happened <b>with me</b> where I traveled a distance to reach my home on Friday <b>and I did not find even small fried fish [<i>deharsena</i>]</b> to eat in the house. One must prepare for Shabbat well in advance of the onset of Shabbat.

### Part 10
§ The mishna continues: <b>How</b> is <b>the mitzva of <i>lulav</i></b> fulfilled in the Temple when the first day of the Festival occurs on Shabbat? The mishna then explains how the attendants arrange their <i>lulavim</i> on the bench in the Temple. The <b><i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> in the study hall <b>taught</b> a version of the mishna <b>before Rav Naḥman:</b> The attendant <b>arranges them on the roof</b> over <b>the bench</b> in the Temple. Rav Naḥman <b>said to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC