
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: It is not obvious that Rav Kahana’s statement was stated in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda. <b>Lest you say</b> that Rav Kahana’s statement is <b>even in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> and that he is coming <b>to exclude</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan who said:</b> If <b>one heard nine blasts in nine</b> different <b>hours on the day</b> of Rosh HaShana, despite the considerable gap between them, <b>he fulfilled his obligation.</b> Therefore, the Gemara <b>teaches us</b> that Rav Kahana holds in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda alone and he does not allow even a brief pause between the sounds of the <i>shofar</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And say it is indeed so</b> that Rav Kahana holds in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis and he merely comes to exclude the view of Rabbi Yoḥanan. The Gemara answers: <b>If so, what is</b> the meaning of the phrase: <b>At all,</b> in Rav Kahana’s statement: There is no pause between a <i>tekia</i> and a <i>terua</i> at all? This indicates that Rav Kahana does not allow even a slight pause between blasts, and that could be only in accordance with Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 3
§ The mishna enumerates the number of blasts sounded on <b>Shabbat eve during the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>. Among those blasts were three sounded when pouring the water libation upon the altar. The Gemara infers: <b>However,</b> the mishna <b>is not teaching</b> that the trumpet blasts were sounded when the person carrying the water reached <b>the tenth stair.</b> According to <b>whose</b> opinion is the <b>mishna? It is</b> according to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Three</b> blasts were sounded when arriving <b>at the tenth stair. Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says: Three</b> blasts were sounded when pouring the water libation <b>upon the altar.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: <b>The one who says</b> that the trumpets were sounded upon arriving <b>at the tenth stair does not say</b> that they sounded the trumpets when pouring the water libation <b>upon the altar; and the one who says</b> that they sounded the trumpets when pouring the water libation <b>upon the altar does not say</b> that the trumpets were sounded upon arriving <b>at the tenth stair.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since he sounded</b> the trumpet <b>for the opening of the gates, for what do I</b> need <b>to sound</b> it again when arriving <b>at the tenth stair? That is not a gate. Therefore,</b> it is <b>preferable</b> to sound the trumpets when pouring the water libation <b>upon the altar. And the Rabbis hold that since he sounded</b> the trumpets <b>for the filling</b> of the vessel with <b>the water, why do I</b> need an additional trumpet blast when pouring the water libation <b>upon the altar? Therefore, it is preferable</b> to sound the trumpets when arriving <b>at the tenth stair.</b>

### Part 6
§ <b>When Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina came from the south</b> of Eretz Yisrael, from Judea, <b>he brought a <i>baraita</i> with him</b> that he received from the Sages there. It is written: <b>“And the children of Aaron, the priests, will sound the trumpets”</b> (Numbers 10:8). There is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “Shall sound,” as it is already stated: “And you shall sound the trumpets for your burnt-offerings and your peace-offerings”</b> (Numbers 10:10). <b>And what</b> then is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Shall sound”?</b> It appears to be teaching a new <i>halakha</i>; it is <b>all according to the additional offerings</b> that <b>one sounds</b> trumpet blasts. The Gemara notes: Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina <b>teaches</b> the <i>baraita</i>, <b>and he said its</b> explanation: The verse comes <b>to say that one sounds</b> trumpet blasts <b>for each and every additional offering</b> in and of itself.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: On <b>Shabbat eve during the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>there were forty-eight</b> blasts, and that was the highest number of blasts sounded on any day in the Temple. <b>And if it is so,</b> Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina says: <b>Let</b> the mishna <b>teach</b> the case of <b>Shabbat during the Festival,</b> when <b>you find</b> that there are <b>fifty-one</b> blasts, including additional blasts for the additional offerings of Shabbat. <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> Although based on the <i>baraita</i> taught by Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina there would indeed be additional blasts for the additional offerings of Shabbat, they would total forty-eight blasts, <b>because one does not sound</b> the three blasts <b>for the opening of the gates on Shabbat;</b> those blasts were merely a signal.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said: Who is this who is not concerned about the flour</b> that his mill is producing, i.e., who is making unconsidered statements? <b>First,</b> the mishna contradicts the explanation of Rabbi Zeira, as, with regard to the order of the blasts, including those for the opening of the gates, <b>we learned</b> that this was the practice <b>each day,</b> including Shabbat. <b>And furthermore, even if they are equal to each other,</b> i.e., the same number of blasts were sounded on Shabbat during the Festival and on Friday during the Festival, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach:</b> On <b>Shabbat during the Festival there are forty-eight</b> blasts. <b>You would learn two</b> matters <b>from</b> that case: <b>You would learn from it that</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> that the trumpets are not sounded at the tenth step but when pouring the water libation upon the altar. <b>And you would learn from it</b> that <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina,</b> that the trumpet is sounded for each and every additional offering.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The reason that the number of offerings on Shabbat during the Festival does not exceed forty-eight is <b>because one does not sound</b> the trumpet <b>for filling</b> the vessels with <b>water on Shabbat,</b> as the mishna stated that they did not draw water from the Siloam pool on Shabbat. Therefore, the blasts sounded on Shabbat during the Festival <b>were considerably fewer</b> than those sounded on Friday. The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the mishna <b>also teach</b> the case of <b>Rosh HaShana that occurs on Shabbat, as</b> in that case <b>there are three additional offerings:</b> The <b>additional offering of Rosh HaShana,</b> the <b>additional offering of the New Moon,</b> and the <b>additional offering of Shabbat.</b> The total would be forty-eight blasts. The fact that the mishna did not cite this case indicates that it is contrary to the opinion of Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects that conclusion. The reason that the mishna did not cite the case of Rosh HaShana is that the <i>tanna</i> held that the case of <b>Shabbat eve during the Festival is necessary</b> in order <b>to teach</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> that one does not sound the trumpet at the tenth stair. The Gemara asks: <b>Is anyone saying: Let</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach this</b> case <b>and let him not teach that</b> case? <b>Let him teach this</b> case <b>and let him teach that</b> case, as there is a novel element in each. The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> did not list all the possible cases; <b>he taught</b> one case <b>and omitted</b> others. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> other case <b>did he omit, that he omitted</b> this case of Rosh HaShana as well? While the <i>tanna</i> does not typically list all relevant cases, if there are only two that are relevant, he typically cites them in the mishna.

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>He omitted</b> the case of <b>Passover eve.</b> The Paschal lamb was sacrificed in three shifts. When the Paschal lamb was sacrificed they would recite <i>hallel</i>, and the recitation of <i>hallel</i> was accompanied by three blasts. Due to the great number of Paschal lambs sacrificed, they would often recite <i>hallel</i> three times during each shift. Consequently, there could be as many as twenty-seven additional blasts sounded on that day. Added to the twenty-one blasts sounded each day, the total is forty-eight blasts.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC