
### Part 1
with regard to whether or not <b>to recite the blessing</b> over residing in the <i>sukka</i>. According <b>to the one who says</b> that the status of the eighth day is like that of the <b>seventh</b> day with regard <b>to the</b> mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>, we also recite the blessing:</b> To reside in the <i>sukka</i>. However, according <b>to the one who says</b> that its status is like that of the <b>eighth</b> day both with regard <b>to this and to that, we do not recite the blessing. Rav Yosef said: Take</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> that on the eighth day outside Eretz Yisrael one does not recite the blessing: To reside in the <i>sukka</i>, <b>in your hand,</b> i.e., adopt it as your practice. <b>As Rav Huna bar Bizna and all the prominent</b> scholars <b>of the generation happened</b> to visit a <b><i>sukka</i> on the eighth</b> day, with regard to which there was <b>uncertainty</b> that it might be the <b>seventh</b> day, and <b>they were sitting</b> in the <i>sukka</i>, but <b>they did not recite the blessing.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>And perhaps</b> the reason they did not recite a blessing is that <b>they hold in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the one who said: Once he recited the blessing on</b> the <b>first Festival</b> day <b>he does not recite it again</b> on the subsequent days, and not because it was the eighth day. The Gemara answers: That is not the reason that they did not recite the blessing, as the Sages <b>learned</b> through tradition <b>that</b> these Sages <b>were coming from the fields,</b> where they had been herding their flocks, and that was the first time during the Festival that they sat in a <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 3
<b>Some say</b> a different version of the dispute: <b>Everyone agrees that we do not recite the blessing; when they disagree</b> it is with regard to whether <b>to reside</b> in the <i>sukka</i>. According <b>to the one who says</b> that the status of the eighth day is like that of the <b>seventh</b> day with regard <b>to the</b> mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>, we reside</b> in the <i>sukka</i>. However, according <b>to the one who says</b> that its status is like that of the <b>eighth</b> day both with regard <b>to this and to that, neither do we reside</b> in the <i>sukka</i>. <b>Rav Yosef said: Take</b> the statement <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan in your hand, as who is the Master</b> responsible for dissemination <b>of the <i>halakha</i>?</b> It is <b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, and on the eighth</b> day, with regard to which there is <b>uncertainty</b> that it might be the <b>seventh</b> day, he himself <b>resides outside of the <i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is that we reside</b> in the <i>sukka</i> on the eighth day, with regard to which there is uncertainty that it might be the seventh day, but <b>we do not recite the blessing.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that <b>one recites</b> the blessing: Who has given us life, sustained us, and brought us to this <b>time, on the eighth</b> day <b>of the Festival,</b> as the eighth day is a Festival distinct from <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>and one does not recite</b> the blessing of <b>time on the seventh</b> day <b>of Passover</b> because it is not a Festival distinct from Passover.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabbi Levi bar Ḥama said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina</b> who said: <b>Know</b> that the eighth day of <i>Sukkot</i> is a Festival in and of itself and therefore requires its own blessing, <b>as it is distinct</b> from the seven days of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>with regard to three matters: With regard to <i>sukka</i>,</b> as one is not obligated to sit in the <i>sukka</i> on the eighth day; <b>and</b> with regard to <b><i>lulav</i>,</b> as one is not obligated to take the four species on the eighth day; <b>and</b> with regard to <b>the water libation,</b> as one does not pour the water libation on the altar on the eighth day. The Gemara notes: <b>And according to Rabbi Yehuda, who said: With</b> a vessel measuring <b>one <i>log</i></b> the priest <b>pours</b> the water libation <b>all eight</b> days, including the eighth day, the eighth day <b>is</b> nevertheless <b>distinct</b> from the rest of the Festival <b>with regard to</b> the other <b>two matters.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> the <b>seventh</b> day <b>of Passover</b> should be considered distinct <b>as well, as it is distinct</b> from the first day in terms of the obligation of <b>eating <i>matza</i>, as the Master said:</b> On the <b>first night</b> of Passover, it is <b>an obligation</b> to eat <i>matza</i>. <b>From that</b> point <b>onward, it is optional;</b> if one chooses, he eats <i>matza</i>, and if he chooses not to eat <i>matza</i>, he need not, provided that he does not eat leavened foods. The Gemara retorts: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the case of Passover, the <i>halakha</i> of the seventh day <b>is distinct from the</b> first <b>night;</b> however, <b>it is not distinct from the</b> first <b>day,</b> as on the first day there is no obligation to eat <i>matza</i>. <b>Here,</b> in the case of <i>Sukkot</i>, the eighth day of the Festival <b>is distinct even from the</b> first <b>day.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Ravina said</b> a different reason for the distinction between the two Festivals: <b>This,</b> the eighth day of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>is distinct</b> in terms of its <i>halakhot</i>, even <b>from</b> the day just <b>before it,</b> the seventh day. However, <b>that,</b> the seventh day of Passover, <b>is distinct</b> in terms of its <i>halakhot</i>, only <b>from</b> a day <b>previous to the day before,</b> i.e., the first day alone. There is no distinction between the sixth and seventh days.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Pappa said</b> another reason why the eighth day of <i>Sukkot</i> is considered a distinct Festival. <b>Here,</b> with regard to the additional offering sacrificed on the Eighth Day of Assembly, <b>it is written:</b> “And you shall present a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord: One <b>bull”</b> (Numbers 29:36). <b>There,</b> with regard to the additional offering sacrificed on the first day of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>it is written:</b> “And you shall present a burnt-offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord: Thirteen <b>bulls”</b> (Numbers 29:13), and on each subsequent day one bull fewer is sacrificed: Twelve on the second day, eleven on the third day, and so on, until seven are sacrificed on the seventh day. Were the eighth day part of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, the additional offering on that day should have included six bulls. The fact that it includes only one bull indicates that it is a distinct Festival.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: Here, it is written: “On the</b> eighth <b>day</b> you shall have a solemn assembly; you shall do no manner of servile labor” (Numbers 29:35). This indicates that this day is distinct from the others, as <b>there,</b> with regard to the other days of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>it is written: And on the day,</b> indicating that each of the days from the second through the seventh are all continuations of the first day.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi said: Here,</b> with regard to the eighth day, <b>it is written:</b> “Their meal-offering and their libations, for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, <b>as per the regulation”</b> (Numbers 29:37). However, <b>there,</b> with regard to the seventh day, <b>it is written:</b> “And their meal-offering and their libations, for the bulls, and for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, <b>as per their regulation”</b> (Numbers 29:33). The Gemara understands the use of the plural pronoun: Their, to indicate that the offerings sacrificed on all seven days are related.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>Let us say</b> that the following <b>supports</b> the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan that one recites the blessing of time on the eighth day. Failure to bring either <b>the bulls,</b> or <b>the rams, or the sheep</b> on the Festival <b>prevents</b> fulfillment of one’s obligation with <b>the other</b> animals, as they are considered one offering. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Failure to bring <b>the bulls does not prevent</b> fulfillment of one’s obligation with the <b>other</b> animals, <b>since they decrease progressively</b> each day. The Torah displays flexibility with regard to the bulls. Therefore, apparently, even if they are not brought at all one fulfills his obligation with the others.

### Part 12
The Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda: <b>But don’t the numbers of all</b> the animals <b>eventually decrease on the eighth</b> day, as on the other days two rams and fourteen sheep are sacrificed and on the eighth day it is one ram and seven sheep? Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to them:</b> The <b>Eighth</b> Day of Assembly <b>is a Festival in and of itself. As just as the seven days of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>require an offering, and a song</b> sung by the Levites, <b>and a blessing</b> unique to the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>and</b> there is a mitzva of <b>staying overnight</b> in Jerusalem after the first Festival day, <b>so too,</b> the <b>eighth</b> day <b>requires an offering, and a song</b> sung by the Levites, <b>and a blessing</b> unique to the Eighth Day of Assembly, <b>and</b> there is a mitzva of <b>staying overnight</b> in Jerusalem at its conclusion.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC