
### Part 1
<b>In the name of Rabbi Sheila they said: A groom is exempt</b> from the mitzva of <i>Shema</i>, <b>but the groomsmen and all the members of the wedding</b> party <b>are obligated.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akavya said:</b> With regard to <b>scribes of Torah scrolls, phylacteries, and <i>mezuzot</i>, they</b> themselves, <b>and the merchants</b> who sell <b>them, and the merchants</b> who purchase them from <b>the</b> first <b>merchants and sell them to others, and all who are engaged in the labor of Heaven,</b> which comes <b>to include the sellers of the sky-blue dye</b> for ritual fringes, <b>are</b> all <b>exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b>reciting <i>Shema</i> and from prayer and from</b> donning <b>phylacteries and from all mitzvot that are mentioned in the Torah</b> while they are engaged in that labor. This statement comes <b>to fulfill</b> the <b>statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, as Rabbi Yosei HaGelili would say: One who is engaged in a mitzva is exempt from</b> another <b>mitzva.</b>

### Part 3
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Travelers</b> who travel <b>during the day are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> during the day and are obligated at night. Travelers by night are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> at night and obligated during the day. Travelers</b> both <b>during the day and at night are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> both during the day and at night.</b> Those who <b>travel for a matter of mitzva are exempt both during the day and at night,</b> because they are preoccupied with the mitzva, even if they are not traveling at night, <b>as</b> in <b>this</b> recurring incident involving <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rabba bar Rav Huna.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>When they would enter the house of the Exilarch on the Shabbat of the Festival</b> to hear his Festival homily, <b>they would sleep on the bank of the Sura</b> River and not in a <i>sukka</i>. <b>They said</b> in explanation: <b>We are ones on the path</b> to perform <b>a mitzva and</b> are <b>exempt</b> from the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Guardians of the city</b> who guard <b>during the day are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> during the day and are obligated at night. Guardians of the city at night are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> at night and are obligated during the day. Those who guard the city both during the day and at night are exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> both during the day and at night.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Guardians of gardens and orchards are exempt</b> from <i>sukka</i> <b>both during the day and at night.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And let them establish a <i>sukka</i> there</b> in the garden <b>and reside there.</b> Why are they exempt from the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>? <b>Abaye said:</b> The reason for the exemption is the verse: “In <i>sukkot</i> <b>shall you reside” (</b>Leviticus 23:42), which the Sages interpreted to mean: Reside <b>as you dwell</b> in your permanent home. Since preparing a <i>sukka</i> that is a fully equipped dwelling in the orchard far from his house would involve considerable exertion, the mitzva does not apply to him.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said: A breach summons the thief.</b> If the guardian builds a <i>sukka</i>, thieves will know where the guardian is located in the field and they will enter the field elsewhere. The exemption of the watchman from the mitzva of <i>sukka</i> prevents that situation. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> the two reasons given? The Gemara answers: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> in a case <b>where he is guarding a pile of fruit,</b> which can be guarded from inside the <i>sukka</i>; therefore, according to Rava, in that case the guard would be obligated in the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>. However, since the <i>sukka</i> in the orchard is not like a fully equipped home, in Abaye’s opinion he would still be exempt in that case.

### Part 7
§ It is stated in the mishna: The <b>ill and their caretakers</b> are exempt from the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The <b>ill</b> person <b>that they said</b> is exempt from <i>sukka</i> is not only <b>an ill</b> person <b>whose</b> condition <b>is critical, but even an ill</b> person <b>whose</b> condition <b>is not critical,</b> and <b>even</b> one who <b>feels</b> pain <b>in his eyes, and even</b> one who <b>feels</b> pain <b>in his head. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: One time I felt</b> pain <b>in my eyes in Caesarea, and the esteemed Rabbi Yosei</b> ben Ḥalafta <b>permitted me and my attendant to sleep outside the <i>sukka</i>.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara relates a similar tale: <b>Rav permitted Rav Aḥa Bardela to sleep beneath a canopy in the <i>sukka</i> due to</b> the biting <b>flies [<i>baki</i>].</b> He permitted this although the canopy was more than ten handbreadths high and in sleeping beneath it he did not fulfill his obligation. <b>Rava permitted Rabbi Aḥa bar Adda to sleep outside the <i>sukka</i> due to the foul odor of the earth [<i>gargishta</i>]</b> floor of the <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: <b>Rava</b> conforms <b>to his</b> line of <b>reasoning, as Rava said: One who suffers</b> in the <i>sukka</i> <b>is exempt from the</b> mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that the <b>ill and their caretakers are exempt from the</b> mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i>?</b> By inference, with regard to <b>an ill</b> person, <b>yes,</b> he is exempt; with regard to <b>one who suffers, no,</b> he is not exempt. The Sages <b>say:</b> With regard to <b>an ill</b> person, <b>he and his caretakers are exempt;</b> however, with regard to <b>one who</b> merely <b>suffers</b> in the <i>sukka</i>, <b>he is exempt</b> but <b>his caretakers</b> are <b>not.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna continues: <b>One may eat</b> and drink in the framework of a <b>casual meal outside the <i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> food <b>is</b> considered <b>a casual meal? Rav Yosef said:</b> It is <b>two or three egg</b>-bulks of bread. <b>Abaye said to him: But often, doesn’t a person suffice with that</b> measure of food, <b>and</b> then <b>its</b> legal status <b>is</b> that of <b>a formal meal? Rather, Abaye said:</b> A casual meal is <b>like</b> the measure <b>that a student of the academy of Rav tastes and then enters</b> the study hall to hear <b>the lecture.</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> may <b>eat a casual meal outside the <i>sukka</i>, but one</b> may <b>not</b> take even <b>a brief nap outside the <i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for this distinction? After all, sleeping in the <i>sukka</i> is an obligation just as eating in the <i>sukka</i> is an obligation. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> It is prohibited to nap outside the <i>sukka</i> due to <b>a decree lest he fall</b> into a deep <b>sleep.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Abaye said to him: But</b> with regard to <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person</b> may <b>take a brief nap</b> while donning <b>phylacteries but substantial sleep</b> is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>Let us be concerned</b> in that case as well <b>lest he fall</b> into a deep <b>sleep. Rav Yosef, son of Rav Illai, said:</b> There is no concern with regard to phylacteries, as it is a case <b>where one assigns</b> responsibility for ensuring that <b>his sleep</b> will not be prolonged <b>to others.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rav Mesharshiyya strongly objects to</b> Abaye’s statement: <b>Your guarantor,</b> who ensures that you do not sleep too long, <b>requires a guarantor</b> to ensure that he does not do the same. <b>Rather, Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: We are dealing with</b> a case <b>where he places his head between his knees,</b> a position that does not lend itself to deep sleep. <b>Rava said:</b> Neither with regard to <i>sukka</i> nor with regard to phylacteries is there concern lest he fall into a deep sleep. Taking a brief nap outside the <i>sukka</i> is prohibited because <b>there is no</b> concept of <b>substantial</b> duration with regard <b>to sleep,</b> i.e., there is no halakhic difference between a brief nap and a longer-lasting sleep. Depending on circumstances, sleep of any duration can be considered substantial and is therefore prohibited outside a <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 14
The Gemara comments that <b>it is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person</b> may <b>take a brief nap with phylacteries, but substantial sleep</b> is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>And it was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Both substantial</b> sleep <b>and</b> a <b>brief</b> nap are permitted. <b>And it was taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Neither substantial</b> sleep <b>nor</b> a <b>brief</b> nap is permitted. The Gemara explains that this is <b>not difficult: This</b> <i>baraita</i>, where it is taught that even a brief nap is prohibited, is in a case <b>where one holds</b> the phylacteries <b>in his hands.</b> It is prohibited to sleep at all lest he drop them. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i>, where it was taught that a brief nap is permitted, is in a case <b>where</b> the phylacteries <b>are placed on his head.</b> There is no concern during a brief nap lest he break wind or experience a seminal emission. During deep sleep, that is a concern. <b>That</b> third <i>baraita</i>, where it was taught that even substantial sleep is permitted with phylacteries, is in a case <b>where he</b> removes the phylacteries and <b>spreads a cloth over</b> them and sleeps alongside them.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And how much is</b> the duration of <b>a brief nap? Rami bar Yeḥezkel taught:</b> It is <b>equivalent</b> to the time required for <b>walking one hundred cubits.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>That is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who sleeps with phylacteries and experiences a seminal emission grips the strap</b> of the phylacteries to remove them

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC