
### Part 1
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Why was it placed in this manner? It was as an indicator for the people <b>to know that the New Moon was established at its</b> proper <b>time,</b> after the twenty-ninth day of the previous month. The Gemara answers: This is not difficult, as <b>they implemented two indicators:</b> One <b>who saw this</b> one, i.e., the sequence of the songs, <b>saw</b> it; <b>and</b> one who <b>saw that</b> one, i.e., where the fats were placed, <b>saw</b> it, and there is no contradiction.

### Part 2
The Gemara <b>raises</b> another <b>objection</b> to the opinion of Rabbi Aḥa, <b>as Rava bar Shmuel taught</b> this <i>baraita</i>: I <b>might</b> have thought <b>that just as</b> when Shabbat and the New Moon do not coincide <b>they sound</b> the trumpets <b>for</b> the additional <b>Shabbat</b> offering <b>in and of itself, and for the</b> additional <b>New Moon</b> offering <b>in and of itself, so too would they sound</b> the trumpets <b>for each and every additional offering</b> when the days coincide. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And on the day of your rejoicing, and at your appointed times, <b>and on your New Moons,</b> and you shall sound the trumpets for your burnt-offerings and your peace-offerings, and they will be a memorial for you before your God. I am the Lord your God” (Numbers 10:10), indicating that one blast is sounded for all. The Gemara suggests: This is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Aḥa.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 3
Since the <i>baraita</i> was cited, the Gemara asks: <b>What is the derivation</b> cited in this <i>baraita</i>? How does the phrase: And on your New Moons, prove that the trumpets are sounded once for all the additional offerings? <b>Abaye said: The verse states: “And on your New Moons,”</b> in plural, indicating that <b>all the months are equated to each other,</b> and just as on a typical New Moon the trumpets are sounded once for the additional offering, so too when Shabbat and the New Moon coincide the trumpets are sounded once and no more. <b>Rav Ashi said</b> that in this verse <b>it is written: Your moon [<i>ḥodshekhem</i>],</b> without a <i>yod</i>, in the singular, <b>and</b> in the same verse <b>it is written: “And on</b> your <b>new [<i>uverashei</i>],”</b> in the plural. <b>And which</b> is the <b>month that has two new</b> beginnings? <b>You must say it is Rosh HaShana,</b> which is the beginning of both the new year and the new month. <b>And</b> yet <b>the Merciful One says: Your moon,</b> in the singular, indicating <b>it is one</b> and the trumpets are sounded once.

### Part 4
<b>And furthermore,</b> contrary to the statement of Rabbi Aḥa, <b>it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>On the intermediate days of the Festival, on the first</b> day, <b>what would they say</b> as the song accompanying the offering on that day? <b>“Ascribe [<i>havu</i>] unto the Lord, O you sons of might”</b> (Psalms 29:1). <b>On the second</b> day, <b>what would they say?</b> The psalm that contains the verse: <b>“But unto the wicked [<i>velarasha</i>] God says:</b> What have you to do to declare My statutes?” (Psalms 50:16). <b>On the third</b> day, <b>what would they say?</b> The psalm containing the verse: <b>“Who [<i>mi</i>] will rise up for me against the evildoers?”</b> (Psalms 94:16).

### Part 5
<b>On the fourth</b> day, <b>what would they say? “Consider [<i>binu</i>], you brutish among the people”</b> (Psalms 94:8). <b>On the fifth</b> day, <b>what would they say? “I removed [<i>hasiroti</i>] his shoulder from the burden”</b> (Psalms 81:7). <b>On the sixth</b> day, <b>what would they say? “All the foundations of the earth are moved [<i>yimotu</i>]”</b> (Psalms 82:5). <b>And if Shabbat occurred on any</b> of the intermediate days of the Festival, since Shabbat has its own song (Psalms 92), the last of the songs of the intermediate days, i.e., “All the foundations of the earth <b>are moved,” is superseded,</b> and all the other songs are recited in their proper sequence.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Safra established a mnemonic for</b> the sequence of the psalms recited during the intermediate days of the Festival: <b><i>Heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>yod</i>,</b> the first letters of the transliterated word in the verses cited. <b>Rav Pappa established a</b> different <b>mnemonic for</b> a different sequence of the Psalms: <b><i>Heh</i>, <i>vav</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>heh</i>, <i>beit</i>, <i>yod</i>,</b> as in his opinion, the psalm containing: “I removed” is recited before the psalm containing: “Consider.” The Gemara notes: <b>A mnemonic</b> to identify which <i>amora</i> established which mnemonic is the expression: <b>Convoy [<i>ambuha</i>] of scribes [<i>desafrei</i>],</b> as the spelling of <i>ambuha</i> is like the mnemonic of Rav Safra.

### Part 7
The Gemara concludes: This <i>baraita</i> is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Aḥa bar Ḥanina,</b> as on Shabbat the song for Shabbat was recited alone without the song for the Festival, and similarly, separate trumpet blasts are not sounded for the various additional offerings. Rabbi Aḥa’s opinion was rejected based on several sources. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Aḥa say a verse and a <i>baraita</i></b> in support of his opinion? How can those citations be rejected?

### Part 8
<b>Ravina said:</b> The verse and the <i>baraita</i> that he cited do not teach that trumpet blasts were sounded for each additional offering. Rather, they come <b>to say that one extends</b> the duration <b>of the blasts</b> to honor the added additional offerings, but does not sound even one additional blast. <b>The Sages of Caesarea, in the name of Rabbi Aḥa, said:</b> The verse and the <i>baraita</i> cited by Rabbi Aḥa come <b>to say that one increases</b> the number of <b>trumpeters</b> to honor the added additional offerings, but not the number of blasts sounded.

### Part 9
Apropos the psalms recited during the Festival, the Gemara asks: <b>And we,</b> outside Eretz Yisrael, <b>who have two days</b> of Festival due to the uncertainty, as well as uncertainty with regard to each of the intermediate days, <b>how do we conduct</b> ourselves with regard to the mention of the additional offerings in the additional prayer of the Festival during the intermediate days, and with regard to Torah reading on those days? <b>Abaye said:</b> Mention of <b>the second</b> day <b>will be superseded.</b> Since the first of the intermediate days outside Eretz Yisrael is the third day of the Festival in Eretz Yisrael, the additional offering for the third day alone is mentioned, and the offerings for the fourth day on the fourth day, etc. No mention is made of the second day outside Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 10
<b>Rava said:</b> Mention of the <b>seventh</b> day <b>will be superseded.</b> On the first of the intermediate days outside Eretz Yisrael, the third day of the Festival, the passage beginning “And on the second day” (Numbers 29:17) is mentioned in the additional <i>Amida</i> prayer and read in the Torah, and on each succeeding day the succeeding passage is mentioned and read. There is no mention of the seventh day on the eighth day, as that is no longer <i>Sukkot</i> but rather the Eighth Day of Assembly. The Gemara notes: A <i>baraita</i> <b>was taught in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rava: And if Shabbat occurs on any</b> of the intermediate days of the Festival, the song of the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i>: “All the foundations of the earth <b>are moved,” is superseded.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara cites a third opinion: <b>Ameimar instituted in</b> his city of <b>Neharde’a that</b> during the intermediate days, <b>one repeats</b> the second of the additional offerings that he mentioned the day before and adds the additional offerings of the subsequent day. On the first of the intermediate days in the Diaspora, one mentions the additional offerings of both the second and third days of <i>Sukkot</i>. On the second of the intermediate days, one repeats the verses of the third day of <i>Sukkot</i> and adds the verses of the fourth day.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC