
### Part 1
<b>this</b> mishna, where it states that if the <i>etrog</i> was peeled it is unfit, is <b>in</b> a case where <b>all of it</b> was peeled. <b>That</b> statement of Rava that if it was peeled it is fit is <b>in</b> a case where only <b>part of it</b> was peeled.

### Part 2
The mishna continues discussing the <i>halakha</i> of an <i>etrog</i> that was <b>split</b> or <b>pierced. Ulla bar Ḥanina taught:</b> An <i>etrog</i> that was <b>pierced with a hole that</b> completely <b>goes through</b> its body is unfit <b>with any</b> size hole. If <b>the hole does not</b> completely <b>go through</b> the <i>etrog</i>, it is unfit only <b>with</b> a hole <b>the size of an <i>issar</i></b> coin.

### Part 3
<b>Rava raised a dilemma:</b> If <b>signs of a <i>tereifa</i> developed in the <i>etrog</i>, what is</b> its halakhic status? The Gemara clarifies: <b>What is the dilemma</b> that <b>he is raising?</b> There are similarities between the <i>halakhot</i> of the <i>etrog</i> in the mishna and some of the <i>halakhot</i> of a <i>tereifa</i>, a bird or animal with a condition that will lead to its death within a year. <b>If</b> it is the case where the <i>etrog</i> was <b>peeled, we</b> already <b>learned</b> that case. <b>If</b> it is the case where the <i>etrog</i> was <b>split, we learned</b> that case as well. And <b>if</b> it is the case where the <i>etrog</i> was <b>pierced, we learned</b> that too. After ruling out those defects, the question remains: With regard to what is Rava’s dilemma?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>When he raises the dilemma,</b> it is with regard to a case <b>like</b> that <b>which Ulla</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: A lung whose</b> contents <b>can be poured like a pitcher,</b> i.e., whose tissue dissolved to the point of liquefaction, is not a sign of <i>tereifa</i>, and the animal is <b>kosher. And Rava said: And that is</b> the <i>halakha</i> only <b>where the bronchia are intact.</b> However, <b>if the bronchia are not intact, it is</b> a sign of <b><i>tereifa</i>.</b> The dilemma <b>here</b> is with regard to a comparable situation in an <i>etrog</i>, i.e., an <i>etrog</i> that liquefied from within: <b>What</b> is its halakhic status? <b>Perhaps it is there,</b> in the case of the lung, <b>where the air does not affect it</b> since it is completely enclosed in the body, that the lungs <b>can recover,</b> and that is why it is not a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>However, here,</b> in the case of the <i>etrog</i>, <b>where the air affects it, it</b> inevitably <b>decays</b> and spoils and therefore it is a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>Or, perhaps</b> the case of the <i>etrog</i> is <b>no different.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma based on that which was taught in a <i>baraita</i>. <b>An <i>etrog</i> that is <i>tafuaḥ</i>, <i>saruaḥ</i>, pickled, boiled,</b> a black <b>Cushite</b> <i>etrog</i>, <b>a white</b> <i>etrog</i>, <b>or a speckled</b> <i>etrog</i> <b>is unfit. An <i>etrog</i></b> shaped <b>like a ball is unfit, and some say even a twin,</b> conjoined, <i>etrog</i> is unfit. With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i> that is unripe, Rabbi Akiva deems it unfit, and the Rabbis deem it fit. If he grew</b> the <i>etrog</i> <b>in a mold and shaped it</b> to appear <b>like a different entity,</b> and it is no longer shaped like an <i>etrog</i>, it is <b>unfit.</b>

### Part 6
<b>In any event, it teaches</b> that an <i>etrog</i> that is <b><i>tafuaḥ</i></b> or <b><i>saruaḥ</i></b> is unfit. <b>What, is it not</b> that <b><i>tafuaḥ</i></b> means that it decayed <b>on the outside and <i>saruaḥ</i></b> means that it decayed <b>on the inside?</b> The Gemara rejects this explanation: <b>No,</b> both <b>this and that are</b> referring to decay <b>on the outside. And this</b> apparent redundancy is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>this</b> case, <i>tafuaḥ</i>, <b>is where it swelled even though it did not decay, and that</b> case, <i>saruaḥ</i>, <b>is where it decayed even though it did not swell.</b>

### Part 7
<b>The Master said</b> in the <i>baraita</i> cited above: <b>A Cushite <i>etrog</i> is unfit.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>A Cushite <i>etrog</i> is fit,</b> but an <i>etrog</i> that is <b>similar to a Cushite</b> <i>etrog</i> <b>is unfit. Abaye said: When we learned</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in the mishna</b> that it is unfit, <b>too, we learned</b> it not in reference to an actual Cushite <i>etrog</i>, but rather in reference to one that is <b>similar to a Cushite</b> <i>etrog</i>. <b>Rava said:</b> Actually, the mishna is referring to a Cushite <i>etrog</i>, and nevertheless, it is <b>not difficult; this,</b> the <i>halakha</i> that it is unfit, <b>is for us</b> in Babylonia because our <i>etrogim</i> are typically light, and the dark Cushite <i>etrogim</i> are conspicuously different. <b>And that,</b> the <i>halakha</i> that it is fit, <b>is for them</b> in Eretz Yisrael, whose <i>etrogim</i> are typically dark. In Eretz Yisrael the dark Cushite <i>etrog</i> is not conspicuously different, and it is therefore fit.

### Part 8
It was also taught in the <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>an unripe <i>etrog</i>, Rabbi Akiva deems it unfit, and the Rabbis deem it fit. Rabba said: Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Shimon said one</b> and the same <b>statement.</b> The Gemara elaborates: The statement of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> is <b>that which we said;</b> an unripe <i>etrog</i> is unfit. <b>Rabbi Shimon, what is</b> his statement? It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon exempts <i>etrogim</i></b> from the requirement to be tithed while <b>in their small</b> state. Apparently, Rabbi Shimon, too, holds that an unripe <i>etrog</i> is not a fruit.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rabba: <b>Perhaps that is not</b> the case and they do not share the same opinion. <b>Rabbi Akiva stated his opinion only here,</b> with regard to an unripe <i>etrog</i>, <b>as we require beauty [<i>hadar</i>]</b> in an <i>etrog</i> <b>and there is none</b> in the case of an unripe <i>etrog</i> due to its color or small size; <b>however, there,</b> with regard to tithes, perhaps <b>he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> that one is obligated to tithe even a half-ripe <i>etrog</i>.

### Part 10
<b>Alternatively, Rabbi Shimon stated his opinion only there</b> with regard to the exemption of an unripe <i>etrog</i> from tithes, <b>as it is written: “You shall surely tithe all the produce of your planting,</b> which is brought forth in the field year by year” (Deuteronomy 14:22). From that verse it is derived that the obligation to tithe applies only to produce that has developed to the point where it is <b>typical for people to take it out</b> to the field <b>for sowing;</b> one is not obligated to tithe unripe fruit that is not suitable for planting. <b>However,</b> perhaps <b>here he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Akiva and would deem an unripe <i>etrog</i> fit.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC