
### Part 1
It is unfit <b>because it is a mitzva that comes</b> to be fulfilled <b>by means of a transgression,</b> which renders the mitzva unfulfilled, <b>as it is stated: “And you have brought that which was stolen and the lame, and the sick;</b> that is how you bring the offering; should I accept this of your hand? says the Lord” (Malachi 1:13). Based on the juxtaposition in the verse, it is derived that the legal status of <b>a stolen</b> animal is <b>equivalent to</b> that of <b>a lame</b> animal. <b>Just as a lame</b> animal, because it is blemished, <b>has no remedy</b> and is unfit for use, <b>so too, a stolen</b> animal <b>has no remedy.</b> There is <b>no difference before</b> the owners reach a state of <b>despair</b> of recovering the stolen animal, and there is <b>no difference after despair.</b> In both cases there is no remedy.

### Part 2
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Granted, before</b> the <b>despair</b> of the owner, the robber may not sacrifice the animal because the animal does not belong to him. <b>The Merciful One says: “When a person sacrifices from yours</b> an offering” (Leviticus 1:2). The term “from yours” indicates that the animal must belong to the one sacrificing it, <b>and this</b> stolen animal <b>is not his. However, after</b> the <b>despair</b> of the owner, <b>didn’t</b> the robber <b>acquire</b> the animal <b>with</b> the <b>despair?</b> Once the owner despairs, the animal belongs to the robber, despite the fact that he incurs a debt that he must repay the owner. Since the animal is legally his, why is it prohibited for the robber to sacrifice it as an offering? <b>Rather, is it not because</b> the offering <b>is a mitzva that comes by means of a transgression?</b> Since the animal came into his possession by means of a transgression, it is unfit for use in fulfilling a mitzva.

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: What is</b> the meaning of <b>that which is written: “For I the Lord love justice, I hate robbery in a burnt-offering”</b> (Isaiah 61:8)? The Gemara cites <b>a parable of a flesh-and-blood king who was passing by a customs house. He said to his servants: Pay the levy to the taxmen. They said to him: Doesn’t all the tax in its entirety belong to you?</b> If the taxes will ultimately reach the royal treasury, what is the point of paying the levy? <b>He said to them: From my</b> conduct, <b>all travelers will learn and will not evade</b> payment of <b>the tax. So too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, said: “I the Lord... hate robbery in a burnt-offering.”</b> Although the whole world is His and the acquisitions of man have no impact upon Him, God says: <b>From My</b> conduct, <b>My children will learn and distance themselves from robbery,</b> even from robbery unrelated to the needs of offerings.

### Part 4
<b>It was also stated: Rabbi Ami said: A dry <i>lulav</i> is unfit because it</b> does <b>not</b> meet the criterion of <b>beauty, and a stolen</b> <i>lulav</i> <b>is unfit because it is a mitzva that comes by means of a transgression.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> Rabbi Ami <b>disagrees with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak, as Rabbi Yitzhak bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that the <i>halakha</i> that a stolen <i>lulav</i> is unfit applies <b>only with regard to the first day of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>. <b>However,</b> beginning <b>on the second day of the Festival,</b> there is no longer a Torah requirement to use a <i>lulav</i> from one’s own property. <b>Since one fulfills his obligation with a borrowed</b> <i>lulav</i>, <b>one fulfills</b> his obligation <b>with a stolen one as well.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Naḥman bar Yitzḥak raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>A <i>lulav</i> that was stolen or that is</b> completely <b>dry</b> is <b>unfit.</b> By inference, one concludes <b>that a borrowed</b> <i>lulav</i> <b>is fit</b> for use. The Gemara asks: <b>When</b> does this <i>halakha</i> apply? <b>If you say</b> that it applies only on <b>the first day of the Festival, isn’t it written:</b> “And you shall take <b>for yourselves</b> on the first day,” indicating that the four species must be taken <b>from your own</b> property, <b>and this</b> borrowed <i>lulav</i> <b>is not his?</b> Clearly, the mishna is not referring to the first day. <b>Rather, is it not</b> that the mishna is referring to <b>the second day of the Festival, and</b> the mishna <b>teaches that a stolen</b> <i>lulav</i> <b>is unfit</b> on this day too, contrary to Shmuel’s opinion?

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: Actually,</b> the mishna can be explained as referring to <b>the first day of the Festival,</b> and the <i>tanna</i> <b>is stating</b> the <i>halakha</i> employing the didactic style: <b>It was not necessary. It was not necessary</b> to state that one does not fulfill his obligation with <b>a borrowed <i>lulav</i>, as it is not his. However,</b> with regard to <b>a stolen</b> <i>lulav</i>, <b>say:</b> Barring extraordinary circumstances, <b>standard robbery</b> is a case that leads to <b>despair of the owners, and</b> despite the fact that a stolen <i>lulav</i> was acquired by means of a transgression, its legal status <b>is like</b> the robber’s own property. Therefore, the mishna <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so. One does not fulfill his obligation with a stolen <i>lulav</i>. The mishna is not a refutation of Shmuel’s opinion.

### Part 8
§ Apropos the unfitness of four species acquired through robbery, the Gemara relates: <b>Rav Huna said to the merchants [<i>avankarei</i>]</b> selling the four species: <b>When you purchase myrtle</b> branches <b>from gentiles, don’t you cut</b> them off the tree? <b>Rather, let the gentiles cut them and give them to you. What is the reason</b> for this advice? It is because <b>typical gentiles are land robbers,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC