
### Part 1
According to your reasoning, if <b>one did not find</b> any of the <b>four species</b> to roof his <i>sukka</i>, <b>he will sit idly</b> and fail to fulfill the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>; <b>and the Torah states: “You shall reside in <i>sukkot</i></b> for seven days” (Leviticus 23:42), meaning <b>a <i>sukka</i> of any material. Likewise, in</b> the book of <b>Ezra,</b> which can refer also to the book of Nehemiah, <b>it says: “Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of a dense-leaved tree, to make <i>sukkot</i>, as it is written”</b> (Nehemiah 8:15). Apparently, a <i>sukka</i> may be constructed even with materials other than the four species.

### Part 2
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds: These</b> olive branches and pine branches mentioned in the verse were <b>for the walls</b> of the <i>sukka</i>, which need not be built from the four species. <b>Myrtle branches, palm branches, and branches of a dense-leaved tree,</b> i.e., again myrtle, all of which are among the four species, were <b>for the roofing.</b> Rabbi Yehuda holds that one may roof the <i>sukka</i> only with the four species. <b>And we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>One</b> may <b>roof</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>with boards;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda.</b> As boards can be produced from one of the four species only if the trunk of the date palm is considered a <i>lulav</i>, <b>apparently, fibers and the trunk of the date palm are the species of the <i>lulav</i>.</b> The Gemara determines: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 3
The Gemara wonders: <b>And did Rabbi Yehuda say</b> with regard to the materials fit for roofing a <i>sukka</i> that <b>the four species, yes,</b> they are fit, but <b>other materials, no,</b> they are not fit? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>one roofed</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>with cedar [<i>erez</i>] boards that have four</b> handbreadths <b>in their</b> width, <b>everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>unfit.</b> If <b>they do not have four</b> handbreadths <b>in their</b> width, <b>Rabbi Meir deems it unfit and Rabbi Yehuda deems it fit. And Rabbi Meir concedes that if there is between</b> one <b>board</b> and another <b>board</b> a gap the <b>complete</b> width <b>of a board,</b> then <b>one places</b> fit roofing from the <b>waste</b> of the threshing floor and the winepress <b>between</b> the boards <b>and</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is fit.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Yehuda permits one to roof the <i>sukka</i> with cedar wood, which is not one of the four species.

### Part 4
The Gemara responds: <b>What is</b> the <b><i>erez</i></b> to which the mishna refers? It is in fact a <b>myrtle</b> tree, <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which Rabba bar Rav Huna</b> said, <b>as Rabba bar Rav Huna said</b> that <b>they say in the school of Rav: There are ten types of <i>erez</i>, as it is stated: “I will place in the wilderness the cedar [<i>erez</i>], the acacia-tree, the myrtle,</b> and pine tree; I will set in the plain the juniper, the box-tree, and the cypress all together” (Isaiah 41:19). All the trees listed in this verse are types of cedar, and the myrtle is one of them.

### Part 5
§ The mishna continues: <b>Rabbi Meir says:</b> One may tie the <i>lulav</i> <b>even with a cord. It is taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> that <b>Rabbi Meir said:</b> There was <b>an incident involving the prominent</b> residents <b>of Jerusalem who would bind their <i>lulavim</i> with gold rings.</b> The Sages <b>said to him:</b> Is there <b>proof from there? They would bind it with its own species beneath</b> the rings, which serve a merely decorative purpose and not a halakhic one.

### Part 6
<b>Rabba said to those who</b> would <b>bind the four species [<i>hoshana</i>] of the house of the Exilarch: When you bind the four species of the house of the Exilarch, leave</b> room for <b>a handgrip on it</b> where there is neither binding nor decoration <b>so that there will not be an interposition</b> between the <i>lulav</i> and the hand of the person taking it.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said:</b> That is unnecessary, as <b>any</b> addition whose purpose is <b>to beautify does not interpose. And Rabba said: Let a person not take the four species with a cloth [<i>sudara</i>]</b> around his hand, <b>since I require a complete taking, and there is none</b> in this case due to the interposition between his hand and the <i>lulav</i>. <b>And Rava said:</b> That is not a problem, as <b>taking by means of another object is considered taking.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava said: From where do I say that taking by means of another object is considered taking?</b> It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: One undergoing purification from impurity imparted by a corpse must be sprinkled with purification water with the ashes of the red heifer. If the <b>hyssop</b> used to sprinkle the water was <b>short</b> and did not reach the water in the receptacle, <b>one renders it sufficiently</b> long <b>by</b> attaching <b>a string or a spindle, and</b> then he <b>dips</b> the hyssop into the water, <b>removes</b> it, <b>grasps the hyssop, and sprinkles</b> the water on the one undergoing purification. And <b>why</b> may he do so? Doesn’t <b>the Merciful One say</b> in the Torah: <b>“And</b> a ritually pure person shall <b>take</b> hyssop, <b>and dip</b> it in the water, and sprinkle it” (Numbers 19:18), indicating that one must take the hyssop while dipping it? <b>Rather,</b> may one <b>not conclude from</b> this that <b>taking by means of another object is considered taking?</b>

### Part 9
This proof is rejected: <b>From where</b> can that be proven? <b>Perhaps it is different there; since he attached</b> the string to the hyssop, its legal status <b>is like</b> that of the hyssop <b>itself.</b> However, the legal status of the cloth is not like that of the <i>lulav</i>, since it is not attached to the <i>lulav</i>. <b>Rather,</b> the fact that taking by means of another object is considered taking can be learned <b>from here:</b> If the ashes of the red heifer <b>fell from the tube</b> in which they were held <b>into the trough</b> in which the spring water was located, the water is <b>unfit,</b> since taking the ashes and placing them in the water must be performed intentionally.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC