
### Part 1
<b>“You shall reside,” “you shall reside,”</b> by means <b>of a verbal analogy. It is stated here,</b> with regard to <i>sukka</i>: <b>“You shall reside</b> in <i>sukkot</i> seven days” (Leviticus 23:42), <b>and it is stated with regard to the inauguration</b> of the Tabernacle: “And at the door of the Tent of Meeting <b>you shall reside</b> day and night seven days” (Leviticus 8:35). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the inauguration, the meaning is <b>days and even nights, so too here,</b> with regard to <i>sukka</i>, the meaning is <b>days and even nights.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna continues: The altar is encircled with the <b>willow branch</b> for <b>seven</b> days. <b>How</b> so? If the seventh day of performing the mitzva of the willow branch occurs on Shabbat, since on that day the mitzva of the willow branch is a mitzva by Torah law, it overrides Shabbat and the mitzva of the willow branch is then performed seven days. The Gemara asks: With regard to the mitzva of the <b>willow branch on the seventh</b> day, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>it overrides Shabbat? Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> It is <b>in order to publicize that it is</b> a mitzva that <b>applies by Torah</b> law, since it is not written explicitly in the Torah. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>If so, <i>lulav</i> too should override</b> Shabbat in the Temple on the other days of <i>Sukkot</i> as well and not only on the first day <b>in order to publicize that it is</b> a mitzva <b>by Torah</b> law all seven days, since that too is not written explicitly in the Torah.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: One is prohibited from taking the <b><i>lulav</i></b> on Shabbat by rabbinic <b>decree due to</b> the concern expressed <b>by Rabba</b> (42b) lest he take the <i>lulav</i> in his hand and go to an expert to learn how to wave the <i>lulav</i> and thereby carry it in the public domain. The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> with regard to the <b>willow branch as well let us issue a decree</b> due to the same concern. The Gemara answers: The two cases are different. With regard to the <b>willow branch, agents of the court bring it</b> to the priests who perform the mitzva in the Temple, and they carefully prepare the willow branch prior to the onset of Shabbat and will not come to carry it in a prohibited manner on Shabbat. However, performance of the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i> is incumbent upon every individual.</b> Therefore, there is concern lest one unwittingly perform the prohibited labor of carrying on Shabbat.

### Part 4
The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> i.e., because the willow branch is supplied by agents of the court there is no concern that Shabbat will be desecrated, <b>let</b> the mitzva of the willow branch <b>override</b> Shabbat on <b>every day</b> of the Festival <b>as well.</b> The Gemara answers: In that case people <b>would come to raise doubts about</b> the significance of the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i>,</b> as, unlike the mitzva of the willow branch, it would override Shabbat on only one day of the Festival and not on all seven. The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the mitzva of the willow branch <b>override</b> Shabbat <b>on the first day of the Festival,</b> just as the mitzva of <i>lulav</i> does, and not on the seventh day. The Gemara answers: <b>The matter</b> of publicizing that the mitzva of willow branch is a mitzva by Torah law <b>would not be apparent,</b> as people <b>would say</b> that <b>it is</b> really the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i> that overrides</b> Shabbat, and once <i>lulav</i> is permitted the willow branch is permitted as well.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And let</b> the mitzva of the willow branch <b>override</b> Shabbat <b>on one of these</b> other days of <i>Sukkot</i>; why specifically the seventh day? The Gemara answers: <b>Once you moved it from the first</b> day, <b>establish it on the seventh</b> day, which is also a unique day of <i>Sukkot</i>, and not on one of the other intermediate days of <i>Sukkot</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> i.e., if the mitzva of the willow branch is so significant that it overrides Shabbat, <b>let it override</b> Shabbat <b>today as well,</b> even though the Temple is not standing. The Gemara answers: <b>We do not know</b> when precisely <b>the establishment of the month</b> was determined by the court. Therefore, it is possible that the day observed as the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i> is not the seventh day at all. Certainly, one does not violate the rabbinic decree to fulfill a mitzva that is not definitely a mitzva by Torah law.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to the people of Eretz Yisrael, <b>who know the establishment of the month, let them override</b> Shabbat for the mitzva of willow branch on the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i> even today. <b>When bar Hedya came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia <b>he said:</b> That is not a practical question, as the seventh day <b>does not coincide</b> with Shabbat, since the Sages fixed the calendar to avoid that possibility. <b>When Ravin and all those</b> emissaries <b>who descended</b> to Babylonia, or who originally left Babylonia for Eretz Yisrael and returned, <b>came, they said: It does coincide</b> with Shabbat, <b>but it does not override</b> Shabbat.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> then it is <b>difficult;</b> why doesn’t the mitzva of the willow branch override Shabbat on the seventh day today? <b>Rav Yosef said: Who will say to us</b> definitively <b>that</b> the mitzva of <b>the willow branch</b> is performed <b>by taking</b> it? <b>Perhaps it is</b> performed <b>by standing</b> the branches <b>upright</b> against the altar. Since there is no altar today, the mitzva does not override Shabbat.

### Part 9
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rav Yosef from the mishna, which states: The <b><i>lulav</i></b> is taken <b>and</b> the altar is encircled with <b>the willow branch</b> either <b>six or seven</b> days. <b>What, is it not</b> learned from the juxtaposition of these mitzvot in the mishna that the mitzva of the willow branch is <b>like</b> the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i></b> in that <b>just as</b> the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i></b> is performed <b>by taking</b> it, <b>so too,</b> the mitzva of the <b>willow branch</b> is performed <b>by taking</b> it and not by standing it upright? He answered him: <b>Are the cases</b> necessarily <b>comparable?</b> Perhaps <b>this</b> mitzva of <i>lulav</i> is <b>as it is,</b> by means of taking, <b>and this</b> mitzva of the willow branch is <b>as it is,</b> by means of standing it upright.

### Part 10
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rav Yosef from a mishna: <b>On every day</b> the people <b>circle the altar one time, and</b> on <b>that day,</b> the seventh day of the willow branch, they circle it <b>seven times. What, is</b> the mishna <b>not</b> referring to circling the altar <b>with the willow branch</b> in hand? He answered him: <b>No,</b> it is referring to circling the altar <b>with a <i>lulav</i>.</b> Abaye objects: <b>But didn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said:</b> They would circle the altar <b>with the willow branch?</b> Rav Yosef <b>said to him: He said to you with the willow branch;</b> however, my authority is no less than his, as we are both <i>amora’im</i>, <b>and I say</b> that they circle the altar <b>with a <i>lulav</i>. It was stated</b> that this was the subject of dispute between other <i>amora’im</i> as well. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> They circle the altar <b>with a <i>lulav</i>. Rav Shmuel bar Natan said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> They circle the altar <b>with the willow branch. And likewise, Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh said:</b> They would circle the altar <b>with the willow branch.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rava said to Rav Yitzḥak, son of Rabba bar bar Ḥana: Son of Torah [<i>bar urya</i>], come and I will tell you an outstanding statement that your father would say.</b> With regard to <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna: On <b>every day</b> the people <b>circle the altar one time, and on that day,</b> the seventh day of the willow branch, <b>they circle the altar seven times; this</b> is what <b>your father said in the name of Rabbi Elazar:</b> They circle the altar <b>with a <i>lulav</i>.</b>

### Part 12
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> Rav Yosef from the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Sukka</i> 3:1): The mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i> overrides Shabbat at</b> the <b>start</b> of the Festival, <b>and the willow branch</b> overrides it <b>at</b> the <b>end</b> of the Festival. <b>One time, the seventh</b> day <b>of</b> the <b>willow branch occurred on Shabbat, and they brought branches of</b> the <b>willow</b> tree <b>on Shabbat eve,</b> before Shabbat, <b>and placed them in the</b> Temple <b>courtyard</b> for use on Shabbat. The <b>Boethusians</b> in the Temple, who disagreed with the Sages and held that there is no mitzva of the willow branch on the seventh day of the Festival, <b>noticed them and took them and concealed them under</b> the <b>stones.</b> This was an attempt to prevent fulfillment of the mitzva, as they knew that the Sages would prohibit moving the stones, which are set-aside on Shabbat.

### Part 13
<b>The next day,</b> some of <b>the ignoramuses noticed</b> the branches concealed under the stones. <b>And</b> since the ignoramuses identified with the opinion of the Sages, and at the same time were ignorant of the details of the mitzvot, <b>they extracted them from under the stones. And the priests brought them and stood them upright at the sides of the altar.</b> This happened <b>because</b> the <b>Boethusians do not concede that waving the willow branch overrides Shabbat.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Apparently,</b> based on the conclusion of the incident, the mitzva of the willow branch <b>is</b> fulfilled <b>by taking</b> it, as it is referring to waving the willow branch and not just standing it upright at the sides of the altar. The Gemara notes: Indeed, it is <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of Rav Yosef’s opinion.

### Part 15
Given the refutation of Rav Yosef’s opinion, the original question is difficult: <b>Rather, let them</b> in Eretz Yisrael <b>override</b> Shabbat for the mitzva of the willow branch on the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i> nowadays as well. The Gemara answers: <b>Since we</b> in the Diaspora <b>do not override</b> Shabbat for this purpose, <b>they</b> in Eretz Yisrael <b>also do not override</b> it. The Gemara objects: <b>But doesn’t the first day of the Festival</b> refute that contention, as <b>for us</b> in the Diaspora it <b>does not override</b> Shabbat and we do not take the <i>lulav</i>, <b>and for them</b> in Eretz Yisrael <b>it overrides</b> Shabbat and they take the <i>lulav</i>?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC