
### Part 1
By inference, if <b>he spilled</b> the ashes intentionally from the tube into the water, <b>it is fit. Why?</b> Doesn’t <b>the Merciful One say</b> in the Torah: <b>“And</b> for the impure <b>they shall take</b> of the ashes of the burning of the purification from sin, <b>and he places</b> running water upon them in a vessel” (Numbers 19:17). Apparently, one must mix the water and the ashes intentionally. <b>Rather,</b> may one <b>not conclude from it</b> that <b>taking by means of another object is considered taking?</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Rabba said</b> with regard to the <i>lulav</i>: After binding the myrtle branches and willow branches, <b>let a person not insert the <i>lulav</i> into</b> the binding of <b>the four species, as perhaps</b> as a result <b>the leaves</b> will <b>fall</b> from the branches <b>and</b> the leaves <b>will</b> constitute <b>an interposition</b> between the various species. <b>And Rava said:</b> An object of one <b>species does not interpose before</b> an object of the same <b>species.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Rabba said: Let a person not cut the <i>lulav</i></b> in order to shorten it while it is <b>in</b> the binding of <b>the four species, as</b> perhaps as a result <b>leaves will become detached and will</b> constitute <b>an interposition</b> between the various species. <b>And Rava said:</b> An object of one <b>species does not interpose before</b> an object of the same <b>species.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>And Rabba said: It is prohibited to smell the myrtle branch</b> used in fulfillment <b>of the mitzva.</b> However, <b>it is permitted to smell the <i>etrog</i></b> used in fulfillment <b>of the mitzva.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the distinction between them? The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>a myrtle branch, which exists</b> primarily <b>for</b> its <b>fragrance, when he sets it aside</b> exclusively for the mitzva, <b>he sets it aside from</b> enjoying its <b>fragrance.</b> With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>,</b> on the other hand, <b>which exists</b> primarily <b>for eating, when he sets it aside</b> exclusively for the mitzva, <b>he sets it aside from eating.</b> However, he never intended to prohibit this ancillary pleasure.

### Part 5
<b>And Rabba said:</b> With regard to <b>a myrtle branch, while it is attached</b> to the tree, it is <b>permitted to smell it</b> on Shabbat. With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>, while it is attached</b> to the tree, <b>it is prohibited to smell it.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for the difference between them? With regard to <b>a myrtle branch, which exists</b> primarily <b>to smell</b> it, <b>if you permit him</b> to smell it, <b>he will not come to cut it.</b> Once he has smelled it, he has no further use for it. With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>, which exists</b> primarily <b>for eating,</b> one may not smell it because <b>if you permit him</b> to do so, the concern is that <b>he will come to cut it</b> from the tree to eat it.

### Part 6
§ <b>And Rabba said:</b> One takes the <b><i>lulav</i></b> bound with the other two species <b>in the right</b> hand <b>and the <i>etrog</i> in the left.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for that arrangement? <b>These</b> species constitute <b>three mitzvot, and this</b> <i>etrog</i> <b>is</b> only <b>one mitzva.</b> One accords deference to the greater number of mitzvot by taking the three species in the right hand. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zerika: What is the reason</b> that <b>we recite the blessing only</b> with the formula: <b>About taking the <i>lulav</i>,</b> with no mention of the other species? Rabbi Zerika said to him: <b>Since it</b> is <b>highest of them all</b> and the most conspicuous, the other species are subsumed under it. Rabbi Yirmeya asks: <b>And</b> if that is the only reason, <b>let him lift the <i>etrog</i></b> higher than the <i>lulav</i> <b>and recite the blessing</b> mentioning it. Rabbi Zerika <b>said to him</b> that he meant: <b>Since</b> the tree <b>of its species is the tallest of them all,</b> it is the most prominent, and therefore it is appropriate for the formula of the blessing to emphasize the <i>lulav</i>.

### Part 7
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And where</b> in the recitation of <i>hallel</i> <b>would they wave</b> the <i>lulav</i>? They would do so <b>at</b> the verse: <b>“Thank the Lord,</b> for He is good” (Psalms 118:1, 29) that appears <b>at</b> both <b>the beginning and the end</b> of the psalm, <b>and at</b> the verse: <b>“Lord, please save us”</b> (Psalms 118:25); this is <b>the statement of Beit Hillel. And Beit Shammai say:</b> They would wave the <i>lulav</i> <b>even at</b> the verse: <b>“Lord, please grant us success”</b> (Psalms 118:25). <b>Rabbi Akiva said: I was observing Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Yehoshua</b> and saw <b>that all the people were waving their <i>lulavim</i>, and</b> the two of <b>them waved</b> their <i>lulav</i> <b>only at: “Lord, please save us,”</b> indicating that this is the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 8
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks about the premise of the mishna. With regard to <b>waving, who mentioned it?</b> As no previous mention was made of waving the <i>lulav</i>, it is a non sequitur when the <i>tanna</i> begins discussion of the details of the custom. The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>is basing</b> himself on the mishna <b>there</b> (29b), which states: <b>Any <i>lulav</i> that has three handbreadths</b> in length, <b>sufficient</b> to enable one <b>to wave with it, is fit</b> for use in fulfilling the mitzva. As the custom of waving the <i>lulav</i> was already established there, here the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: Where would they wave</b> the <i>lulav</i>?

### Part 9
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there</b> (<i>Menaḥot</i> 61a): With regard to <b>the two loaves and the two lambs</b> offered on the festival of <b><i>Shavuot</i>, how does he perform</b> their waving before the altar? <b>He places the two loaves atop the two lambs, and places his hand beneath them, and waves to and fro</b> to each side, <b>and he raises and lowers</b> them, <b>as it is stated: “Which is waved and which is lifted”</b> (Exodus 29:27), indicating that there is waving to the sides as well as raising and lowering.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He moves</b> them <b>to and fro</b> to dedicate them <b>to He Whom the four directions are His. He raises and lowers</b> them <b>to He Whom the heavens and earth are His. In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they taught</b> it <b>as follows. Rabbi Ḥama bar Ukva said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: He moves</b> them <b>to and fro in order to</b> request <b>a halt</b> to <b>harmful winds,</b> storms and tempests that come from all directions; <b>he raises and lowers</b> them <b>in order to halt harmful dews</b> and rains that come from above. <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Avin said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Yosei bar Zevila</b> who said: <b>That is to say,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC