
### Part 1
<b>And if he brings</b> the water <b>in a consecrated</b> barrel, the water <b>will become disqualified</b> for use in the libation <b>by remaining overnight,</b> just as all consecrated items, e.g., offerings, are rendered unfit after remaining overnight. <b>Ḥizkiya said: Temple vessels consecrate only with</b> specific <b>intent.</b> Therefore, in theory, one could bring water to the Temple in a consecrated vessel, provided he has no intent to consecrate it. <b>And</b> the reason one may not do so is due to <b>a</b> rabbinic <b>decree lest</b> people <b>say,</b> upon seeing the water poured in the morning, that the water <b>was intentionally consecrated.</b> In that case, they might draw the mistaken conclusion that remaining overnight does not disqualify liquids for use in libations.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yannai said</b> that <b>Rabbi Zeira said: Even</b> if <b>you say that there is a</b> requisite <b>measure for the water</b> to be poured for libation and no more than three <i>log</i> can be consecrated, <b>and</b> that <b>Temple vessels consecrate only with intent,</b> here there is a rabbinic <b>decree lest they say</b> the barrel <b>was filled</b> with water <b>for sanctifying the hands and the feet</b> of the priest, for which there is no measure. Then, when they see the water poured in the morning, they will draw the mistaken conclusion that remaining overnight does not disqualify liquids for use in libations.

### Part 3
§ The mishna continues: <b>If</b> the water in the barrel <b>spilled or was exposed</b> overnight, the water is disqualified. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> is the water disqualified? <b>Let him pass it through a strainer,</b> eliminating the poison. <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: A vessel covered <b>with a strainer is subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure</b> if the vessel is left unsupervised. <b>Rabbi Neḥemya said: When</b> is this so? It is <b>when the lower vessel,</b> in which the liquid collects after passing through the strainer, <b>is exposed. However, if the lower vessel is covered, even if the upper vessel is exposed,</b> it <b>is not subject to</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>exposure, because the poison of a snake is like a sponge</b> in that <b>it floats and stays in place.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Neḥemya, say that Rabbi Neḥemya said</b> his opinion permitting strained water <b>for a common</b> person. <b>However, did he</b> actually <b>say</b> that strained water is permitted even to be sacrificed <b>to God?</b> Even if it is possible to render this water potable, it is certainly not of the select quality that would render it eligible for use in the Temple service. <b>Isn’t Rabbi Neḥemya of</b> the opinion that it is inappropriate to sacrifice on the altar any item that one would not give to someone of prominent stature? As it is stated: “And when you offer the blind for sacrifice, it is no evil; and when you offer the lame and sick, it is no evil. <b>Present it now unto your governor; will he be pleased with you or will he accept your person, says the Lord of hosts”</b> (Malachi 1:8).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC