
### Part 1
<b>And does he need to dry them?</b> Clearly, that is not his intention. Why, then, would he place the <i>lulavim</i> on the roof? <b>Rather,</b> emend your version and <b>say: On the bench</b> beneath the roof, in a place designated for that purpose. <b>Raḥava said</b> that <b>Rav Yehuda said: The Temple Mount was a double colonnade [<i>setav</i>], a colonnade within a colonnade,</b> and there was room there to place the <i>lulavim</i>.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>How is the mitzva of</b> the <b>willow branch</b> fulfilled? <b>There was a place below Jerusalem, and it was called Motza. They</b> would <b>descend there and gather willow branches [<i>murbiyyot</i>] from there. And they</b> would then <b>come and stand them upright at the sides of the altar, and</b> the <b>tops</b> of the branches would <b>be inclined over the top of the altar. They</b> then <b>sounded a <i>tekia</i>,</b> a simple uninterrupted blast, <b>sounded a <i>terua</i>,</b> a broken sound and/or a series of short staccato blasts, <b>and sounded</b> another <b><i>tekia</i>. Each day they</b> would <b>circle the altar one time and say: “Lord, please save us. Lord, please grant us success”</b> (Psalms 118:25). <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that they would say: <b><i>Ani vaho</i>, please save us. And on that day,</b> the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>they</b> would <b>circle the altar seven times. At the time of their departure</b> at the end of the Festival, <b>what</b> would <b>they say?</b> It is <b>beautiful for you, altar;</b> it is <b>beautiful for you, altar. Rabbi Elazar said</b> that they would say: <b>To the Lord and to you, altar; to the Lord and to you, altar.</b>

### Part 3
The mishna notes: <b>As its performance during the week, so is its performance on Shabbat; except</b> for the fact <b>that they would gather</b> the branches <b>from</b> Shabbat <b>eve and place them in basins of gold so that they would not dry. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says:</b> There was a unique custom on the seventh day. <b>They would bring palm branches</b> to the Temple <b>and place them on the ground at the sides of the altar, and that</b> seventh <b>day</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>was called:</b> The day of the <b>placing of palm branches. Immediately</b> after fulfilling the mitzva of taking the four species on the seventh day of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>children remove their <i>lulavim</i></b> from the binding <b>and eat their <i>etrogim</i></b> as an expression of extreme joy.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It was taught:</b> Motza, which was mentioned in the mishna, <b>was</b> a Roman <b>military colony [<i>kelanya</i>].</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>he called it Motza?</b> The reason is that <b>since it is exempted from the king’s tax [<i>karga</i>], they call it Motza,</b> meaning removed.

### Part 5
§ The mishna continues: <b>And</b> after gathering the willow branches, <b>they</b> would then <b>come and stand them upright at the sides</b> of the altar. <b>It was taught:</b> The willow branches were <b>numerous and long, and eleven cubits high, so that they would lean over the altar</b> one <b>cubit.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Mareimar said in the name of Mar Zutra: Learn from it</b> that <b>one places them on the base</b> of the altar and not on the ground, <b>as, if it enters your mind that one places them on the ground,</b> it would pose a difficulty in understanding the mishna. <b>Now, since</b> the following is stated with regard to the structure of the altar: The altar <b>ascended</b> one <b>cubit</b> high <b>and indented</b> one <b>cubit</b> and <b>that is</b> the <b>base,</b> and it <b>ascended five</b> additional cubits <b>and indented</b> one <b>cubit</b> and <b>that is</b> the <b>surrounding ledge,</b> and <b>it ascended three</b> additional cubits and <b>that is the location of the horns</b> of the altar, as the height of the altar totaled nine cubits; consequently, <b>where can you find</b> a case where the willow branches <b>lean over the altar</b> one cubit? Due to the indentations, the branches would need to stand inclined. Eleven cubits would not be sufficiently high to lean one cubit over the altar. <b>Rather, is it not</b> that one must <b>conclude from</b> this that the branches were <b>placed on the base,</b> adding a cubit to their height? The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that it is so.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said: What is</b> the <b>verse</b> that alludes to the fact that the branches must lean one cubit over the top of the altar? It is <b>as it is stated: “Encircle [<i>isru</i>] with branches on the Festival until the horns of the altar”</b> (Psalms 118:27), indicating that willow branches should surround the horns of the altar. That is facilitated by standing the branches on the base. The Gemara cites derivations based on different interpretations of the terms in that verse. <b>Rabbi Abbahu said</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who takes a <i>lulav</i> in its binding and a myrtle branch in its dense-leaved</b> form, <b>the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he built an altar and sacrificed an offering upon it, as it is stated:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC