
### Part 1
<b>One who prepares a <i>lulav</i> for himself,</b> but not one who prepares for others, <b>recites</b> when preparing it on the eve of the Festival: <b>Blessed…Who has given us life, sustained us, and brought us to this time. When he takes it</b> during the Festival <b>in order to fulfill his obligation, he says: Blessed…Who sanctified us with His mitzvot and commanded us concerning the taking of a <i>lulav</i>. And even though he recited the blessing over</b> the <i>lulav</i> <b>on the first day</b> of the Festival, <b>he repeats and recites the blessing</b> over the <i>lulav</i> <b>all seven</b> days when fulfilling the mitzva. <b>One who establishes a <i>sukka</i> for himself recites: Blessed…Who has given us life, sustained us,</b> and brought us to this time. When <b>he enters to sit in</b> the <i>sukka</i>, <b>he recites:</b> “Blessed…<b>Who has sanctified us with His mitzvot and commanded us to reside in the <i>sukka</i>. And once he recited the blessing on the first day, he no longer recites it</b> on the rest of the days, as all seven days are considered a single unit.

### Part 2
Now, the <i>halakha</i> cited in this <i>baraita</i> that the blessing over <b><i>lulav</i></b> is recited all seven days is <b>difficult;</b> it contradicts the <i>halakha</i> stated by Rabba bar bar Ḥana in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan, that the blessing over <b><i>lulav</i></b> is recited only on the first day. The <i>halakha</i> cited in this <i>baraita</i> that the blessing over <b><i>sukka</i></b> is recited only on the first day is likewise <b>difficult,</b> as it contradicts the <i>halakha</i> that Rabba bar bar Ḥana said that Rabbi Yoḥanan said, that the blessing over <b><i>sukka</i></b> is recited all seven days.

### Part 3
The Gemara continues: <b>Granted,</b> the contradiction between the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>lulav</i></b> in the <i>baraita</i> and the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>lulav</i></b> stated in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan is <b>not difficult. Here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i>, where the <i>halakha</i> is to recite the blessing each day, it is referring <b>to a time when the Temple is in existence,</b> where the mitzva of <i>lulav</i> is performed all seven days. <b>There,</b> in the case of the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan that the blessing is recited only on the first day, it is referring <b>to a time when the Temple is not in existence. However,</b> the contradiction between one <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>sukka</i></b> and the other <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>sukka</i></b> remains <b>difficult,</b> as Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement indicates that the mitzva of <i>sukka</i> during the Festival is considered seven separate mitzvot, while the <i>halakha</i> in the <i>baraita</i> indicates that it is one extended mitzva.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: This matter <b>is</b> related to a general dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>phylacteries, every time one dons them he recites the blessing over them;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>And the Rabbis say: One recites the blessing only in the morning.</b> Apparently, these <i>tanna’im</i> would dispute the issue of <i>sukka</i> as well: Does one recite the blessing each time he performs the mitzva or only the first time he performs it at the beginning of <i>Sukkot</i>?

### Part 5
Apropos phylacteries, <b>it was stated</b> that <b>Abaye said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and Rava said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. Rav Mari, son of the daughter of Shmuel, said: I observed Rava, who did not act in accordance with his</b> own <b><i>halakha</i></b> and recite the blessing over phylacteries only once. <b>Rather, he rises early, and enters the bathroom, and exits, and washes his hands, and dons phylacteries, and recites the blessing. And when he needs</b> to go <b>another time, he enters the bathroom, and exits, and washes his hands, and</b> then <b>dons phylacteries, and</b> then <b>recites the blessing. And we too,</b> in the case of <i>sukka</i>, <b>act in accordance</b> with the opinion <b>of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and recite the blessing all seven</b> days.

### Part 6
<b>Mar Zutra said: I observed Rav Pappi, who recited</b> the <b>blessing whenever he donned phylacteries. The Sages of the school of Rav Ashi recited</b> the <b>blessing whenever they touched</b> the phylacteries that they were donning.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The blessing over <b>the mitzva of <i>lulav</i></b> is recited <b>all seven</b> days of the Festival. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> On the <b>first day,</b> there is <b>the mitzva of <i>lulav</i></b> by Torah law, and one recites a blessing. <b>From that</b> point <b>onward</b> it is <b>a mitzva of the Elders,</b> a rabbinic ordinance to commemorate the Temple, and one is not required to recite a blessing. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said:</b> On <b>each day</b> of <i>Sukkot</i> it is <b>a mitzva of the Elders.</b> The Gemara wonders: <b>Even</b> on <b>the first day? But don’t we maintain that</b> on <b>the first day</b> the mitzva of <i>lulav</i> is <b>by Torah</b> law? The Gemara emends the citation. <b>Say</b> that Rabbi Yitzḥak said: On each day of <i>Sukkot</i> <b>except for the first day.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so, that</b> opinion <b>is</b> the same as that <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi;</b> but they appear to disagree. The Gemara answers: Emend the citation and <b>say: And likewise, Rabbi Yitzḥak said,</b> in agreement with Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: <b>And Rav also held</b> that the blessing over <b>the mitzva of <i>lulav</i></b> is recited <b>all seven</b> days, and one recites the blessing even on the six days when the mitzva is by rabbinic law, <b>as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Ashi said</b> that <b>Rav said: One who lights a Hanukkah light must recite a blessing. Rabbi Yirmeya said: One who sees</b> a burning <b>Hanukkah light must recite a blessing. What blessings does one recite? Rav Yehuda said:</b> On the <b>first day</b> of Hanukkah, <b>the one who lights recites three</b> blessings: To light the Hanukkah light, Who has performed miracles, and the blessing of time. <b>The one who sees</b> burning lights <b>recites two</b> blessings. <b>From this</b> point <b>onward,</b> from the second day of Hanukkah, the one who <b>lights recites two</b> blessings, <b>and</b> the one who <b>sees recites one</b> blessing.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: And <b>what</b> is the first <b>blessing</b> that one <b>recites?</b> He recites: <b>Blessed…Who has made us holy through His mitzvot and has commanded us to light the Hanukkah light.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And where did He command us?</b> The mitzva of Hanukkah is not mentioned in the Torah, so how can one say that it was commanded to us by God? The Gemara answers: The obligation to recite this blessing is derived <b>from</b> the verse: <b>“You shall not turn aside</b> from the sentence which they shall declare unto you, to the right, nor to the left” (Deuteronomy 17:11). From this verse, the mitzva incumbent upon all Jews to heed the statements and decrees of the Sages is derived. Therefore, one who fulfills their directives fulfills a mitzva by Torah law. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that the mitzva to heed the voice of the Elders is derived from the verse: <b>“Ask your father, and he will declare unto you,</b> your Elders, and they will tell you” (Deuteronomy 32:7).

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> blessing does he <b>omit</b> on the other days of Hanukkah? The Gemara answers: He <b>omits</b> the blessing of <b>time:</b> Who has given us life, sustained us, and brought us to this time. The Gemara asks: <b>And say</b> that <b>he omits</b> the blessing of the <b>miracle:</b> Who has performed miracles. The Gemara answers: The <b>miracle is</b> relevant on <b>all</b> of the <b>days,</b> whereas the blessing: Who has given us life, is pertinent only to the first time one performs the mitzva each year. In any event, from the statement of Rav it is clear that one recites a blessing over a rabbinic mitzva, and therefore one recites the blessing over the <i>lulav</i> all seven days. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> in the name of Rav <b>explicitly,</b> and it is unnecessary to infer Rav’s opinion from statements in other areas of <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rav said:</b> On <b>all seven</b> days, one recites the blessing over <b>the mitzva of <i>lulav</i>.</b>

### Part 11
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who establishes a <i>sukka</i> for himself recites: Blessed…Who has given us life,</b> sustained us, and brought us to this time. When <b>he enters to reside in</b> the <i>sukka</i>, <b>he recites:</b> “Blessed…<b>Who has sanctified us</b> with His mitzvot and commanded us to reside in the <i>sukka</i>. If the <i>sukka</i> <b>was</b> already <b>established and standing</b> and was not constructed for the sake of the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>, then <b>if he is able to introduce a novel element</b> in the <i>sukka</i> for the sake of the mitzva, <b>he recites the blessing:</b> Who has given us life. <b>And if not,</b> then <b>when he enters to reside in</b> the <i>sukka</i> on the Festival <b>he recites two blessings:</b> To reside in the <i>sukka</i>, and: Who has given us life. <b>Rav Ashi said: I observed Rav Kahana, who recites all</b> these blessings <b>over the cup</b> on which he recites <b><i>kiddush</i>.</b>

### Part 12
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>one had several mitzvot before him</b> to fulfill, <b>he recites: Blessed…Who has sanctified us with His mitzvot, and commanded us concerning the mitzvot. Rabbi Yehuda says: He recites a blessing over each and every one in and of itself. Rabbi Zeira said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa</b> who said: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. And Rabbi Zeira said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa</b> who said: <b>What is the rationale for</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yehuda?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “Blessed is the Lord, day by day”</b> (Psalms 68:20). The question arises: <b>Is it so that one blesses Him by day and does not bless Him at night? Rather,</b> the verse comes <b>to tell you: Each and every day, give the Lord</b> the <b>blessings</b> appropriate for that day. <b>Here too, with regard to each and every matter, give Him blessings appropriate</b> to that matter, and do not group the blessings together.

### Part 13
Apropos the <i>halakha</i> transmitted by this pair of <i>amora’im</i>, the Gemara continues: <b>Rabbi Zeira said, and some say</b> that it was <b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappa</b> who said: <b>Come and see that the attribute of flesh and blood is unlike the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He. The attribute of flesh and blood is</b> that <b>an empty vessel</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC