
### Part 1
<b>that they</b> can become <b>ritually impure,</b> even with impurity imparted by treading, as those mats are produced for the purpose of lying upon them. <b>And</b> they also agreed concerning the coarse mats <b>of Tiberias, that they are ritually pure,</b> as these are produced exclusively for use in partitions and for roofing. <b>Concerning what</b> mats <b>do they disagree?</b> It is <b>concerning</b> the mats produced in the <b>rest of the places.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds: Since there is no one who sits on these</b> mats regularly, <b>they are comparable</b> to the mats <b>of Tiberias</b> and are pure. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>holds that since</b> it <b>happens and one sits on them</b> on occasion, <b>they are comparable</b> to the mats <b>of Usha</b> and are impure.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the mishna cited above. <b>The Master said: All</b> types of <b><i>ḥotzalot</i> can become ritually impure</b> with <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Dosa.</b> Apparently, they are all considered vessels, which is why they are susceptible to ritual impurity and one may not roof the <i>sukka</i> with them. The Gemara asks: <b>But wasn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And likewise, Rabbi Dosa would say in accordance with his statement,</b> i.e., in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, in the name of his father, that all types of mats are ritually pure, and one may roof a <i>sukka</i> with them? Don’t these two sources contradict each other?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> mishna <b>is</b> referring to a mat <b>that has an upturned edge,</b> which renders the mat a vessel susceptible to ritual impurity. <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is</b> referring to a mat <b>that does not have an upturned edge [<i>gedanpa</i>];</b> therefore, it is not a vessel and is not susceptible to impurity.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection: <i>Ḥotzalot</i></b> made <b>of papyrus, or of bulrushes, or of sackcloth</b> produced out of goat hair, <b>or of horsehair,</b> all of which are woven and comfortable, <b>can become ritually impure</b> with the <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse</b> but not with the impurity imparted by treading, because while they are considered vessels, they are not designated for sitting; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Dosa. And the Rabbis say:</b> They do become ritually impure, <b>even</b> with the impurity imparted by <b>treading.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that <i>ḥotzalot</i> are sacks called <b><i>marzovelei</i>,</b> there is no problem. The reasoning of the one who holds that they do not become impure with impurity imparted by treading is that they are not designated for sitting. However, since they are vessels, they become impure with impurity imparted by a corpse. And for what are these vessels used? The vessels made <b>of papyrus and of bulrushes are fit</b> to be used <b>as a fruit basket,</b> and the ones made <b>of sackcloth and of horsehair are fit</b> to be used <b>as</b> small <b>sacks [<i>gulkei</i>] and baskets</b> for legumes and small fruits, because their weave is finer. <b>However, according to the one who said</b> that <i>ḥotzalot</i> are <b>actual mats</b> without upturned edges, what is the basis for the dispute? These mats are fit only for the purpose of lying upon them. <b>Granted,</b> the mats made <b>of sackcloth,</b> of goat hair, <b>or of horsehair are fit for</b> use as <b>screens and</b> flour <b>sifters. However,</b> the mats <b>of papyrus and of bulrushes, for what</b> use <b>are they fit?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They are fit for</b> use as covers <b>for vats of ale.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Some say</b> a different version of this exchange: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that <i>ḥotzalot</i> are <b>actual mats,</b> then the mats <b>of papyrus and of bulrushes are fit</b> to be used as covers <b>for vats of ale,</b> while those <b>of sackcloth,</b> i.e., goat hair, <b>and of horsehair</b> may <b>be used as screens or sifters. However, according to the one who said that</b> the <i>ḥotzalot</i> are sacks called <b><i>marzovelei</i>,</b> what is the basis of their dispute? <b>Granted,</b> sacks made <b>of sackcloth and of horsehair are fit to</b> be used as small <b>baskets and sacks; but for what</b> are mats <b>of papyrus or of bulrushes fit;</b> why are they susceptible to ritual impurity? The Gemara answers: <b>They are fit</b> to be used <b>as a fruit basket.</b>

### Part 7
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Ḥananya said: When I descended to the exile</b> of Babylonia, <b>I found one Elder, who said to me: One</b> may <b>roof</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>with a mat. When I</b> returned to Eretz Yisrael and <b>came to Rabbi Yehoshua</b> ben Ḥananya, <b>the brother of</b> my <b>father,</b> and related to him what the Elder said, <b>he agreed with his statement. Rav Ḥisda said: That</b> applies <b>only</b> to a mat that <b>does not have an upturned edge</b> and is not fit for any use other than for roofing.

### Part 8
<b>Ulla said: These mats of the residents of Meḥoza, if not for their wall,</b> i.e., upturned edge, <b>one</b> would be permitted to <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with them. That opinion is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> may <b>roof</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>with a mat; and if they have a wall, one</b> may <b>not roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> with <b>them</b> because the upturned edge renders it a receptacle susceptible to ritual impurity.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC