
### Part 1
It is stated: <b>“The land will eulogize, each family separately; the family of the house of David separately, and their women separately,</b> the family of the house of Nathan separately, and their women separately” (Zechariah 12:12). This indicates that at the end of days a great eulogy will be organized during which men and women will be separate. <b>They said: And are</b> these <b>matters not</b> inferred <b><i>a fortiori</i>? If in the future,</b> at the end of days referred to in this prophecy, <b>when</b> people <b>are involved in</b> a great <b>eulogy and</b> consequently <b>the evil inclination does not dominate them,</b> as typically during mourning inappropriate thoughts and conduct are less likely, and nevertheless <b>the Torah says: Men separately and women separately;</b> then <b>now that they are involved in</b> the <b>Celebration</b> of the Drawing of the Water, <b>and</b> as such <b>the evil inclination dominates them,</b> since celebration lends itself to levity, <b>all the more so</b> should men and women be separate.

### Part 2
Apropos the eulogy at the end of days, the Gemara asks: For <b>what is the nature of this eulogy?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Dosa and the Rabbis disagree concerning this</b> matter. <b>One said</b> that this eulogy is <b>for Messiah ben Yosef who was killed</b> in the war of Gog from the land of Magog prior to the ultimate redemption with the coming of Messiah ben David. <b>And one said</b> that this eulogy is <b>for the evil inclination that was killed.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that the lament is for <b>Messiah ben Yosef who was killed, this</b> would be the meaning of that <b>which is written</b> in that context: <b>“And they shall look unto Me because they have thrust him through; and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son”</b> (Zechariah 12:10). <b>However, according to the one who said</b> that the eulogy is <b>for the evil inclination that was killed,</b> does one <b>need to conduct a eulogy</b> for <b>this?</b> On the contrary, <b>one should conduct a celebration. Why,</b> then, <b>did they cry?</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: This can be understood <b>as Rabbi Yehuda taught: In the future,</b> at the end of days, <b>God will bring the evil inclination and slaughter it in the presence of the righteous and in the presence of the wicked.</b> For <b>the righteous</b> the evil inclination <b>appears to them as a high mountain, and</b> for <b>the wicked</b> it <b>appears</b> to <b>them as</b> a mere <b>strand of hair. These weep and those weep. The righteous weep and say: How were we able to overcome so high a mountain? And the wicked weep and say: How were we unable to overcome this strand of hair? And even the Holy One, Blessed be He, will wonder with them, as it is stated</b> with regard to the eulogy: <b>“So says the Lord of hosts: If it be wondrous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, it should also be wondrous in My eyes”</b> (Zechariah 8:6).

### Part 5
Apropos the evil inclination and the battle against it, the Gemara cites that which <b>Rav Asi said: Initially,</b> when it begins to entice someone, <b>the evil inclination is like a strand of a spider’s web [<i>bukhya</i>]; and ultimately it is like</b> the thick <b>ropes of a wagon, as it is stated: “Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as if it were with a wagon rope”</b> (Isaiah 5:18). Initially, the enticement is almost imperceptible, like a thin strand; however, after one sins, it is like wagon ropes tied tightly around him.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught: To Messiah ben David, who is destined to be revealed swiftly in our time, the Holy One, Blessed be He, says: Ask of Me anything and I will give you</b> whatever you wish, <b>as it is stated: “I will tell of the decree;</b> the Lord said unto me: You are My son, <b>this day have I begotten you, ask of Me, and I will give the nations for your inheritance,</b> and the ends of the earth for your possession” (Psalms 2:7–8). <b>Once</b> the Messiah ben David <b>saw Messiah ben Yosef, who was killed, he says</b> to the Holy One, Blessed be He: <b>Master of the Universe, I ask of you only life;</b> that I will not suffer the same fate. The Holy One, Blessed be He, <b>says to him: Life?</b> Even <b>before you stated</b> this request, <b>your father, David, already prophesied about you</b> with regard to this matter precisely, <b>as it is stated: “He asked life of You, You gave it to him;</b> even length of days for ever and ever” (Psalms 21:5).

### Part 7
§ <b>Rabbi Avira, and some say Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, taught: The evil inclination has seven names. The Holy One, Blessed be He, called it evil, as it is stated: “For the inclination of a man’s heart is evil from his youth”</b> (Genesis 8:21). <b>Moses called it uncircumcised, as it is stated: “And circumcise the foreskin of your hearts”</b> (Deuteronomy 10:16). <b>David called it impure, as it is stated: “Create for me a pure heart, O God”</b> (Psalms 51:12); <b>by inference, there is an impure</b> heart that is the evil inclination.

### Part 8
<b>Solomon called it enemy, as it is stated: “If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink; for you will heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Lord will reward you”</b> (Proverbs 25:21–22). <b>Do not read</b> it as: <b>And the Lord will reward you [<i>yeshalem lakh</i>]; rather</b> read it as: And the Lord <b>will reconcile it to you [<i>yashlimenu lakh</i>].</b> God will cause the evil inclination to love you and no longer seek to entice you to sin.

### Part 9
<b>Isaiah called it a stumbling block, as it is stated: “And He will say: Cast you up, cast you up, clear the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of My people”</b> (Isaiah 57:14). <b>Ezekiel called it stone, as it is stated: “And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh”</b> (Ezekiel 36:26). <b>Joel called it hidden one, as it says: “But I will remove the northern one [<i>hatzefoni</i>] far off from you”</b> (Joel 2:20). <b>The Sages taught</b> concerning the verse: <b>“But I will remove the northern one [<i>hatzefoni</i>] far off from you,”</b> that <b>this is</b> referring to <b>the evil inclination.</b> And why is the evil inclination referred to as <i>tzefoni</i>? It is due to the fact <b>that it is always hidden [<i>tzafun</i>] in the heart of man.</b>

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues interpreting the verse in the book of Joel. <b>“And will drive it to a land barren and desolate”</b> (Joel 2:20), <b>where there are no people for</b> the evil inclination <b>to incite.</b> And what damage does the evil inclination cause? <b>“With its face toward the eastern [<i>hakadmoni</i>] sea”</b> (Joel 2:20), <b>as it set its eyes on the First</b> [<b><i>mukdam</i></b>] <b>Temple and destroyed it, and killed the Torah scholars that</b> were <b>in it; “and its end toward the western [<i>ha’aḥaron</i>] sea”</b> (Joel 2:20), <b>as it set its eyes on the Second</b> [<b><i>aḥaron</i></b>] <b>Temple and destroyed it, and killed the Torah scholars that</b> were <b>in it; “its foulness may come up, and its ill odor may come up”</b> (Joel 2:20), <b>as it forsakes the nations of the world and incites the enemies of</b> the <b>Jewish people:</b> In this context, the term the nations is a euphemism for the Jewish people. The evil inclination seeks to corrupt the Jews more than it does the members of any other nation. <b>“Because it has done greatly”</b> (Joel 2:20): <b>Abaye said: And</b> it provokes <b>Torah scholars more than</b> it provokes <b>everyone</b> else.

### Part 11
The Gemara illustrates that point. It is <b>like this</b> incident, <b>as Abaye once heard a certain man say to a certain woman: Let us rise early and go on the road.</b> Upon hearing this, Abaye <b>said</b> to himself: <b>I will go</b> and accompany them and <b>prevent them from</b> violating <b>the prohibition</b> that they certainly intend to violate. <b>He went after them</b> for a distance of <b>three parasangs in a marsh</b> among the reeds, while they walked on the road, and they did not engage in any wrongful activity. <b>When they were taking leave of each other, he heard that they were saying:</b> We traveled <b>a long distance</b> together, <b>and the company was pleasant company.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Abaye said:</b> In that situation, <b>if</b> instead of that man <b>it had been one whom I hate,</b> a euphemism for himself, <b>he would not have been able to restrain himself</b> from sinning. After becoming aware of so great a shortcoming <b>he went and leaned against the doorpost,</b> thinking <b>and feeling regret. A certain Elder came</b> and <b>taught him: Anyone who is greater than another, his</b> evil <b>inclination is greater than his.</b> Therefore, Abaye should not feel regret, as his realization is a consequence of his greatness.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: A person’s inclination overcomes him each day, as it is stated: “Only</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC