
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A <i>sukka</i> that is <i>meduvlelet</i> and whose shade exceeds its sunlight is fit.</b> A <i>sukka</i> whose roofing <b>is thick like a house of sorts, even though</b> it is so thick <b>that the stars cannot be seen from within it, is fit.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b><i>meduvlelet</i>? Rav said:</b> It means <b>an impoverished <i>sukka</i>,</b> i.e., a <i>sukka</i> whose roofing is sparse, although at no point in the roofing is there a gap of three handbreadths. <b>And Shmuel said:</b> It means that the roofing is aligned with one <b>reed ascending and</b> one <b>reed descending.</b> There are two layers of roofing, with each reed on the upper layer situated directly above the space between each reed on the lower level.

### Part 3
The Gemara explains: <b>Rav taught</b> the first clause in the mishna as <b>one</b> <i>halakha</i>, <b>and Shmuel taught</b> that clause as <b>two</b> <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Rav taught one</b> <i>halakha</i>: The <i>halakha</i> of <b>a <i>sukka meduvlelet</i>.</b> And <b>what is</b> a <i>sukka <b>meduvlelet</b></i><b>?</b> It is a <b>sparse</b> <i>sukka</i>. Nevertheless, as long <b>as the shade exceeds the sunlight</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is fit. And Shmuel taught two</b> <i>halakhot</i>. <b>What is</b> a <i>sukka <b>meduvlelet</b></i><b>?</b> It is a <b>disordered</b> <i>sukka</i>. <b>And he teaches two</b> <i>halakhot</i>: <b>A disordered <i>sukka</i> is fit, and one whose shade exceeds its sunlight is fit.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said: They taught</b> that a <i>sukka</i> with two layers of roofing is fit <b>only</b> in a case <b>where there is not</b> a gap of at least <b>three handbreadths between</b> the top and bottom layers. <b>However,</b> if <b>there is</b> a gap of <b>three handbreadths between them it is unfit. Rava said: Even</b> if <b>there is</b> a gap of <b>three handbreadths between them, we say</b> that the two layers of roofing are not considered joined <b>only</b> in a case <b>where there is not</b> the width of <b>a handbreadth in its</b> upper <b>roof. However,</b> if <b>there is</b> the width of <b>a handbreadth in its</b> upper <b>roof,</b> even if the gap between them is three handbreadths, the <i>sukka</i> <b>is fit, because we say</b> that the principle: <b>Lower and cast</b> down the upper level of the <i>sukka</i> roofing down to the level of the lower <i>sukka</i> roofing, applies here.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said: From where do I</b> learn to <b>say that when there is a handbreadth</b> of width <b>in its</b> roof, <b>we say</b> that the principle <b>lower and cast</b> applies, <b>and when there is not a handbreadth in its</b> roof, <b>we do not say</b> that the principle <b>lower and cast</b> applies? Rava learns this from the <i>halakha</i> of impurity imparted by a corpse, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>the boards</b> of the ceiling of the first floor <b>of the house and of the second story that do not have plaster on them,</b> so that each of the boards is considered a separate entity, <b>and</b> the boards of each <b>are aligned</b> so that the boards of the ceiling of the second story are directly above the boards of the house: If there is a source of <b>ritual impurity</b> imparted by a corpse <b>beneath one of</b> the lower boards, any object that is directly <b>beneath</b> that board <b>is</b> rendered <b>impure</b> by means of a tent over a corpse. However, any object that is above the board or off to the side remains pure.

### Part 6
If the source of impurity is in the airspace of the second story <b>between the lower and upper</b> boards, any object <b>between</b> the two boards <b>is impure;</b> however, any object beneath the lower board or above the upper board or off to the side remains pure. If the source of impurity is <b>atop the upper board,</b> any object <b>aligned</b> with the source of impurity even <b>up to the heavens is impure.</b> However, if <b>the upper</b> boards <b>are</b> spaced <b>between the lower</b> boards, if the source of <b>impurity</b> is <b>beneath</b> any of the boards within the house, any object that is <b>beneath any of</b> the boards is <b>impure,</b> as the legal status of the roof is as though the upper boards were lowered to the level of the lower boards, and the result is one continuous ceiling. If the source of impurity is <b>above them,</b> i.e., above the top boards, any object <b>aligned</b> with the source of impurity even <b>up to the heavens is impure.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And it is taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i> elaborating <b>on this</b> mishna: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is only <b>when</b> these boards <b>have</b> the width of <b>a handbreadth, and between them</b> is the <b>space of a handbreadth. However,</b> if the boards are close together and there isn’t even the <b>space of a handbreadth between them,</b> then if the source of <b>impurity</b> is directly <b>beneath one of</b> the boards, only objects in the space <b>beneath it is impure,</b> while an object <b>between</b> the two layers of boards <b>and atop them</b> remains <b>pure. Apparently, when there is a handbreadth</b> in the upper layer, <b>we say lower and cast</b> the upper <i>sukka</i> roofing down to the level of the lower <i>sukka</i> roofing. <b>And when there is not</b> even <b>a handbreadth</b> in the upper layer, <b>we do not say lower and cast</b> the upper <i>sukka</i> roofing down. Indeed, <b>conclude from here</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Kahana sat</b> in the study hall <b>and stated this <i>halakha</i></b> of Rava, that in a case where the upper <i>sukka</i> roofing is a handbreadth wide, even if the gap between the two layers of roofing is greater than three handbreadths, they are considered attached. <b>Rav Ashi said to Rav Kahana:</b> Is it so that <b>wherever there is not</b> the width of <b>a handbreadth, we do not say lower and cast?</b>

### Part 9
<b>Isn’t it taught in</b> the <i>Tosefta</i> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of the merging of alleyways that one of the means of rendering carrying in a closed alleyway permitted on Shabbat is by placing a beam one handbreadth wide over the entrance of the alleyway within twenty cubits but no less than ten handbreadths off the ground? With regard to a cross <b>beam that projects from this wall</b> of an alleyway <b>but does not touch the other</b> opposite <b>wall, and similarly,</b> with regard to <b>two</b> cross <b>beams, one projecting from this wall and one projecting from the other</b> opposite <b>wall, and they do not touch each other,</b> if there is a gap of <b>less than three</b> handbreadths between the beam and the wall, or between the two beams respectively, <b>one need not bring another</b> cross <b>beam</b> to render the alleyway fit for a person to carry within it. This is because they are considered joined based on the principle of <i>lavud</i>. However, if there is a gap of <b>three</b> handbreadths, <b>one must bring another</b> cross <b>beam.</b>

### Part 10
However, <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel,</b> who holds that the principle of <i>lavud</i> applies to a gap of up to four handbreadths wide, <b>says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC