
### Part 1
<b>By Torah law,</b> if there is an interposition between a person and the water, and it covers <b>the majority</b> of <b>his</b> body, <b>and he is particular about it</b> and wants the interposing substance removed, only then <b>is it</b> considered <b>an interposition</b> that invalidates immersion in a ritual bath. <b>However, if he is not particular about</b> that substance, <b>it is not</b> considered <b>an interposition.</b> The Sages, however, <b>issued a decree</b> that it is prohibited to immerse with a substance covering <b>the majority</b> of <b>one’s</b> body with regard to <b>which he is not particular, due to</b> substances covering <b>the majority</b> of <b>one’s</b> body with regard to <b>which he is particular. And,</b> they issued a decree that it is prohibited to immerse with a substance covering <b>the minority</b> of <b>his</b> body with regard to <b>which one is particular, due to</b> substances covering <b>the majority</b> of <b>his</b> body with regard to <b>which one is particular.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a question: Then <b>let us also issue a decree</b> deeming substances covering <b>the minority</b> of <b>one’s</b> body with regard to <b>which he is not particular</b> an interposition, <b>due to</b> substances covering <b>the minority</b> of <b>his</b> body with regard to <b>which he is particular, or alternatively, due to</b> substances covering <b>the majority</b> of <b>his</b> body with regard to <b>which he is not particular.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: We do not issue that decree because the <i>halakha</i> that deems both an interposition covering the minority of his body about which one is particular and an interposition covering the majority of his body about which one is not particular an interposition <b>is itself a decree. Shall we</b> then <b>arise and issue</b> one <b>decree to</b> prevent violation of another <b>decree?</b> In any case, these details with regard to interpositions are neither written nor alluded to in the Torah; rather, they are <i>halakhot</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai.

### Part 4
The <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai that the minimum height for <b>partitions</b> is ten handbreadths <b>is as we stated</b> earlier. The Gemara asks: <b>This</b> works out <b>well</b> according <b>to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that there is no verse in the Torah from which this <i>halakha</i> can be derived, as he therefore concludes that it is a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai. <b>However, according to Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that all of the cubits in the Temple consist of six handbreadths and therefore the measure of ten handbreadths can be derived from verses in the Torah, <b>what is there to say?</b> What is the <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai with regard to partitions?

### Part 5
<b>When the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses <b>comes</b> to teach, it is with regard <b>to</b> other <i>halakhot</i> concerning partitions, e.g., the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>extending</b> [<b><i>gode</i>],</b> according to which an existing partition is extended upward or downward to complete the requisite measure; <b>and</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>joining [<i>lavud</i>],</b> according to which two solid surfaces are joined if they are separated by a gap of less than three handbreadths; <b>and</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>a curved wall</b> of a <i>sukka</i>. A <i>sukka</i> is fit even if there are up to four cubits of unfit roofing, provided that this roofing is adjacent to one of the walls of the <i>sukka</i>. In that case, the unfit roofing is considered a bent extension of the wall. These concepts are certainly not written in the Torah.

### Part 6
§ Among the factors listed in the mishna that render a <i>sukka</i> unfit is: <b>And</b> one <b>that does not have three walls.</b>

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: In order to construct a fit <i>sukka</i>, <b>two</b> of the walls must be walls <b>in the standard sense,</b> sealing the entire length and height of the <i>sukka</i>, <b>and the third</b> wall may be <b>even</b> one <b>handbreadth</b> long. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: Three</b> of the walls must be walls <b>in the standard sense, and the fourth</b> wall may be <b>even</b> one <b>handbreadth</b> long.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> principle do <b>they disagree? The Rabbis hold: The tradition</b> of the manner in which the verses in the Torah are written <b>is authoritative,</b> and one derives <i>halakhot</i> based on the spelling of the words. <b>And Rabbi Shimon holds: The vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative,</b> meaning that one derives <i>halakhot</i> based on the pronunciation of the words, although it diverges from the spelling.

### Part 9
With regard to <i>sukka</i>, <b>the Rabbis hold: The tradition</b> of the verses <b>is authoritative,</b> as the word <i>basukkot</i> is written three times in the context of the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>. It is written twice in the verse: <b>“In <i>sukkot</i> [<i>basukkot</i>]</b> shall you reside seven days; all that are home-born in Israel shall reside <b>in <i>sukkot</i> [<i>basukkot</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 23:42). In both of these instances, the word in Hebrew is spelled without a <i>vav</i>, as are Hebrew words in the singular. And one time it is written with a <i>vav</i>, as are Hebrew words in the plural: “So that your future generations will know that I caused the children of Israel to reside <b>in <i>sukkot</i> [<i>basukkot</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 23:43). <b>There is</b> mention <b>here</b> of <i>sukka</i> <b>four</b> times, two singular plus one plural hinted at here in these verses.

### Part 10
<b>Subtract one to</b> teach the mitzva of <i>sukka</i> <b>itself, and three remain.</b> These three remaining <i>sukkot</i> teach that the <i>sukka</i> requires three walls; <b>two</b> of the three are walls <b>in the standard sense,</b> and <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai <b>comes and reduces the</b> dimension of the <b>third and establishes it as</b> one <b>handbreadth.</b> That tradition teaches that one wall need not be any longer than one handbreadth.

### Part 11
On the other hand, <b>Rabbi Shimon holds: The vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative.</b> Therefore, although two of the instances are written without a <i>vav</i>, since they are all vocalized in the plural, <b><i>basukkot</i>, <i>basukkot</i>, <i>basukkot</i>, there is</b> mention <b>here</b> of <i>sukka</i> <b>six times</b> in these two verses. <b>Subtract one verse to</b> teach the mitzva of the <i>sukka</i> <b>itself, and</b> two mentions of <i>basukkot</i>, which equal <b>four</b> <i>sukkot</i>, <b>remain</b> and teach that the <i>sukka</i> requires four walls. <b>Three</b> of the walls are walls <b>in the standard sense, and the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses from Sinai <b>comes and reduces the</b> dimension of the <b>fourth and establishes it as</b> one <b>handbreadth.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone agrees</b> that <b>the vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative, and here,</b> it is <b>with regard to this that they disagree: One Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that to derive <b>its roofing requires a verse;</b> therefore, only three of the original six <i>sukkot</i> remain from which walls can be derived. The <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai reduces the dimension of one of the three walls to one handbreadth. <b>And one Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds</b> that to derive <b>its roofing does not require a verse,</b> as the essence of <i>sukka</i> is its roofing. No additional source beyond the verse from which the mitzva of <i>sukka</i> is derived is required for the roofing. Therefore, walls are derived from four of the six <i>sukkot</i> Three full-fledged walls and a fourth measuring one handbreadth.

### Part 13
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone agrees</b> that <b>the tradition</b> of the verses <b>is authoritative, and here,</b> it is <b>with regard to this that they disagree: One Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds: When the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses <b>comes</b> to teach, it is <b>to reduce</b> to one handbreadth the dimension of one of the three walls derived from the verses. <b>And one Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds: When the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses <b>comes</b> to teach, it is <b>to add</b> another wall to the three walls derived from the verses; however, the dimension of that fourth wall may be one handbreadth.

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead <b>that everyone agrees</b> that <b>when the <i>halakha</i></b> transmitted to Moses <b>comes</b> to teach, it is <b>to reduce</b> the dimension of one of the three walls. And everyone agrees that <b>the tradition</b> of the verses <b>is authoritative,</b> and there are four mentions of <i>sukka</i> in the verse. <b>And here</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> whether <b>one derives</b> numbers for halakhic matters from the <b>first</b> mention of a term in the Torah that <b>they disagree.</b> When that total is derived from the number of instances a certain word appears in the Torah, there is a dispute whether the first instance is included in the tally, or whether the first instance is necessary to teach the mitzva itself and the number may be counted only from subsequent mentions. One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds</b> that <b>one derives</b> numbers from the <b>first</b> mention and therefore four walls derived from the verses. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>one does not derive</b> numbers from the <b>first</b> mention, and therefore only three walls are derived from the verses.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Mattana said</b> that the <b>rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon</b> is derived <b>from here: “And there shall be a <i>sukka</i> for shade in the daytime from the heat, and for refuge and cover from storm and from rain”</b> (Isaiah 4:6). A <i>sukka</i> without three full-fledged walls does not provide shelter nor serve as refuge.

### Part 16
§ The Gemara asks: According to the opinion that a <i>sukka</i> can be built with two full-fledged walls and a third that is one handbreadth, <b>where does one position that</b> third wall that measures one <b>handbreadth? Rav said: He positions it</b> at the end of one of the standing walls <b>opposite</b> the wall <b>that emerges</b> from the other end of that wall.

### Part 17
<b>Rav Kahana and Rav Asi said to Rav:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC