
### Part 1
<b>One</b> may <b>not depart from</b> one <b><i>sukka</i> to</b> another <b><i>sukka</i>;</b> he must reside in the same <i>sukka</i> for the entire Festival. <b>And one</b> may <b>not establish a <i>sukka</i> during the intermediate days of the Festival</b> if he failed to do so before the Festival. <b>And the Rabbis say: One</b> may <b>depart from</b> one <b><i>sukka</i> to</b> another <b><i>sukka</i>, and one</b> may <b>establish a <i>sukka</i> on the intermediate days of the Festival. And they</b> all, even Rabbi Eliezer, <b>agree that if</b> a <i>sukka</i> that one constructed before the Festival <b>collapsed, he</b> may <b>rebuild it during the intermediate days of the Festival.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Eliezer</b> that it is prohibited to move from one <i>sukka</i> to another during the Festival? The Gemara explains it is as <b>the verse says: “You shall prepare for yourself the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> for seven days”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:13); this is interpreted to mean: <b>Establish a <i>sukka</i> that is suitable for seven</b> days. It is considered a <i>sukka</i> suitable for the mitzva only if it is established for seven days. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis</b> interpret this verse? The Gemara answers: In their opinion, <b>this</b> is what the <b>Merciful One is saying:</b> If one did not establish a <i>sukka</i> on the eve of the Festival, he should <b>establish a <i>sukka</i> during the Festival.</b> The obligation to establish a <i>sukka</i> is in effect all seven days of the Festival.

### Part 3
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And they agree that if</b> a <i>sukka</i> that one constructed before the Festival <b>collapsed, he may rebuild it during the intermediate days of the Festival.</b> The Gemara asks: That is <b>obvious;</b> why would it be prohibited? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that according to Rabbi Eliezer <b>this</b> rebuilt <i>sukka</i> <b>is</b> considered <b>a different one and is not</b> a <i>sukka</i> established for <b>seven</b> days, therefore, the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches us</b> that Rabbi Eliezer agrees that it is considered to be the same <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 4
<b>It is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Just as a person does not fulfill his obligation on the first day of the Festival with the <i>lulav</i> of another, as it is written: “And you shall take for yourselves on the first day the fruit of a beautiful tree, branches of a date palm”</b> (Leviticus 23:40), and the Sages derive from the phrase: Shall take for yourselves, that it must be taken <b>from your own</b> and not from that of someone else, <b>so too, a person does not fulfill his obligation with the <i>sukka</i> of another, as it is written: “You shall prepare for yourself the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> for seven days”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:13), and the Sages derive from the term “for yourself” that it must be taken <b>from your own.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And the Rabbis say: Although they said</b> that <b>a person does not fulfill his obligation on the first day of the Festival with the <i>lulav</i> of another, he fulfills his obligation with the <i>sukka</i> of another, as it is written: “All the homeborn in Israel shall reside in <i>sukkot</i>”</b> (Leviticus 23:42). This <b>teaches that all of the Jewish people are fit to reside in one <i>sukka</i>.</b> If the value of one <i>sukka</i> were divided among all the Jewish people, no individual would have a <i>peruta</i> stake in it; therefore, no individual could be considered even a part-owner of the <i>sukka</i>. The only way the entire Jewish people could fulfill the mitzva in one <i>sukka</i> is by residing in a communal <i>sukka</i> that does not belong to any of them. Apparently, there is no obligation to reside specifically in one’s own <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> who do not derive that one is obligated to reside in his own <i>sukka</i>, <b>what do they derive from this</b> term <b>“for yourself”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They require</b> that term <b>to exclude a stolen</b> <i>sukka</i>. One does not fulfill his obligation with a stolen <i>sukka</i>. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>a borrowed</b> <i>sukka</i>, <b>it is written: “All the homeborn,”</b> to teach that every Jew can fulfill the mitzva in a <i>sukka</i> borrowed from the community.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Eliezer, what does he do with this</b> term: <b>“All the homeborn”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He requires</b> that term <b>to</b> derive that <b>a convert who converted in the interim,</b> during <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>and a minor who reached majority in the interim,</b> whose obligation began during the Festival, are obligated to fulfill the mitzva of residing in a <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>the Rabbis,</b> from where are these <i>halakhot</i> derived? The Gemara answers: <b>Once</b> the Sages <b>said</b> that <b>one</b> may <b>establish a <i>sukka</i> during the intermediate days of the Festival,</b> an additional <b>verse</b> is <b>not necessary</b> to derive the obligation of the convert and the minor who reached majority.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving Rabbi Elai, who went</b> on <i>Sukkot</i> eve <b>to greet his teacher Rabbi Eliezer in Lod on</b> the first day of <b>the Festival. He said to him: Elai, you are not among</b> those who <b>stay</b> home <b>on the Festival</b> and therefore you have not fulfilled the mitzva of the Festival, <b>as Rabbi Eliezer would say: I praise the lazy, who,</b> although they act no differently than they do the entire year, are praiseworthy because they <b>do not leave their houses on the Festival, as it is written: “You shall rejoice, you and your household”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:26). The term “your household” is interpreted as referring to one’s wife. One who is not home cannot rejoice with his wife.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? Didn’t Rabbi Yitzḥak say: From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> one <b>is obligated to greet his teacher on the Festival?</b> It is <b>as it is stated</b> that the husband of the Shunamite woman asked his wife: <b>“Why are you going to him today? It is neither the New Moon nor Shabbat”</b> (II Kings 4:23). This proves <b>by inference that on the New Moon and Shabbat a person is obligated to greet his teacher.</b> The Gemara answers that this is <b>not difficult: This</b> statement of Rabbi Yitzḥak that one is obligated to go and greet his teacher is referring to a case <b>where he goes and returns on</b> the same <b>day</b> and can rejoice with his wife at night; <b>and this</b> statement of Rabbi Eliezer that one should stay home is referring to a case <b>where he goes and does not return on</b> the same <b>day</b> and cannot rejoice with his wife at night.

### Part 10
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident</b> involving <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who stayed in the Upper Galilee in the <i>sukka</i> of Yoḥanan, son of Rabbi Elai, in Caesarea; and some say that</b> it did not occur in Caesarea but <b>in Caesarion. And</b> the <b>sun reached</b> a point over the roofing <b>of the <i>sukka</i>,</b> rendering it uncomfortable to remain in the <i>sukka</i>. Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>; may <b>I spread a sheet over</b> the roofing? Is it permitted, since it is only adding to a temporary tent or is it prohibited? Rabbi Eliezer evaded the question and <b>said to him: There is no tribe of Israel from which a judge did not emerge.</b>

### Part 11
In the meantime, the <b>sun reached</b> directly over the <b>midpoint</b> of the roofing <b>of the <i>sukka</i>.</b> Once again, Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i>; may <b>I spread a sheet over it?</b> Rabbi Eliezer again evaded the question and <b>said to him: There is no tribe of Israel from which prophets did not emerge.</b> And <b>the tribes of Judah and Benjamin</b> were unique because <b>they established kings according to prophets,</b> as Saul and David were anointed by the prophet Samuel. At that point, the light of the <b>sun reached the feet of Rabbi Eliezer. Yoḥanan took a sheet and spread it over</b> the <i>sukka</i>. <b>Rabbi Eliezer slung his cloak</b> over his shoulder <b>behind him and emerged</b> from the <i>sukka</i> because he did not want to permit doing so. The Gemara comments: Rabbi Eliezer conducted himself in that manner <b>not because he was</b> seeking <b>to</b> avoid answering by <b>diverting his</b> attention <b>with</b> his <b>words, but because</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>never said a matter that he did not hear from his teacher.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>How did</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>do so?</b> How did he stay in a <i>sukka</i> in the Upper Galilee on the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Eliezer</b> himself <b>say: One may not depart from</b> one <b><i>sukka</i> to</b> another <b><i>sukka</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: The incident <b>was</b> on <b>a different Festival</b> and not the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, and they were in the <i>sukka</i> merely for the fresh air.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks from a different perspective: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Eliezer say: I praise the lazy, who do not leave their houses on the Festival?</b> That apparently applies to all Festivals. The Gemara answers: The incident did not take place on a Festival at all. <b>It was</b> on <b>Shabbat,</b> and Rabbi Yoḥanan’s question was with regard to the prohibited labor of building on Shabbat.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: If so, <b>resolve</b> the matter and conclude that it is not permitted <b>from his own</b> opinion, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>a window shutter</b> on Shabbat, <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: When it is tied</b> to <b>and hanging</b> from the window, i.e., it is not touching the ground, <b>one may shutter</b> the window <b>with it,</b> because that is not considered building; <b>and if not,</b> i.e., if it is touching the ground, <b>one may not shutter</b> the window <b>with it. And the Rabbis say: Both</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>and</b> in <b>that</b> case <b>one may shutter with it.</b> From the fact that if it is not hanging from the window, Rabbi Eliezer prohibits shuttering the window, he also prohibits adding to a temporary tent.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC