
### Part 1
with <b>two thin</b> perforated <b>nose-like</b> protrusions. <b>One</b> of the basins, used for the wine libation, had a perforation that was <b>broad, and one,</b> used for the water libation, had a perforation that was <b>thin, so that</b> the flow of <b>both</b> the water and the wine, which do not have the same viscosity, would <b>conclude simultaneously.</b> The basin to the <b>west of</b> the altar was <b>for water,</b> and the basin to the <b>east of</b> the altar was <b>for wine.</b> However, if <b>one poured</b> the contents of the basin <b>of water into</b> the basin <b>of wine, or</b> the contents of the basin <b>of wine into</b> the basin <b>of water, he fulfilled</b> his obligation, as failure to pour the libation from the prescribed location does not disqualify the libation after the fact.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The basin for the water libation was not that large; rather, <b>one would pour</b> the water <b>with</b> a vessel that had a capacity of <b>one <i>log</i></b> on <b>all eight</b> days of the Festival and not only seven. <b>And</b> the appointee <b>says to the one pouring</b> the water into the silver basin: <b>Raise your hand,</b> so that his actions would be visible, <b>as one time</b> a Sadducee priest intentionally <b>poured</b> the water <b>on his feet,</b> as the Sadducees did not accept the oral tradition requiring water libation, and in their rage <b>all the people pelted him with their <i>etrogim</i>.</b>

### Part 3
Rabbi Yehuda continues: <b>As its performance during the week, so is its performance on Shabbat, except</b> that on Shabbat one would not draw water. Instead, <b>on Shabbat eve, one would fill a golden barrel that was not consecrated</b> for exclusive use in the Temple <b>from the Siloam</b> pool, <b>and he</b> would <b>place it in the</b> Temple <b>chamber</b> and draw water from there on Shabbat. If the water in the barrel <b>spilled,</b> or if it <b>was exposed</b> overnight, leading to concern that a snake may have deposited poison in the water, <b>one would fill</b> the jug with water <b>from the basin</b> in the Temple courtyard, <b>as exposed wine or water is unfit for the altar.</b> Just as it is prohibited for people to drink them due to the potential danger, so too, they may not be poured on the altar.

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the customs accompanying the drawing of the water, the Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>Rav Eina said</b> that it is <b>as the verse states: “With joy [<i>sason</i>] you shall draw water</b> out of the springs of salvation” (Isaiah 12:3), indicating that the water was to be drawn from the spring and the rite performed in extreme joy.

### Part 5
Apropos this verse, the Gemara relates: There were <b>these two heretics, one named Sason and one named Simḥa. Sason said to Simḥa: I am superior to you, as it is written: “They shall obtain joy [<i>sason</i>] and happiness [<i>simḥa</i>],</b> and sorrow and sighing shall flee” (Isaiah 35:10). The verse mentions joy first. <b>Simḥa said to Sason,</b> On the contrary, <b>I am superior to you, as it is written: “There was happiness [<i>simḥa</i>] and joy [<i>sason</i>] for the Jews”</b> (Esther 8:17). <b>Sason said to Simḥa: One day they will dismiss you and render you a messenger [<i>parvanka</i>], as it is written: “For you shall go out with happiness [<i>simḥa</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 55:12). <b>Simḥa said to Sason: One day they will dismiss you and draw water with you, as it is written: “With joy [<i>sason</i>] you shall draw water.”</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara relates a similar incident: <b>A certain heretic named Sason said to Rabbi Abbahu: You are</b> all <b>destined to draw water for me in the World-to-Come, as it is written: “With <i>sason</i> you shall draw water.”</b> Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him: If it had been written: For <i>sason</i>,</b> it would have been <b>as you say; now that it is written: With <i>sason</i>,</b> it means that <b>the skin of that man,</b> you, <b>will be rendered a wineskin, and we will draw water with it.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna continues: The priest <b>ascended the ramp</b> of the altar <b>and turned to his left. The Sages taught: All who ascend the altar ascend</b> and turn <b>via</b> the <b>right, and circle</b> the altar, <b>and descend via</b> the <b>left.</b> This is the case <b>except for one ascending</b> to perform one of <b>these three tasks, as</b> the ones who perform these tasks <b>ascend via</b> the <b>left, and</b> then <b>turn on</b> their <b>heel and return</b> in the direction that they came. <b>And</b> these tasks <b>are: The water libation, and the wine libation, and the bird</b> sacrificed as <b>a burnt-offering when there were</b> too <b>many</b> priests engaged in the sacrifice of these burnt-offerings <b>in the</b> preferred location <b>east</b> of the altar. When that was the case, additional priests engaged in sacrificing the same offering would pinch the neck of the bird west of the altar.

### Part 8
The mishna continues: Rabbi Yehuda said that they were limestone, not silver, basins, <b>but they would blacken</b> due to the wine. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> the basin <b>for wine blackened</b> due to the wine; however, <b>why did the</b> basin <b>for water blacken?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since the Master said</b> in the mishna: However, if <b>one</b> inadvertently <b>poured</b> the contents of the basin <b>of water into</b> the basin <b>of wine or</b> the contents of the basin <b>of wine into</b> the basin <b>of water, he fulfilled</b> his obligation. Then even the basin <b>for water</b> would <b>come to blacken</b> over the course of time as well.

### Part 9
§ The mishna continues: <b>And</b> the two basins were <b>perforated</b> at the bottom with <b>two thin,</b> perforated, <b>nose-like</b> protrusions, one broad and one thin. The Gemara asks: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>the mishna is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda and not</b> with that of <b>the Rabbis, as we learned</b> in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: One would pour</b> the water <b>with</b> a vessel that had a capacity of <b>one <i>log</i></b> on <b>all eight</b> days of the Festival, unlike the wine libation, for which a three-<i>log</i> basin was used. According to his opinion, there is a difference between the capacity of the wine vessel and that of the water vessel; therefore, it is clear why the opening in the wine vessel was broader. <b>As, if</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, they are the same</b> as the capacity of the water basin, three <i>log</i>. Why, then, were there different sized openings?

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> the reason for the different-sized openings is that <b>wine is thick</b> and <b>water is thin,</b> and therefore wine flows more slowly than water. In order to ensure that the emptying of both basins would conclude simultaneously, the wine basin required a wider opening.

### Part 11
<b>So too, it is reasonable</b> to establish that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>as, if</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> unlike the description of the two openings in the mishna as broad and thin, elsewhere he <b>is of</b> the opinion that the openings <b>as wide and narrow, as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: There were two</b> small <b>pipes there, one for water and one for wine. The mouth of</b> the pipe <b>for wine was wide and the mouth of</b> the pipe <b>for water was narrow, so that</b> the emptying of both basins <b>would conclude simultaneously.</b> The disparity between wide and narrow is greater than the disparity between broad and thin, thereby facilitating the simultaneous emptying of the three-<i>log</i> and one-<i>log</i> basins according to Rabbi Yehuda. The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>learn from it</b> that the mishna is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda.

### Part 12
§ The mishna continues: The basin to the <b>west of</b> the altar was <b>for water,</b> and the basin to the east of the altar was for wine, and they would tell the one pouring the water to raise his hand. <b>The Sages taught:</b> There was <b>an incident involving one Sadducee</b> priest <b>who poured</b> the water <b>on his feet,</b> and in anger <b>all the people pelted him with their <i>etrogim</i>. And that day, the horn of the altar was damaged</b> as a result of the pelting and the ensuing chaos. <b>They brought a fistful of salt and sealed</b> the damaged section, <b>not because it rendered</b> the altar <b>fit for the</b> Temple <b>service, but</b> in deference to the altar, <b>so that the altar would not be seen</b> in its <b>damaged</b> state.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC