
### Part 1
<b>holds</b> that which is placed within it, while <b>a full</b> vessel <b>does not hold</b> it. <b>However, the attribute of the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> is: If God adds to someone who is <b>a full vessel</b> in terms of knowledge or good attributes, <b>he holds</b> it; a person who is <b>an empty</b> vessel <b>will not hold</b> it. This is alluded to by the verse where <b>it is stated: “And it shall come to pass, if you will hearken diligently [<i>shamoa tishma</i>] unto</b> the voice of the Lord your God, to observe to do all his commandments” (Deuteronomy 28:1). This verse is interpreted homiletically: <b>If you hearken [<i>shamoa</i>]</b> in the present, <b>you will hearken [<i>tishma</i>]</b> in the future as well; <b>and if not, you will not hearken. Alternatively: If you hearkened to the old,</b> i.e., if you review what you already learned, <b>you will hearken to the new</b> as well. <b>“But if your heart turns away” (</b>Deuteronomy 30:17), <b>you will no longer</b> be able to <b>hearken.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna continues: <b>Immediately</b> after fulfilling the mitzva of taking the four species on the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>children</b> remove their <i>lulavim</i> from the binding and eat their <i>etrogim</i> in an expression of extreme joy. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: It is prohibited</b> to derive benefit from the <b><i>etrog</i> on the seventh</b> day of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>; however, <b>on the eighth</b> day <b>it is permitted. It is prohibited</b> to derive benefit from the <b><i>sukka</i> even on the eighth</b> day. <b>And Reish Lakish said: It is permitted</b> to derive benefit from the <b><i>etrog</i> even on the seventh</b> day, once the mitzva has been fulfilled.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>what do they disagree? One Sage,</b> Reish Lakish, <b>holds</b> that the <i>etrog</i> <b>was set aside for its mitzva;</b> once the mitzva has been fulfilled there is no legal barrier to eating the <i>etrog</i> on the seventh day. <b>And one Sage,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>holds that</b> the <i>etrog</i> <b>was set aside for the entire day.</b> Therefore, one may not derive benefit from it even after he fulfills the mitzva.

### Part 4
<b>Reish Lakish raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> from the mishna: <b>Immediately</b> after fulfilling the mitzva, <b>children remove their <i>lulavim</i></b> from the binding <b>and eat their <i>etrogim</i>. What, is it not</b> that <b>the same is true for</b> <i>etrogim</i> belonging to <b>adults,</b> and it would be permitted to eat those as well? Apparently, it is permitted to derive benefit from the <i>etrog</i> immediately after the mitzva is performed. Rabbi Yoḥanan rejected this: <b>No,</b> the mishna is referring to <b>children specifically,</b> who are not obligated by Torah law to fulfill the mitzva. However, <i>etrogim</i> belonging to adults were set aside for the entire day.

### Part 5
<b>Some say</b> another version of the exchange between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raised an objection to</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish</b> from mishna: <b>Immediately</b> after fulfilling the mitzva, <b>children remove their <i>lulavim</i></b> from the binding <b>and eat their <i>etrogim</i>.</b> One can conclude by inference: <i>Etrogim</i> belonging to <b>children, yes,</b> they may be eaten; <i>etrogim</i> belonging to <b>adults, no,</b> they may not be eaten until the conclusion of the Festival. Reish Lakish responded: <b>The same is true for</b> <i>etrogim</i> belonging to <b>adults,</b> i.e., it would be permitted to eat those as well, <b>and the reason that</b> the mishna <b>is teaching</b> specifically about <i>etrogim</i> belonging to <b>children</b> is that <b>it is teaching the manner</b> in which the <b>matter</b> typically occurs, because children are entertained by eating the <i>etrogim</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: According to Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> who holds that an object set aside for a mitzva is set aside for the entire day, <b>what is different</b> with regard to <b>a <i>sukka</i></b> such that it is prohibited even on the eighth day, and <b>what is different</b> with regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>?</b>

### Part 7
Abaye <b>said to him:</b> With regard to <b>a <i>sukka</i>, it is suitable</b> for use <b>even during twilight</b> at the end of the seventh day, <b>as, if a meal happens to</b> present itself to <b>him</b> at that time, <b>he is required to sit in</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>and eat in</b> the <i>sukka</i>. Therefore, the <i>sukka</i> <b>is set aside</b> for the mitzva <b>for</b> the <b>twilight</b> period, <b>and since it is set aside for</b> the <b>twilight</b> period, <b>it is set aside for the entire eighth day.</b> Since the status of the twilight period is uncertain, it may be the evening of the eighth day, and once it is set aside for the potential start of the eighth day, it is set aside for the entire eighth day. However, with regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>, which,</b> once the mitzva has been fulfilled, <b>is not suitable</b> for use <b>during</b> the <b>twilight</b> period, it is <b>not set aside during</b> the <b>twilight</b> period. Since it was not set aside then, <b>it is not set aside for the entire eighth day.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And Levi said: It is prohibited</b> to use <b>the <i>etrog</i> even on the eighth</b> day. <b>The father of Shmuel said: It is prohibited</b> to use <b>the <i>etrog</i> on the seventh</b> day, <b>and it is permitted on the eighth</b> day. The Gemara notes that ultimately, <b>the father of Shmuel</b> reconsidered his opinion and <b>assumed the opinion of Levi. Rabbi Zeira,</b> however, <b>assumed the opinion of the father of Shmuel, as Rabbi Zeira said:</b> With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i> that was rendered unfit</b> for any reason, <b>it is prohibited to eat it all seven days,</b> as it was set aside for the mitzva until the end of the Festival.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: A person should not transfer ownership of the four species to a child</b> by means of a gift <b>on the first day of the Festival. What is the rationale</b> for this <i>halakha</i>? It is due to the fact with regard to <b>acquisition, a child</b> is able to <b>acquire</b> objects; <b>however,</b> with regard to <b>transferring ownership,</b> he is <b>not</b> able <b>to transfer ownership</b> to others. In other words, a child is legally able to acquire an item given to him, but he does not have the legal cognizance to transfer ownership of an item to another. In this case, if an adult gives the child the four species as a gift before having fulfilled the mitzva himself, the child will be unable to effect the transfer of ownership back to the adult. <b>And</b> in that case, a situation <b>will result</b> where the adult is seeking to <b>fulfill</b> his obligation <b>with a <i>lulav</i> that is not his.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Zeira said: A person should not say to a child: I will give you something, and</b> then <b>not give</b> it <b>to him, because he</b> thereby <b>comes to teach him</b> about <b>lying, as it is stated: “They have taught their tongues to speak lies”</b> (Jeremiah 9:4). One must not accustom a child to fail to honor commitments.

### Part 11
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> other <i>amora’im</i> disagree <b>with regard to</b> the matter of <b>the dispute of Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, as it was stated:</b> If <b>one designated seven <i>etrogim</i> for</b> the <b>seven days</b> of the Festival. <b>Rav said: With each and every one, he fulfills his obligation with it and he</b> may then <b>eat it immediately. And Rav Asi said: With each and every one, he fulfills his obligation with it and he</b> may then <b>eat it the following day. With regard to what</b> principle <b>do they disagree? One Sage,</b> Rav, <b>holds:</b> The <i>etrog</i> <b>was set aside for the mitzva;</b> once the mitzva has been fulfilled it is no longer prohibited to derive benefit from the item. The other <b>Sage,</b> Rav Asi, <b>holds:</b> It <b>was set aside for the entire day.</b> Deriving benefit from the <i>etrog</i> remains prohibited until the end of the day, even after one has fulfilled the mitzva.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And we,</b> who live outside of Eretz Yisrael, <b>who have two days</b> of the Festival due to uncertainty whether the eighth day is actually the seventh day of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>how do we act</b> with regard to deriving benefit from the four species? <b>Abaye said:</b> On the <b>eighth</b> day, with regard to which there is <b>uncertainty</b> that it might be the <b>seventh</b> day, <b>it is prohibited,</b> as due to that uncertainty, the day retains the sanctity of <i>Sukkot</i>. However, on the <b>ninth</b> day, with regard to which there is <b>uncertainty</b> as it might be the <b>eighth</b> day, <b>it is</b> certainly <b>permitted. Mareimar said: Even</b> on the <b>eighth</b> day, with regard to which there is <b>uncertainty</b> that it might be the <b>seventh</b> day, it is <b>permitted.</b> Since that is also the first day of the Eighth Day of Assembly, no vestige of the sanctity of the festival of <i>Sukkot</i> is attached to it.

### Part 13
The Gemara notes: <b>In Sura they acted in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Mareimar</b> and derived benefit from the <i>etrog</i> on the eighth day. <b>Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, acted in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye.</b>

### Part 14
§ Apropos the matter of the Eighth Day of Assembly in the Diaspora, the Gemara notes: <b>Rav Yehuda, son of Rav Shmuel bar Sheilat, said in the name of Rav:</b> Outside of Eretz Yisrael, on <b>the eighth</b> day, with regard to which there is <b>uncertainty</b> that it might be the <b>seventh</b> day of <i>Sukkot</i>, its status is like that of the <b>seventh</b> day with regard <b>to the</b> mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i> and</b> like that of the <b>eighth</b> day with regard <b>to the blessing,</b> i.e., in Grace after Meals, in <i>kiddush</i>, and in the <i>Amida</i> prayer, the Eighth Day of Assembly is mentioned. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> Its status is like that of the <b>eighth</b> day both with regard <b>to this,</b> the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>, <b>and to that,</b> the blessing. The Gemara explains: <b>Everyone,</b> even Rabbi Yoḥanan, <b>agrees that we reside</b> in the <i>sukka</i> on the eighth day, with regard to which there is uncertainty that it might be the seventh day. <b>When they disagree is</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC