
### Part 1
<b>And this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying:</b> With regard to <b>a large mat of reeds,</b> if <b>one produced it for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it, <b>it is susceptible to ritual impurity, and one</b> may <b>not roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it.</b> The <b>reason</b> is that <b>one produced it</b> specifically <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it; however, by inference, a mat that one produced <b>without designation becomes as</b> a mat <b>produced for roofing,</b> and one may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it.</b> With regard to <b>a small mat of reeds,</b> if <b>one produced it for roofing, one</b> may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it.</b> The <b>reason</b> is that <b>one produced it</b> specifically <b>for roofing;</b> however, by inference, a mat that one produced <b>without designation becomes as</b> a mat <b>produced for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it, <b>and</b> one may <b>not roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it. And Rabbi Eliezer comes to say</b> that <b>both a small</b> mat <b>and a large</b> one produced <b>without designation</b> are <b>fit</b> for roofing.

### Part 2
<b>Abaye said to him: If so,</b> if their dispute is only with regard to a small mat, then instead of saying: <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: Both a small</b> mat <b>and a large</b> mat, the mishna <b>needed</b> to say: <b>Both a large</b> mat <b>and a small</b> mat. In a phrase with the format: Both this and that, one typically mentions the more obvious item first. Why then, does Rabbi Eliezer mention the small mat first, if it is with regard to the small mat that they disagree?

### Part 3
<b>And furthermore,</b> there is proof that <b>when they disagree,</b> it <b>is with regard to a large</b> mat, <b>and Rabbi Eliezer’s</b> opinion is <b>a stringency</b> and not a leniency, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a reed mat, with a large</b> mat <b>one</b> may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i>. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: If it is not susceptible to ritual impurity, one</b> may <b>roof</b> his <i>sukka</i> <b>with it.</b> Apparently, Rabbi Eliezer holds that without designation, one may not roof his <i>sukka</i> with a large mat.

### Part 4
<b>Rather, Rav Pappa said:</b> Rava’s proposed resolution is rejected. Rather, <b>with regard to a small</b> mat, <b>everyone agrees that</b> if it was produced <b>without designation,</b> presumably it is <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it. <b>When they disagree, is with regard to a large</b> mat: <b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds</b> that <b>a large</b> mat produced <b>without designation</b> is presumably <b>for roofing, and Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that <b>a large</b> mat produced <b>without designation</b> is <b>also</b> presumably <b>for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it.

### Part 5
<b>What,</b> then, is the meaning of: If <b>one produced it for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it, <b>that</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>states? This is what</b> he <b>is saying: Making mats without designation is also for</b> the purpose of <b>lying</b> upon it, <b>until one makes</b> it specifically <b>for roofing.</b>

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: In the case of <b>a mat [<i>maḥatzelet</i>]</b> woven <b>of papyrus or bulrushes,</b> if it is <b>a large</b> mat, <b>one</b> may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it,</b> as it is not typically produced for the purpose of lying upon it. If it is <b>a small</b> mat, <b>one</b> may <b>not roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it,</b> as it is typically produced for the purpose of lying upon it. However, with regard to a mat produced <b>of</b> ordinary <b>reeds or reeds</b> specifically used <b>for plaiting,</b> if the mat is plaited with <b>a large,</b> coarse weave, <b>one</b> may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i> <b>with it,</b> as it was certainly not produced for the purpose of lying upon it. If it is <b>woven</b> with a small, fine weave, <b>one</b> may <b>not roof</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>with it,</b> as typically mats of this sort are woven only for the purpose of lying upon them.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said in the name of his father: Both with this</b> plaited mat <b>and with that</b> woven mat, <b>one</b> may <b>roof</b> a <i>sukka</i>, as without specific designation otherwise they are not produced for the purpose of lying upon them, and therefore they are ritually pure. <b>And likewise, Rabbi Dosa would say in accordance with his statement.</b>

### Part 8
<b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>there: All</b> types of <b><i>ḥotzalot</i> can become ritually impure</b> with <b>impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse.</b> Since their legal status is that of a vessel, they become a primary source of ritual impurity. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Dosa. And the Rabbis say:</b> They become impure with the impurity imparted by <b>treading.</b> If a <i>zav</i> lies or sits on one of the <i>ḥotzalot</i>, they become a primary source of ritual impurity, like a chair or bed of a <i>zav</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: Impurity imparted by <b>treading, yes; impurity</b> imparted by <b>a corpse, no? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>Any item that becomes ritually impure</b> with impurity imparted <b>by treading</b> also <b>becomes ritually impure</b> with other types of impurity, including impurity <b>imparted by a corpse,</b> although the reverse is not necessarily so. The opinion of the Rabbis is difficult. The Gemara explains: Emend the mishna and <b>say:</b> They become ritually impure <b>even</b> with the impurity imparted by <b>treading.</b> These mats are not merely nondescript vessels, which become primary sources of ritual impurity through exposure to a corpse, they are vessels designated for sitting and lying upon them, and therefore they also become primary sources of ritual impurity if a <i>zav</i> sits or lies upon them.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks about the term used in the mishna: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>ḥotzalot</i>? Rav Avdimi bar Hamduri said:</b> They are <b><i>marzovelei</i>.</b> The Gemara is unfamiliar with the term and asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b><i>marzovelei</i>? Rabbi Abba said:</b> They are called <b><i>mezablei</i></b> in Babylonia. They are leather sacks used by shepherds to feed their animals. Shepherds place them under their heads when lying down. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> <i>Ḥotzalot</i> are a different term for <b>actual mats.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara notes: <b>And Reish Lakish follows his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> stated elsewhere, <b>as Reish Lakish said: I am the atonement for Rabbi Ḥiyya and his sons, as initially, when</b> some of the <b>Torah</b> laws were <b>forgotten from</b> the <b>Jewish people</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>Ezra ascended from Babylonia and reestablished</b> the forgotten laws. Parts of the Torah were <b>again forgotten</b> in Eretz Yisrael, and <b>Hillel the Babylonian ascended and reestablished</b> the forgotten sections. When parts of the Torah were <b>again forgotten</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya and his sons ascended and reestablished</b> the forgotten sections. This expression of deference toward Rabbi Ḥiyya introduces the <i>halakha</i> that Reish Lakish is citing in his name. <b>And so said Rabbi Ḥiyya and his sons: Rabbi Dosa and the Rabbis did not disagree concerning the</b> soft <b>mats of Usha,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC