
### Part 1
<b>“Bind [<i>isru</i>] with dense-leaved branches [<i>ba’avotim</i>] on the Festival until the horns of the altar”</b> (Psalms 118:27), which alludes to both the binding of the <i>lulav</i> and to the myrtle branch, referred to in the Torah as the branch of a dense-leaved tree [<i>anaf etz avot</i>]. <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai, and Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> said <b>in the name of Rabbi Shimon HaMeḥozi,</b> who said <b>in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan HaMakkoti:</b> With regard to <b>anyone who establishes an addition [<i>issur</i>] to the Festival</b> on the day after the Festival <b>by eating and drinking, the verse ascribes him</b> credit <b>as though he built an altar and sacrificed an offering upon it, as it is stated: “Add [<i>isru</i>] to the Festival with fattened animals [<i>ba’avotim</i>] until the horns of the altar.”</b>

### Part 2
§ Apropos the <i>halakha</i> cited by Rabbi Yirmeya in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai, the Gemara cites additional <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Ḥizkiya said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai:</b> With regard to <b>all</b> objects used in performance of <b>each and every</b> one of <b>the mitzvot, a person fulfills his obligation only</b> when the objects are positioned <b>in the manner of their growth.</b> One must take the <i>lulav</i> with the bottom of the branch facing down, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the beams of the Tabernacle: <b>“Acacia wood, standing”</b> (Exodus 26:15), indicating that the beams stood in the manner of their growth.

### Part 3
<b>That was also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“Acacia wood, standing,”</b> indicating <b>that they stand</b> in the Tabernacle <b>in the manner of their growth</b> in nature. <b>Alternatively, standing</b> means <b>that</b> the beams <b>support their</b> gold <b>plating</b> that is affixed to the beams with nails. <b>Alternatively, standing</b> teaches: <b>Lest you say</b> that after the destruction of the Tabernacle <b>their hope is lost and their prospect is abolished,</b> and they will never serve a sacred purpose again, therefore <b>the verse states: “Acacia wood, standing,”</b> meaning <b>that they stand forever and for all time</b> and will yet be revealed and utilized again.

### Part 4
<b>And Ḥizkiya said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: I am able to absolve the entire world from judgment</b> for sins committed <b>from the day I was created until now.</b> The merit that he accrued through his righteousness and the suffering that he endured atone for the sins of the entire world. <b>And were</b> the merit accrued by <b>Eliezer, my son,</b> calculated along <b>with my</b> own, we would absolve the world from judgment for sins committed <b>from the day that the world was created until now. And were</b> the merit accrued by the righteous king, <b>Jotham ben Uzziah,</b> calculated <b>with our</b> own, we would absolve the world from judgment for sins committed <b>from the day that the world was created until its end.</b> The righteousness of these three serves as a counterbalance to all the evil deeds committed throughout the generations, and it validates the ongoing existence of the world.

### Part 5
<b>And Ḥizkiya said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: I have seen members</b> of the caste <b>of</b> the spiritually <b>prominent,</b> who are truly righteous, <b>and they are few. If they</b> number <b>one thousand, I and my son are among them. If they</b> number <b>one hundred, I and my son are among them; and if they</b> number <b>two, I and my son are they.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Are they so few? But didn’t Rava say: There are eighteen thousand</b> righteous individuals <b>in a row before the Holy One, Blessed be He, as it is stated: “Surrounding are eighteen thousand”</b> (Ezekiel 48:35)? Apparently, the righteous are numerous. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai is referring to the very few <b>who view</b> the Divine Presence <b>through a bright,</b> mirror-like <b>partition,</b> while <b>that</b> statement of Rava is referring to those <b>who do not view</b> the Divine Presence <b>through a bright partition.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks further: <b>And are</b> those <b>who view</b> the Divine Presence through <b>a bright partition so few? But didn’t Abaye say: The world</b> has <b>no fewer than thirty-six righteous</b> people in each generation <b>who greet the Divine Presence every day, as it is stated: “Happy are all they that wait for Him [<i>lo</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 30:18)? <b>The numerological value of <i>lo</i>,</b> spelled <i>lamed vav</i>, <b>is thirty-six,</b> alluding to the fact that there are at least thirty-six full-fledged righteous individuals in each generation. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. This</b> statement of Abaye is referring to those <b>who enter</b> to greet the Divine Presence <b>by</b> requesting and being granted <b>permission,</b> while <b>that</b> statement of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai is referring to those <b>who enter</b> even <b>without</b> requesting <b>permission,</b> for whom the gates of Heaven are open at all times. They are very few indeed.

### Part 7
§ The mishna asks: <b>At the time of their departure</b> at the end of the Festival, <b>what</b> would <b>they say?</b> The mishna answers that they would praise the altar and glorify God. The Gemara challenges this: <b>But</b> in doing so <b>aren’t they joining the name of Heaven and another entity, and it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Anyone who joins the name of Heaven and another entity is uprooted from the world, as it is stated:</b> “He that sacrifices unto the gods, <b>save unto the Lord only,</b> shall be utterly destroyed” (Exodus 22:19)? The Gemara answers that <b>this is what</b> the people <b>are saying</b> when they depart the Temple: <b>To the Lord, we acknowledge</b> that He is our God, <b>and to you,</b> the altar, <b>we give praise; to the Lord, we acknowledge</b> that He is our God, <b>and to you,</b> the altar, <b>we give acclaim.</b> The praise to God and the praise to the altar are clearly distinct.

### Part 8
§ The mishna continues: <b>As its performance during the week,</b> so is its performance on Shabbat. And according to Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, on the seventh day of the Festival they would bring palm branches to the Temple. <b>Rav Huna said: What is the rationale</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka?</b> It is <b>as it is written:</b> “And you shall take for yourselves on the first day the fruit of a beautiful tree, <b>branches</b> of a date palm” (Leviticus 23:40). Branches in the plural indicates that <b>two</b> branches must be taken, <b>one for the <i>lulav</i> and one for</b> placement around <b>the altar. And the Rabbis say:</b> Although the word is vocalized in the plural, based on tradition it <b>is written <i>kappot</i>,</b> without the letter <i>vav</i>. Therefore, it is interpreted as if it were written <i>kappat</i>, indicating that only one palm branch need be taken.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Levi says:</b> The rationale for the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka is not based on a verse. Rather, it is a custom that developed to express praise for the Jewish people, <b>likening</b> them to <b>a date palm</b>. <b>Just as the date palm has only one heart,</b> as branches do not grow from its trunk but rather the trunk rises and branches emerge only at the top, <b>so too, the Jewish people have only one heart</b> directed <b>toward their Father in Heaven.</b>

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> The blessing over the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i></b> is recited <b>seven</b> days <b>and</b> the blessing over the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i></b> is recited <b>one day. What is the rationale</b> for this distinction? It is written explicitly in the Torah that the mitzva to sit in the <i>sukka</i> applies all seven days. The Gemara explains: With regard to the <b><i>lulav</i>, where the nights are distinct from the days,</b> as the mitzva of <i>lulav</i> is not in effect at night, <b>each day is a mitzva in and of itself.</b> A separate blessing is recited over each mitzva. However, with regard to <b><i>sukka</i>, where the nights are not distinct from the days,</b> as the mitzva of <i>sukka</i> is in effect at night just as it is during the day, the legal status of <b>all seven</b> days of the Festival <b>is like</b> that of <b>one long day.</b>

### Part 11
<b>But Rabba bar bar Ḥana</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The blessing over the mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i></b> is recited <b>seven</b> days and the blessing over the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i></b> is recited <b>one day. What is the rationale</b> for this distinction? The Gemara explains: The mitzva of <b><i>sukka</i></b> is a mitzva <b>by Torah</b> law all seven days of the Festival. Therefore, a blessing is recited for <b>seven</b> days. However, the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i>,</b> other than on the first day, is a mitzva <b>by rabbinic</b> law, as the Sages instituted an ordinance to take the <i>lulav</i> for all seven days to commemorate the practice in the Temple. Therefore, <b>it is enough</b> to recite the blessing <b>one day,</b> on the first day.

### Part 12
<b>When Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> One recites a blessing over <b>both this,</b> the mitzva of <i>sukka</i>, <b>and</b> over <b>that,</b> the mitzva of <i>lulav</i>, all <b>seven</b> days. <b>Rav Yosef said: Take</b> the statement <b>of Rabba bar bar Ḥana in your hand, as all the <i>amora’im</i></b> who transmitted statements of Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>hold in accordance with his</b> opinion <b>in</b> matters related to <b><i>sukka</i>.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on a <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC