
### Part 1
<b>When they disagree</b> is <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav. Abaye</b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav:</b> The edge of the roof descends and seals both in the portico in the field and in the portico that one roofed as a <i>sukka</i>. <b>And Rava</b> could have <b>said to you: Rav stated</b> his opinion <b>only there,</b> with regard to a portico in the field, because <b>the partitions</b> formed by the descent of the edge of the roof <b>are</b> partitions <b>established for the portico. However, here,</b> in the case of a <i>sukka</i>, <b>where</b> the partitions formed by the descent of the edge of the roof <b>are not</b> partitions <b>established for the</b> portico, <b>no,</b> Rav would not say that the edge of the roof descends and seals.

### Part 2
The Gemara cites another proof. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: With regard to <b>a courtyard that is surrounded</b> on three sides <b>by a portico,</b> if there are four cubits beneath the unfit roofing, the <i>sukka</i> is unfit. The Gemara asks: <b>And why</b> is the <i>sukka</i> unfit? <b>Let us say</b> that <b>the edge of the roof descends and seals,</b> forming a fit partition at the point where the roofing of the <i>sukka</i> begins?

### Part 3
<b>Rava interpreted</b> the mishna <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Abaye:</b> It is a case <b>where one equalized</b> the level of <b>its roofing,</b> i.e., the roofing of the <i>sukka</i> with the level of the roof of the portico. Since the edge of the roof of the portico is not visible inside the <i>sukka</i>, the principle: The edge of the roof descends and seals, does not apply.

### Part 4
<b>In Sura, they</b> would <b>teach this <i>halakha</i> in that language</b> cited above. <b>In Pumbedita they</b> would <b>teach</b> it differently: <b>If one roofed a portico that does not have posts</b> on its open side, <b>everyone agrees</b> that the <i>sukka</i> is <b>unfit.</b> In the case of a portico <b>that has posts</b> less than three handbreadths apart on its open side, <b>Abaye said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit,</b> and <b>Rava said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>unfit. Abaye said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit,</b> as <b>we say</b> that the principle of <b><i>lavud</i></b> applies here; the posts are joined and form a partition for both the portico and the <i>sukka</i> in the courtyard outside the portico. <b>Rava said:</b> The <i>sukka</i> is <b>unfit,</b> as <b>we do not say</b> that the principle of <b><i>lavud</i></b> forms a partition for the <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is ruled <b>in accordance with the first version.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Ashi found Rav Kahana, who was placing roofing</b> for a <i>sukka</i> <b>atop a portico that did not have posts. He said to him: Doesn’t the Master hold</b> in accordance with <b>that which Rava said:</b> If <b>it has posts,</b> the <i>sukka</i> is <b>fit;</b> if <b>it does not have posts</b> it is <b>unfit?</b> How can you use this as a <i>sukka</i>? Rav Kahana <b>showed him</b> that in this <i>sukka</i> the disparity between the <i>sukka</i> and the portico <b>was visible from the inside and even from the outside.</b> From outside, the portico and the <i>sukka</i> appeared to be one continuous structure. However, from inside, one of the walls of the portico was visibly thicker than the wall of the <i>sukka</i>, and that one handbreadth thickness serves as the third wall of the <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Alternatively,</b> in this case that disparity <b>was visible from the outside and even from the inside.</b> The exterior walls of the portico and of the <i>sukka</i> were not even. From the outside, it was plainly discernible that they were two separate structures. However, from the inside the <i>sukka</i> appeared to be a direct extension of the portico with no post protruding. In both cases, the protruding segment serves as the third wall of the <i>sukka</i>, which measures one handbreadth, and the <i>sukka</i> is fit.

### Part 7
This distinction is <b>as it was stated</b> in the context of merging courtyards that open into an alleyway that is open on one side to allow carrying there on Shabbat, one must establish a side post on one side of its opening: Any object that protrudes and is <b>visible from outside</b> the alleyway <b>but</b> is <b>even</b> with the wall <b>on the inside</b> of the alleyway has legal <b>status</b> of a side <b>post,</b> since it can be discerned from the outside. <b>And</b> the provisions that apply to a side <b>post</b> in the case of merging of alleyways <b>are</b> the same as those <b>that</b> apply to <b>posts</b> in the case of <i>sukka</i>. Rav Kahana’s <i>sukka</i> was essentially a portico with a post, and was fit for use as a <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 8
§ <b>It was taught</b> in the <i>Tosefta</i>: Fit roofing that consists of different kinds of agricultural <b>waste</b> products <b>that extend from the<i>sukka</i></b> has the legal <b>status like</b> that of <b>the <i>sukka</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>Waste</b> products <b>that extend from the <i>sukka</i>? Ulla said: Branches that extend behind the <i>sukka</i></b> and are not limited to the area within the <i>sukka</i> walls.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But don’t we require three walls</b> to render an area covered with roofing a fit <i>sukka</i>? The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where there are</b> three walls. The two side walls of the <i>sukka</i> do not end at the middle wall between them; rather, they too extend behind the <i>sukka</i>, forming a second <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>But don’t we require</b> seven by seven handbreadths as the minimum area for <b>fitness of a <i>sukka</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where there is</b> the requisite minimum area. The Gemara asks: <b>But don’t we require</b> that <b>its shade exceeds its sunlight?</b> The Gemara answers: It is referring to a case <b>where there is</b> more shade than sunlight.

### Part 10
After noting that the <i>sukka</i> has three walls, the requisite area, and sufficient shade, the Gemara asks: <b>If so, what</b> purpose is there <b>to state</b> this <i>halakha</i>? The fact that this <i>sukka</i> extends from another is not relevant. The Gemara answers: Nevertheless, there is a novel element in this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>since,</b> as evidenced by the placement of the connecting middle wall, <b>these</b> walls <b>were</b> initially <b>established for inside</b> the original <i>sukka</i> <b>but not for outside</b> the original <i>sukka</i>; and therefore you <b>say no,</b> the middle wall cannot be considered a wall for the additional <i>sukka</i>, Ulla <b>teaches us</b> that the initial intention is not relevant.

### Part 11
<b>Rabba and Rav Yosef both say</b> with regard to the case in the <i>Tosefta</i>: <b>Here,</b> it is referring to a case <b>with branches that extend before the front</b> entrance <b>of the <i>sukka</i>, and one of the side walls extends together with</b> the roofing. <b>Lest you say</b> that this extension <b>does not have</b> the minimum requisite size for the <b>fitness of a <i>sukka</i>,</b> in terms of its area and number of walls, therefore, Ulla <b>teaches us</b> that it is fit because it is considered an extension of the <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 12
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <i>Tosefta</i> <b>was needed only to</b> teach the case of a <i>sukka</i> where in <b>its majority its shade exceeds its sunlight, and</b> in <b>its minority its sunlight exceeds its shade. Lest you say</b> that since the extension lacks this basic requirement of a <i>sukka</i>, it is treated as if it were not there at all, and consequently the entire <i>sukka</i> <b>should be rendered unfit due to that little</b> area, <b>therefore,</b> Ulla <b>teaches us</b> that the entire area is one fit <i>sukka</i>. The Gemara asks: According to that understanding of the <i>Tosefta</i>, <b>what</b> is the meaning of: Waste that <b>extends</b> from the <i>sukka</i>? It means that the roofing <b>extends</b> beyond the halakhic parameters for <b>fitness of a <i>sukka</i>.</b> It does not refer to a physical extension of the <i>sukka</i>.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Oshaya said:</b> This <i>Tosefta</i> <b>was needed only to</b> teach the case of <b>unfit roofing</b> that measures <b>less than three</b> handbreadths <b>in a small <i>sukka</i>.</b> And <b>what</b> is the meaning of: Waste that <b>extends</b> from the <i>sukka</i>? It means that the roofing <b>extends</b> beyond the halakhic <b>status of</b> a fit <b><i>sukka</i>;</b> it is not referring to a physical extension of the <i>sukka</i>. Nevertheless, it does not render the entire <i>sukka</i> unfit.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Hoshaya strongly objects to this:</b> What is the novel element in this <i>Tosefta</i>? <b>Let</b> the status of unfit roofing <b>be only</b> as strict <b>as</b> the status of empty <b>space. And does space</b> measuring <b>less than three handbreadths in a small <i>sukka</i> render</b> the entire <i>sukka</i> <b>unfit?</b> If less than three handbreadths of space, which has a stringent measure for rendering the <i>sukka</i> unfit, does not render the <i>sukka</i> unfit, clearly the same measure of unfit roofing does not render the <i>sukka</i> unfit.

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Abba said to him:</b> There is a distinction between unfit roofing and empty space. <b>This</b> unfit roofing <b>combines</b> with the fit roofing to compose the requisite measure. <b>And one</b> may even <b>sleep beneath it,</b> since the unfit roofing is nullified by the majority of fit roofing and completely incorporated into it. However, <b>that</b> space, although it too <b>combines</b> with the fit roofing to comprise the requisite measure of the <i>sukka</i>, <b>one</b> may <b>not sleep beneath it,</b> as it is not transformed into fit roofing. Therefore, there is a novel element in the explanation of Rabbi Hoshaya as well.

### Part 16
The Gemara questions this contention. <b>Is there any item that combines</b> with other items to engender fitness, <b>but</b> the item <b>itself is not fit? Rabbi Yitzḥak ben Elyashiv said: Yes,</b> that model exists in other areas of <i>halakha</i> as well.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC