
### Part 1
<b>And one does not render it an extension</b> of the city limits when it is located <b>between two cities.</b> Two cities between which there is a distance of more than 141⅓ cubits cannot be joined and considered as a single city for the purpose of measuring the Shabbat limit for one city from the edge of the second city. However if there is a house equidistant between the two cities, i.e., a bit more than seventy cubits from each town, the house joins the two cities together for the purpose of measuring the Shabbat limit. A house in which there is an area of less than four by four cubits cannot serve this function; <b>and brothers and partners do not divide it,</b> as it is too small to be divided.

### Part 2
In answer to the question with regard to the identity of the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i>, the Gemara says: <b>Let us say</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>and not the Rabbis,</b> as it is Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi who holds that a <i>sukka</i> with an area of less than four by four cubits is unfit. The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>the Rabbis, the Rabbis say</b> that a structure with an area smaller than four by four cubits is fit <b>only there, with regard to a <i>sukka</i>, which is a temporary residence,</b> because in a temporary residence one is willing to confine himself to a small area. <b>However, with regard to</b> <i>halakhot</i> relating to <b>a house, which is a permanent residence, even the Rabbis concede that if it has</b> an area of <b>four cubits by four cubits, people reside in it,</b> as it is a functional house, <b>and if not, people do not reside in it,</b> and its legal status is not that of a house at all.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara briefly discusses the <i>halakhot</i> listed in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Master said</b> that a house in which there is an area of less than four by four cubits it <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of placing a <b><i>mezuza</i></b> on its doorpost, <b>and</b> it is exempt <b>from the</b> obligation of establishing a <b>parapet</b> around its roof, <b>and it does not become ritually impure with leprosy</b> of the house. <b>And</b> its sale is <b>not rendered final</b> in the same manner as the sale of <b>houses within walled cities, and one does not return from</b> the ranks <b>of</b> soldiers <b>waging war for</b> a house that size. <b>What is the reason</b> for these <i>halakhot</i>? It is due to the fact <b>that “house” is written</b> in the Torah <b>with regard to all</b> these <i>halakhot</i>. The legal status of a structure with an area of less than four by four cubits is not that of a house.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> by rabbinic law, <b>one</b> need <b>not join</b> the houses in the courtyards <b>for</b> a house with that area, <b>and one</b> need <b>not merge</b> the courtyards that open into an alleyway <b>for</b> a courtyard in which the area of its only house is less than four by four cubits. <b>And one does not place the</b> food collected for the <b>joining</b> of courtyards <b>in</b> this house. <b>What is the reason</b> for these <i>halakhot</i>? It is due to the fact <b>that it is not fit for residence.</b> The point of the joining of courtyards is to transform the courtyard into a residence shared by the residents of all its member households, and this can be accomplished only by placing the joint food in a place whose legal status is that of a house. The Gemara infers this from the fact that it is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And one does not place</b> the food of <b>the joining of courtyards in</b> this house, <b>but the</b> food of the <b>merging</b> of alleyways, <b>one places in it.</b>

### Part 5
<b>What is the reason</b> for this distinction? It is due to the fact <b>that it is no less</b> a residence <b>than a courtyard in the alleyway.</b> An unroofed courtyard is not fit for residence, and nevertheless the food for the merging of alleyways may be placed there, <b>as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in tractate <i>Eiruvin</i> (85b): <b>The joining of courtyards</b> may be placed <b>in the courtyard</b> and <b>the merging of alleyways</b> may be placed <b>in the alleyway.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And we discussed</b> this <i>halakha</i>: How can <b>the joining of courtyards</b> be placed <b>in the courtyard? Didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: With regard to <b>one who placed his joining</b> of courtyards <b>in a gatehouse</b> or in <b>a portico [<i>akhsadra</i>],</b> a roofed structure without walls or with incomplete walls, <b>or</b> on <b>a balcony,</b> it <b>is not a</b> fit <b><i>eiruv</i>. And one who resides there,</b> in any of these structures, <b>does not render it prohibited</b> for the homeowner and the other residents of the courtyard to carry, even if he did not contribute to the <i>eiruv</i>, as the legal status of these places is not that of a house.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> emend the mishna and <b>say: The joining of courtyards</b> is placed <b>in</b> one of <b>the</b> full-fledged <b>houses that is in the courtyard, and the merging of alleyways</b> is placed even <b>in</b> one of <b>the courtyards that</b> opens <b>into the alleyway. And this</b> house whose area is less than four by four cubits <b>is no less</b> a residence <b>than</b> one of <b>the courtyards that</b> open <b>into the alleyway.</b>

### Part 8
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And one does not render it an extension</b> of the city limits when it is located <b>between two cities.</b> The Gemara explains: This means that <b>we do not even render its</b> halakhic status <b>like</b> that of <b>huts [<i>burganin</i>]</b> used by grain watchmen in the fields, which join the two cities between which they are located for the purpose of measuring the Shabbat limit. <b>What is the reason</b> that it is considered less a residence than a watchman’s hut? The Gemara answers: Watchmen’s <b>huts,</b> even though they are not sturdy, <b>are suited for their matters, while this</b> house with an area less than four by four cubits <b>is not suited for its matter,</b> as it is not fit for residence.

### Part 9
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And brothers and partners do not divide</b> a house that does not measure at least four by four cubits, as it is too small to be divided. The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> that a house that size is not divided <b>is</b> due to the fact <b>that there is not</b> an area of four by <b>four cubits in it; however, if there is</b> an area of four by <b>four cubits in it, they divide it.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna: <b>One divides the courtyard</b> at the request of one of the heirs or partners <b>only</b> if its area is sufficient so <b>that there will be in it</b> four by <b>four cubits for this</b> partner or heir <b>and</b> four by <b>four cubits for that</b> partner or heir? Apparently, in order to divide a courtyard it must be at least four by eight cubits.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> emend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i> of division like</b> that of <b>a courtyard</b> does <b>not</b> apply <b>to it. As Rav Huna said: A courtyard is divided according to</b> the number of <b>its entrances.</b> When the residents of the houses in a courtyard divide the courtyard between them, the division is not based on the number of houses in the courtyard, nor is it based on the size of the houses. Instead, it is divided based on the number of entrances that open into the courtyard. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: One gives</b> the homeowner <b>for each and every entrance four cubits, and the rest</b> of the courtyard <b>is divided equally</b> among the residents of the courtyard.

### Part 12
The principle that entrances are factored into the division of a courtyard <b>applies only</b> with regard to <b>a house that stands to endure,</b> as the owner needs use of the yard to ease access to his house, so <b>we provide him</b> with four cubits according to Rav Ḥisda, or part of the <b>courtyard</b> according to Rav Huna. However, in the case of <b>this</b> small house, <b>which stands to be leveled,</b> its owner has no need for the adjacent courtyard, so <b>we do not provide him</b> with any part of the <b>courtyard,</b> as if it were not even there.

### Part 13
§ With regard to the <i>halakha</i> in the mishna that a <i>sukka</i> more than twenty cubits high is unfit, the Gemara states: If the <i>sukka</i> <b>was more than twenty cubits high and one comes to diminish</b> its height <b>by</b> placing <b>cushions and blankets</b> on the floor, <b>it is not a decrease</b> of halakhic significance. It does not render the <i>sukka</i> fit, because in that case one is concerned that the bedding will be ruined and therefore does not intend to leave it there very long.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC