
### Part 1
<b>non-essential aspects of a mitzva avert calamity, as waving is a non-essential aspect of the mitzva,</b> since even if one failed to wave the loaves he fulfilled his obligation, <b>and</b> nevertheless <b>it halts harmful winds and dews. And Rava said: And likewise</b> one should conduct himself the same way <b>with a <i>lulav</i>,</b> i.e., one should wave it to and fro and raise and lower it for the same reasons. When <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov</b> would <b>move</b> the <i>lulav</i> <b>to and fro, he would say: This is an arrow in the eye of Satan,</b> as despite his best efforts, the Jewish people continue to joyously fulfill mitzvot. The Gemara notes: <b>That is not</b> a proper <b>manner</b> of conduct, <b>as</b> it will induce Satan to <b>come to incite him</b> to sin. Gloating due to his victory over the evil inclination will lead Satan to redouble his efforts to corrupt him.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who was coming</b> along <b>the way and did not have a <i>lulav</i> in his hand to take</b> and fulfill the mitzva while traveling, <b>when he enters his house</b> to eat,<b>he</b> should <b>take</b> the <i>lulav</i> <b>at his table.</b> He interrupts his meal to fulfill the mitzva of <i>lulav</i>. <b>If he did not take</b> the <i>lulav</i> in the <b>morning, he</b> should <b>take it in the afternoon, as the entire day is suited for</b> fulfilling the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i>.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara analyzes the mishna. On one hand, <b>you said</b> that if he did not take the <i>lulav</i> before the meal then <b>he takes it at his table. That is to say that</b> if remembers that he did not yet take the <i>lulav</i>, <b>he interrupts</b> his meal, takes the <i>lulav</i>, and then continues his meal. <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Shabbat</i> 9b): One may not begin to eat before he recites the afternoon prayer; however, <b>if they started</b> a meal, <b>they need not interrupt</b> the meal in order to pray. <b>Rav Safra said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>that</b> mishna, where one need not interrupt his meal, is referring to a case <b>where there is opportunity</b> to pray later <b>in the day; this</b> mishna, where one must interrupt his meal, is referring to a case <b>where there is no opportunity</b> to take the <i>lulav</i> later <b>in the day.</b> In that case, one must fulfill the mitzva immediately.

### Part 4
<b>Rava said: What is the difficulty?</b> The two cases are different, and there is no contradiction at all. <b>Perhaps this</b> mitzva of <i>lulav</i> <b>is</b> a mitzva <b>by Torah law,</b> and therefore one must interrupt his meal to take the <i>lulav</i>, while <b>that</b> mitzva to recite the afternoon prayer <b>is</b> a mitzva <b>by rabbinic law,</b> and therefore one need not interrupt his meal to pray. <b>Rather, Rava said: If</b> there is <b>a difficulty,</b> i.e., a contradiction, this is the <b>difficulty:</b> In the first clause in the mishna it says that <b>when he enters his house</b> to eat, <b>he</b> should <b>take</b> the <i>lulav</i> <b>at his table. Apparently, one</b> must <b>interrupt</b> his meal. <b>And then</b> in the latter clause of the mishna it <b>is taught: If he did not take</b> the <i>lulav</i> in the <b>morning, he</b> should <b>take it in the afternoon. Apparently, he</b> need <b>not interrupt</b> his meal.

### Part 5
Resolving the contradiction, <b>Rav Safra said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. This</b> clause, where one need not interrupt his meal, is referring to a case <b>where there is opportunity</b> to take the <i>lulav</i> later <b>in the day; that</b> clause, where one must interrupt his meal, is referring to a case <b>where there is no opportunity</b> to take the <i>lulav</i> later <b>in the day.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: What is the difficulty?</b> There is no contradiction, as <b>perhaps</b> the mishna is teaching that there is <b>a mitzva to interrupt</b> one’s meal and take the <i>lulav</i>; <b>but if he did not interrupt</b> his meal <b>he</b> should <b>take it in the afternoon, as the entire day is suited for</b> fulfilling the mitzva of <b><i>lulav</i>. Rather, Rabbi Zeira said: Actually,</b> the contradiction is <b>as we said initially,</b> between the ruling with regard to <i>lulav</i> and the ruling with regard to the afternoon prayer. <b>And</b> as to <b>that which you found difficult,</b> i.e., there is no contradiction at all, as <b>this</b> mitzva of <i>lulav</i> <b>is</b> a mitzva <b>by Torah law</b> and <b>that</b> mitzva to recite the afternoon prayer <b>is</b> a mitzva <b>by rabbinic law,</b> that is not difficult; as <b>here,</b> in the case of <i>lulav</i>, <b>we are dealing with the second day of the Festival</b> and beyond, during the intermediate days, when the mitzva of <i>lulav</i> is <b>by rabbinic law.</b> The contradiction is therefore between the rulings pertaining to two mitzvot by rabbinic law.

### Part 7
The language of the mishna <b>is also precise</b> and indicates that it is dealing with the intermediate days of the Festival <b>from</b> the fact <b>that it teaches: One who was coming along the way and does not have a <i>lulav</i> in his hand. As, if it enters your mind</b> to say that the mishna is referring to <b>the first day of the Festival, is it permitted</b> to travel a long distance on that day? Rather, it is referring to the intermediate days.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one for whom a Canaanite slave, a woman, or a minor was reciting</b> <i>hallel</i>, <b>he repeats after them what they are saying</b> word for word. The mishna notes: <b>And may a curse come to him</b> for being so ignorant that he needs them to recite it for him. <b>If an adult male was reciting</b> <i>hallel</i> <b>on his</b> behalf, he need not repeat each word, as the adult male can fulfill the obligation to recite <i>hallel</i> on his behalf. Rather, <b>he</b> simply <b>answers: <i>Halleluya</i>,</b> to each phrase that is recited. In <b>a place where they were accustomed to repeat</b> certain verses, <b>he,</b> too, should <b>repeat</b> them. If the custom is <b>to</b> recite them <b>plainly,</b> without repetition, <b>he</b> should recite them <b>plainly. In a place where the custom is to recite a blessing</b> when reciting <i>hallel</i>, <b>he should recite a blessing. Everything is in accordance with the local custom</b> in these matters.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught: Actually, they said</b> that <b>a son may recite a blessing</b> on behalf of <b>his father, and a slave may recite a blessing</b> on behalf of <b>his master, and a woman may recite a blessing</b> on behalf of <b>her husband, but the Sages said: May a curse come to a man</b> who, due to his ignorance, requires <b>his wife and children to recite a blessing on his behalf.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC