
### Part 1
<b>And let him position</b> the wall measuring one handbreadth <b>opposite</b> the wall that emerges like the diagonal <b>line</b> formed by <b>the end</b> of the furrows as the field gradually narrows. This third partition would represent the third side of a triangle and would make the <i>sukka</i> appear more like a full-fledged structure, as the diagonal would represent closure of both unwalled directions. <b>Rav was silent</b> and did not respond.

### Part 2
<b>It was also stated</b> that <b>Shmuel said in the name of Levi: He positions it</b> at the end of one of the standing walls <b>opposite</b> the wall <b>that emerges</b> from the other end of that wall. <b>And similarly, they rule in the study hall: He positions it</b> at the end of one of the standing walls <b>opposite</b> the wall <b>that emerges</b> from the other end of that wall.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Simon</b> said, <b>and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who <b>said,</b> that the third wall is positioned differently. <b>He establishes for</b> the third side a wall that measures <b>an expansive handbreadth,</b> measured with the fingers spread apart, which is slightly larger than a standard handbreadth. <b>And he</b> then <b>positions it less than three handbreadths</b> from and <b>adjacent to the wall</b> opposite the second wall. <b>And</b> the legal status of <b>any</b> item positioned <b>less than three</b> handbreadths from and <b>adjacent to the wall is like</b> an item <b>joined</b> to that wall. In this way, the handbreadth-wide wall is joined to the adjacent wall, and it is as if it is a wall of four handbreadths, which is the majority of the minimum measure of the wall of a full-fledged <i>sukka</i>, seven handbreadths.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Yehuda said: A <i>sukka</i> constructed like an alleyway,</b> with two parallel full-fledged walls, is <b>fit, and</b> with regard to <b>that</b> third wall that measures one <b>handbreadth, he positions it</b> adjacent to one of the walls <b>in any direction that he chooses,</b> as it is merely a conspicuous marker.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Simon</b> said, <b>and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who <b>said:</b> In the case of a <i>sukka</i> built like an alleyway open on two ends, a third wall measuring a single handbreadth is insufficient. Rather, <b>one establishes for</b> the third side <b>a board</b> with a width of <b>four</b> handbreadths <b>and a bit and positions it less than three</b> handbreadths from and <b>adjacent to</b> either <b>wall,</b> as a wall on either of the open ends. <b>And</b> the legal status of <b>any</b> item positioned <b>less than three</b> handbreadths from and <b>adjacent to the wall is like</b> an item <b>joined</b> to that wall. The result is a full-fledged seven-handbreadth <i>sukka</i> wall.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different there,</b> in the case of two attached walls, <b>where you say</b> that a wall with the dimension of <b>an expansive handbreadth suffices</b> to complete the third wall, <b>and what is different here where you say</b> that <b>it requires a board</b> that measures <b>four</b> handbreadths and a bit? The Gemara answers: <b>There, where there are two walls in the standard sense,</b> as they are attached forming a type of structure, <b>it is sufficient to have</b> the third wall measure <b>an expansive handbreadth</b> in order to render the <i>sukka</i> fit; however, <b>here, where there are not two walls</b> in the standard sense, as they are not attached, <b>if there is a board</b> that measures <b>four</b> handbreadths as the third wall, <b>yes,</b> it is fit, and <b>if not, no,</b> it is unfit.

### Part 7
<b>Rava said: And</b> the <i>sukka</i> consisting of two adjacent walls with a third wall measuring one handbreadth <b>is permitted</b> and fit <b>only</b> if the third wall is <b>in</b> the <b>form of a doorway.</b> One can render the sukka fit only by splitting the one-handbreadth wall and attaching one half to the standing wall and one half across from the other wall that emerges from the standing wall, and then placing a pole across the two halves. By creating the form of a doorway, that third wall becomes like an open gate, which is considered a halakhic partition.

### Part 8
<b>Some say</b> that <b>Rava said: And</b> a <i>sukka</i> consisting of two adjacent walls <b>is also permitted</b> and fit if the third wall is <b>in</b> the <b>form of a doorway.</b> In other words, Rava does not reject the remedy of the expansive-handbreadth wall suggested by Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi; rather, he suggests an alternative.

### Part 9
<b>Some say</b> a third version of that which <b>Rava said: And</b> a <i>sukka</i> consisting of two adjacent walls, even with a third that is an expansive handbreadth wide as suggested by Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, <b>also requires the form of a doorway</b> to be fit. In other words, in addition to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi’s remedy, one must also create the form of a doorway to render the <i>sukka</i> fit.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Ashi found Rav Kahana</b> establishing his <i>sukka</i>, which had two adjacent walls, <b>and establishing</b> a third wall that was <b>an expansive handbreadth</b> wide <b>and establishing the form of a doorway</b> as well. Rav Ashi <b>said to</b> him: <b>And does the Master not hold</b> in accordance <b>with that</b> opinion <b>of Rava, as Rava said: And</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>is also permitted</b> and fit if the third wall is <b>in</b> the <b>form of a doorway?</b> Why are you establishing a wall that is an expansive handbreadth wide as well? Rav Kahana <b>said to him: I hold</b> in accordance <b>with the other version</b> of the opinion of <b>Rava, as Rava said: And</b> the <i>sukka</i> <b>also requires the form of a doorway,</b> in addition to the expansive handbreadth, to be fit.

### Part 11
§ It is taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> that if the <i>sukka</i> has <b>two walls in the standard sense</b> and a third wall that measures one handbreadth, it is fit. <b>Rava said: And likewise</b> with regard <b>to Shabbat</b> that occurs during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>since it is</b> considered <b>a wall with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b><i>sukka</i> it is</b> considered <b>a partition with regard to</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>Shabbat.</b> Were one to construct a <i>sukka</i> in that manner in a public domain adjacent to the entrance to his house, its legal status would be that of a private domain and one would be permitted to move objects from it to his house and vice versa on Shabbat that occurs during the Festival. However, that structure is not considered a private domain on any other Shabbat.

### Part 12
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> Rava’s opinion from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And do we say</b> that this principle: <b>Since</b> it is considered, etc., applies in this area of <i>halakha</i>? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The specifications of the <b>wall of a <i>sukka</i></b> are <b>like</b> those of a <b>partition</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of Shabbat.</b> Just as with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, one forms a partition by establishing adjacent reeds, so too, one forms the wall of a <i>sukka</i> in the same manner, <b>provided that</b> the gap <b>from one reed to another will not be</b> as much as <b>three handbreadths.</b> If the gap is three handbreadths or greater, the legal status of the reeds is that they are not considered joined.

### Part 13
<b>But</b> the stringency of the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>Shabbat</b> goes <b>beyond</b> the stringency of the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b><i>sukka</i>,</b> in terms of the criteria for effective partitions, <b>as</b> with regard to <b>Shabbat,</b> carrying <b>is permitted only in</b> a case where the total of <b>the standing</b> segments of the partition, the actual wall, <b>is greater than</b> the total of <b>the breached</b> segments of the partition, the gaps that are less than three handbreadths. <b>That is not so with regard to the <i>sukka</i>,</b> where, even if the breached segments total more than the standing segments, e.g., a <i>sukka</i> consisting of two walls in which there are gaps and a third wall measuring only a single handbreadth, it is still fit.

### Part 14
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>What, isn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaching that</b> the stringency with regard to <b>Shabbat that</b> occurs <b>during</b> the festival of <b><i>Sukkot</i></b> goes <b>beyond</b> the stringency with regard to the rest of the festival of <b><i>Sukkot</i>? And</b> apparently, <b>we do not say</b> the principle: <b>Since</b> it is considered a fit partition for <i>sukka</i> let it also be considered a fit partition for Shabbat. This is difficult according to Rava, in whose opinion that principle is applied in this case.

### Part 15
Rava rejects that interpretation of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is teaching <b>that</b> the stringency with regard to <b>Shabbat in general</b> goes <b>beyond</b> the stringency with regard to <b>Shabbat that</b> occurs <b>during</b> the festival of <b><i>Sukkot</i>.</b> On Shabbat during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, a partition where the total of the breached segments of the partition is greater than the total of the standing segments is effective, as, since it is effective as a wall in a <i>sukka</i>, it is effective as a partition for Shabbat as well. That is not the case on Shabbat during the rest of the year, when a partition of that sort is ineffective on Shabbat.

### Part 16
Abaye asked: <b>If</b> it is <b>so</b> that the distinction in the <i>baraita</i> is not a fundamental distinction between the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>sukka</i> and the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, but is instead a distinction between the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat in general and the specific case of Shabbat during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, then <b>let</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>also teach</b> a novel distinction involving Shabbat that occurs during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>. The stringency with regard to <b><i>sukka</i> in general</b> during the rest of <i>Sukkot</i> goes <b>beyond</b> the stringency with regard to <b><i>sukka</i> on Shabbat</b> that occurs during the festival of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>as a <i>sukka</i> in general</b> consisting of two parallel walls, like an alleyway, <b>requires</b> that its third wall measure <b>an expansive handbreadth, while a <i>sukka</i> on Shabbat</b> does <b>not require an expansive handbreadth</b> for this purpose, <b>and</b> it is <b>sufficient</b> for the third wall to be established <b>with a side post</b> ten handbreadths high and any width.

### Part 17
Since the side post is effective as a partition with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, it should also be effective as a wall with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>sukka</i> although it is less than one handbreadth wide, <b>as you are</b> the <b>one who said: If one placed roofing over an alleyway which has a side post</b> on one of the open ends to permit carrying in that alleyway on Shabbat, <b>it is fit</b> as a <i>sukka</i> for that same Shabbat, although it would not be fit during the rest of the week of the Festival.

### Part 18
Rava replied to him: That is indeed my statement; however, the fact is that the <i>baraita</i> does not cite that distinction, because <b>it is not necessary</b> to state that there are circumstances in which the general <i>halakhot</i> of <i>sukka</i> are stricter than its <i>halakhot</i> on Shabbat, as there is no novelty in the concept that the <i>halakhot</i> of partitions on Shabbat should apply to a <i>sukka</i>. <b>Now</b> that <b>we say</b> that <i>halakhot</i> may be derived <b>from a leniency to a stringency,</b> as a <i>halakha</i> that applies to <i>sukka</i>, which is a positive mitzva, is applied to the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, which is a stringent prohibition punishable by <i>karet</i>; then <b>from a stringency,</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of Shabbat, <b>to a leniency, all the more so</b> may <i>halakhot</i> be derived. Therefore, there is no reason for the <i>baraita</i> to mention that distinction explicitly.

### Part 19
§ Apropos roofing over an alleyway, the Gemara elaborates about <b>the</b> matter <b>itself. Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC