
### Part 1
<b>And</b> then <b>he comes</b> home <b>and eats</b> the produce <b>in</b> the appropriate manner and at the appropriate time, due to <b>the sanctity of Sabbatical-Year</b> produce.

### Part 2
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said</b> that it is permitted to transfer money used to purchase Sabbatical-Year produce to an <i>am ha’aretz</i> as long as it does not exceed the value of three meals? It is specifically in a case <b>where one purchases</b> produce that came <b>from</b> a field that was declared <b>ownerless</b> as required during the Sabbatical Year. In that case, the <i>am ha’aretz</i> who gathered the produce is paid only for the act of harvesting and not for the produce. <b>However,</b> if <b>he buys</b> produce that came <b>from</b> a field <b>that was safeguarded</b> for its owner in the manner that it is during the other years of the Sabbatical-Year cycle and was not declared ownerless, then <b>even</b> if one purchased produce <b>worth half an <i>issar</i>, it is prohibited</b> to transfer the money to him, as it is prohibited to utilize fruits that were safeguarded during the Sabbatical Year.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Sheshet raised an objection: And</b> is it permitted to purchase produce <b>from</b> an <b>ownerless</b> field worth only the value of <b>three meals and no more? He raised a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Shevi’it</i> 9:1): <b>Rue and sorrel,</b> two types of herbs, and vegetables such as <b>asparagus, purslane, coriander that is</b> found <b>in the mountains, water parsley of the rivers, and garden-eruca</b> are all <b>exempt from</b> the requirement of <b>tithes</b> in all years, <b>and they may be purchased from any person during the Sabbatical Year because</b> there is <b>no</b> plant <b>of their</b> species <b>that is safeguarded.</b> These plants are not cultivated but grow wild, rendering them ownerless. Apparently, these plants that grow wild may be purchased in any quantity, even from an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, with no three-meal limit.

### Part 4
The Gemara continues. Rav Sheshet <b>raised the objection, and he</b> also <b>resolved it:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> in the mishna with regard to food in the amount <b>sufficient</b> for his <b>sustenance [<i>man</i>].</b> These plants that the mishna excludes from the prohibition against purchase from an <i>am ha’aretz</i> are still subject to the three-meal limit. <b>And likewise, Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> in the amount <b>sufficient</b> for his <b>sustenance [<i>man</i>]. From where may it be inferred that <i>man</i> is a term</b> meaning <b>sustenance?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “And the king appointed [<i>vayman</i>] for them</b> a daily portion of the king’s food” (Daniel 1:5).

### Part 5
§ The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> if one may not purchase produce from an <i>am ha’aretz</i> lest he misuse the money, it should <b>also</b> be prohibited to give him money and purchase <b>a <i>lulav</i></b> from him during the Sabbatical Year. The Gemara answers: The mishna is dealing with a case where the <b><i>lulav</i> is of the sixth</b> year <b>that is entering the seventh</b> year. As it grew during the sixth year, it is permitted, even though it was removed from the tree during the seventh year. The fact that it remained on the tree between Rosh HaShana and <i>Sukkot</i> does not render it Sabbatical-Year produce. The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> the <b><i>etrog</i>, too, is</b> an object <b>of the sixth</b> year <b>that is entering the seventh</b> year and should have the same status. The Gemara answers: With regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i>,</b> as opposed to a <i>lulav</i>, in determining its status <b>we go</b> according to its <b>picking</b> and not when it grew. Therefore, in that case, the <i>etrog</i> is considered to be Sabbatical-Year produce.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: <b>But both Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who disagree about the status of an <i>etrog</i> that grew in one year and was picked in the following year in terms of determining its year for the <i>halakhot</i> of tithing, agree with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> <b>of</b> the <b>Sabbatical Year</b> that with regard to <b>an <i>etrog</i> we go</b> according to its <b>ripening, as we learned in a mishna</b> (<i>Bikkurim</i> 2:6): The halakhic status of the fruit of <b>an <i>etrog</i></b> tree <b>is like</b> that <b>of</b> a typical fruit <b>tree in three manners and</b> like that <b>of a vegetable in one manner.</b>

### Part 7
The mishna elaborates: Its halakhic status is like that <b>of a tree in three manners:</b> With regard <b>to <i>orla</i>,</b> i.e., it is prohibited to eat of its fruit during the first three years after its planting; with regard <b>to fourth-</b>year produce, i.e., fruits that grow during the fourth year after the tree’s planting, which may not be used outside of Jerusalem unless they are deconsecrated by means of redemption; <b>and</b> with regard <b>to the Sabbatical Year.</b> With regard to all those <i>halakhot</i>, the year to which the fruit is ascribed is determined by when it ripens. And its halakhic status is like that <b>of a vegetable in one manner:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC