
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> that the verse states: <b>“Fruit of a beautiful tree,”</b> meaning, <b>a tree that the taste of its tree</b> trunk <b>and</b> the taste of its <b>fruit are alike.</b> What tree is that? <b>You must say it is</b> the <b><i>etrog</i></b> tree.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And say</b> that it is referring to the <b>pepper</b> tree, since the taste of its trunk and the taste of its fruit are alike, <b>as it was taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: “When you enter the land and plant any tree for food you shall regard its fruit as <i>orla</i>” (Leviticus 19:23). <b>Rabbi Meir would say</b> that <b>by inference from that which is stated</b> “and plant any tree,” <b>don’t I know that it is</b> referring to <b>a tree</b> that produces <b>food? Rather,</b> for <b>what</b> purpose <b>does the verse state: “Any tree for food”?</b> It is <b>to include a tree that the taste of its tree</b> trunk <b>and</b> the taste of its <b>fruit are alike. And which</b> tree <b>is this? You must say this is the pepper</b> tree. This comes <b>to teach you that the peppers,</b> and even its trunk, are edible, and therefore the tree is <b>obligated</b> in the prohibition of <b><i>orla</i>. And Eretz Yisrael lacks nothing, as it is stated: “A land where you shall eat bread without scarceness, you shall lack nothing”</b> (Deuteronomy 8:9). From where, then, is it derived that the Torah commands the taking of an <i>etrog</i> as one of the four species? Perhaps the verse is referring to peppers.

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> with regard to the four species, it is clear that the Torah is not referring to peppers, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that it is not possible</b> to utilize peppers for this purpose. <b>How shall we proceed?</b> If <b>we take one</b> pepper, <b>its taking is not noticeable</b> due to its small size. If <b>we take two or three</b> peppers, <b>the Torah said one</b> fruit <b>and not two or three fruits. Therefore, it is impossible.</b> The verse “the fruit of a beautiful tree” cannot be referring to peppers.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: Do not read</b> the verse as it is written, <b><i>hadar</i>,</b> meaning beautiful, <b>but rather</b> read it <b><i>hadir</i>,</b> meaning the sheep pen. And it means, <b>just as</b> in <b>this pen there are large and small</b> sheep, <b>unblemished and blemished</b> sheep, <b>so too,</b> this tree <b>has large and small</b> fruits, <b>flawless and blemished</b> fruits. The Gemara wonders: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>among other fruits there are not large and small</b> fruits, <b>flawless and blemished</b> fruits? How does this description identify the <i>etrog</i> specifically? <b>Rather, this is</b> what Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>is saying:</b> Just as in a pen, there are both large and small sheep together, so too, on an <i>etrog</i> tree, <b>when</b> the <b>small ones come</b> into being, the <b>large ones still exist</b> on the tree, which is not the case with other fruit trees.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Abbahu said: Do not read</b> it <b><i>hadar</i>, but rather</b> read it <b><i>haddar</i>,</b> meaning one <b>that dwells,</b> referring to <b>an item that dwells on its tree from year to year. Ben Azzai says: Do not read</b> it <b><i>hadar</i>, but rather</b> read it <b><i>idur</i>, as in the Greek language one calls water <i>idur</i>. And which is</b> the fruit <b>that grows on</b> the basis of <b>all water</b> sources, and not exclusively through irrigation or rainwater? <b>You must say it is an <i>etrog</i>.</b>

### Part 6
The mishna continues: An <i>etrog</i> <b>from a tree worshipped as idolatry or from a city</b> whose residents were <b>incited</b> to idolatry is unfit. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the <i>etrog</i> <b>is fated for burning, its</b> requisite <b>measure was crushed.</b> Although it has not yet been burned, its legal status is that of ashes.

### Part 7
The mishna continues: An <i>etrog</i> <b>of <i>orla</i> is unfit.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason? Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin and Rabbi Asi disagree</b> about <b>this</b> matter. <b>One said:</b> It is unfit <b>because there is no permission to eat</b> <i>orla</i>. Anything that may not be eaten is not one’s property, and it is therefore unfit for use in this mitzva. <b>And one said:</b> It is unfit <b>because it has no monetary</b> value. Since it is prohibited to benefit from <i>orla</i>, it has no value, and one cannot own an item that has no value. Therefore, it does not fulfill the requirement of taking an <i>etrog</i> from one’s own property.

### Part 8
The Gemara asserts <b>that it may enter one’s mind</b> to say: The <b>one who requires permission to eat</b> the <i>etrog</i> to render it fit <b>does not require</b> that it have <b>monetary</b> value, <b>and</b> the <b>one who requires</b> that it have <b>monetary</b> value <b>does not require permission to eat it.</b> On that basis, the Gemara raises a difficulty from what <b>we learned in the mishna:</b> An <i>etrog</i> <b>of impure <i>teruma</i> is unfit. Granted, according to the one who says</b> that an <i>etrog</i> of <i>orla</i> is unfit <b>because there is no permission to eat it,</b> it works out <b>well</b> that an <i>etrog</i> of impure <i>teruma</i> is unfit, as it too may not be eaten. <b>However, according to the one who says</b> that it is unfit <b>because it has no monetary value, why</b> is the <i>etrog</i> of impure <i>teruma</i> unfit? Although eating it is prohibited, a priest <b>burns it</b> as fuel <b>under his cooked food.</b> Since one may benefit from it, impure <i>teruma</i> has monetary value.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> contrary to the previous assumption, <b>with regard to permission to eat</b> it, <b>everyone agrees that we require</b> that it be permitted to eat the <i>etrog</i>. <b>When they disagree is with regard to monetary</b> value. One <b>Sage holds: We require permission to eat it,</b> but <b>we do not require</b> that it have <b>monetary</b> value. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage holds: We also require</b> that it have <b>monetary</b> value. The Gemara asks: If so, according to this understanding, <b>what is the</b> practical halakhic difference <b>between them?</b>

### Part 10
<b>There is</b> a practical difference <b>between them</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of an <i>etrog</i> of <b>second tithe in Jerusalem, and according to the opinion of Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that the legal status of second-tithe produce in Jerusalem is that of consecrated property. Although its owner has the right to eat it, just as he may eat from offerings that he sacrifices, it is the property of God, and he has no monetary rights to the produce. According <b>to the one who said:</b> An <i>etrog</i> of <i>orla</i> is unfit <b>because there is no permission to eat</b> it, <b>there is permission to eat</b> second tithe; therefore, according to Rabbi Meir, a second-tithe <i>etrog</i> in Jerusalem is fit for use in fulfilling the mitzva. <b>And</b> according <b>to the one who said:</b> An <i>etrog</i> of <i>orla</i> is unfit <b>because it has no monetary</b> value, <b>second tithe</b> in Jerusalem <b>is</b> consecrated <b>property of God</b> and has no monetary value to its owner. Therefore, according to Rabbi Meir, it is not fit for use in fulfilling the mitzva.

### Part 11
In an attempt to attribute the opinions to the <i>amora’im</i>, the Gemara suggests: <b>Conclude that Rabbi Asi</b> is the one <b>who said</b> that the reason is <b>because there is no monetary</b> value, <b>as Rabbi Asi said:</b> With <b>an <i>etrog</i> of second tithe, according to the statement of Rabbi Meir, a person does not fulfill his obligation with it on</b> the <b>Festival. According to the Rabbis, a person fulfills his obligation with it on</b> the <b>Festival.</b> That is precisely the manner in which the dispute with regard to the need for the <i>etrog</i> to have monetary value is presented above. The Gemara determines: Indeed, <b>conclude</b> that Rabbi Asi is the one who holds that the <i>etrog</i> must have monetary value as well.

### Part 12
§ With regard to <b>the matter itself, Rabbi Asi said:</b> With <b>an <i>etrog</i> of second tithe, according to the statement of Rabbi Meir, a person does not fulfill his obligation with it on</b> the <b>Festival. According to the Rabbis, a person fulfills his obligation with it on</b> the <b>Festival.</b> With <b><i>matza</i> of second tithe, according to Rabbi Meir, a person does not fulfill his obligation with it on Passover</b> because it is not his. <b>According to the Rabbis, a person fulfills his obligation with it on Passover.</b> Similarly, <b>according to Rabbi Meir, dough of second tithe is exempt from the obligation of</b> separating <b><i>ḥalla</i>. According to the Rabbis, it is subject to the obligation of</b> separating <b><i>ḥalla</i>.</b> In all of these cases, the dispute is whether second tithe is the property of the owner or the property of God.

### Part 13
<b>Rav Pappa strongly objects to this: Granted,</b> with regard to <b>dough, it is written: “The first of your dough,</b> <i>ḥalla</i> you shall offer as a gift” (Numbers 15:20). “Your dough” indicates that one is obligated to separate <i>ḥalla</i> only from dough that belongs to him and not consecrated dough. With regard to the <b><i>etrog</i> too it is written: “</b>And you shall take <b>for yourselves,”</b> indicating that it must be <b>from your own</b> property. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b><i>matza</i>,</b> why does he not fulfill his obligation with second tithe? <b>Is it written: Your <i>matza</i>? Rabba bar Shmuel said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Yeimar bar Shelamya</b> who said: This is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between <b>bread</b> written with regard to <i>matza</i> and <b>bread</b> written with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>. <b>It is written here,</b> with regard to <i>matza</i>: <b>“Bread of affliction”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:3), <b>and it is written there,</b> with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC