
### Part 1
<b>just as its pouring is in sanctity, so too must its burning be in sanctity. From where</b> may it <b>be inferred</b> that this is referring to burning? <b>Ravina said: It is derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between the term <b>sanctity</b> written with regard to libations and <b>sanctity</b> written with regard to leftover offerings. <b>It is written here,</b> with regard to libations: <b>“In sanctity shall you pour a libation”</b> (Numbers 28:7), <b>and it is written there,</b> with regard to leftover offerings: <b>“You shall burn the leftovers in fire; they are not to be eaten, for they are sanctity”</b> (Exodus 29:34). Through the verbal analogy it is derived that leftover libations must also be burned.

### Part 2
The Gemara notes: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion <b>is that which is taught</b> in this mishna? With regard to <b>libations, initially,</b> prior to being poured, <b>one</b> can <b>misuse consecrated property with them,</b> as is the case with all consecrated items. However, once <b>they descended to the drainpipes, one does not</b> violate the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of <b>consecrated property with them,</b> because the mitzva was already fulfilled. <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok,</b> who holds that the libations did not descend to the depths but would collect between the ramp and the altar and would be collected once every seventy years. <b>As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> how could the libations be misused? <b>Didn’t they</b> already <b>descend to the depths</b> through the drainpipes?

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> it could be referring <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> some of the wine landed outside the drainpipes and <b>was collected</b> in the space between the ramp and the altar.

### Part 4
<b>And some say</b> a different version of this exchange. <b>Let us say</b> that the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis and not</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar bar Tzadok. As, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> then the wine that collected between the ramp and the altar <b>remains in its sanctity,</b> as it must be burned, and the prohibition against misuse would still apply. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, there is no item whose mitzva has been performed with which one</b> can violate the prohibition against <b>misuse of consecrated property. Reish Lakish said: When they pour wine onto the altar, they plug</b> the top of <b>the drainpipes</b> so that the wine does not descend to the depths, in order <b>to fulfill that which is stated: “In sanctity shall you pour a libation of strong drink [<i>shekhar</i>] unto the Lord”</b> (Numbers 28:7).

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> may it <b>be inferred</b> that this is referring to plugging the drainpipes? <b>Rav Pappa said: <i>Shekhar</i></b> is <b>an expression of drinking, of satiation, of intoxication.</b> In order to underscore all three aspects of the libations, the space between the altar and the ramp would fill with wine. <b>Rav Pappa said: Conclude from this that when a person is satiated from</b> drinking <b>wine,</b> it is <b>from his throat</b> being filled with wine that he is <b>satiated.</b> Unlike food, wine does not satiate a person when it fills his stomach. <b>Rava said:</b> Therefore, <b>let a young</b> Torah <b>scholar, who does not</b> have <b>much wine, swallow</b> his wine <b>in</b> large <b>swigs,</b> filling his throat each time, as he will thereby maximize his enjoyment. And <b>Rava</b> himself, when drinking <b>a cup of blessing, would swallow</b> large <b>swigs</b> so as to drink the wine accompanying the mitzva in an optimal manner.

### Part 6
§ Apropos the homiletic interpretations of the verses from Song of Songs with regard to the drainpipes, the Gemara cites additional interpretations. <b>Rava taught: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “How beautiful are your steps in sandals, O prince’s daughter”</b> (Song of Songs 7:2)? <b>How beautiful are the feet of the Jewish people at the time when they ascend</b> to Jerusalem <b>for the Festival. “O prince’s daughter”;</b> this is referring to <b>the daughter of Abraham our Patriarch, who was called prince, as it is stated: “The princes of the peoples are gathered, the people of the God of Abraham”</b> (Psalms 47:10). The verse calls the Jewish people the people of <b>the God of Abraham and not the God of Isaac and Jacob.</b> Why are the Jewish people associated specifically with Abraham? <b>Rather</b> than referring to the three Patriarchs, the verse is referring to <b>the God of Abraham, who was first of the converts,</b> and therefore it is reasonable for the princes of other nations to gather around him.

### Part 7
In <b>the school of Rav Anan</b> it was <b>taught: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The hidden of your thighs”</b> (Song of Songs 7:2)? <b>Why are matters of Torah likened to a thigh?</b> It is <b>to tell you</b> that <b>just as</b> the <b>thigh is</b> always <b>concealed,</b> covered by clothes, so <b>too, matters of Torah</b> are optimal when recited <b>in private</b> and not in public.

### Part 8
<b>And this is what Rabbi Elazar said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “It has been told you, O man, what is good, and what the Lord does require of you; only to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God”</b> (Micah 6:8)? <b>“To do justly”; this is justice. “To love mercy”; this is acts of kindness. “To walk humbly with your God”; this is</b> referring to <b>taking the</b> indigent <b>dead out</b> for burial <b>and accompanying</b> a poor <b>bride to</b> her <b>wedding canopy,</b> both of which must be performed without fanfare. The Gemara summarizes: <b>And are</b> these <b>matters not</b> inferred <b><i>a fortiori</i>? If,</b> with regard to <b>matters that tend to be conducted in public,</b> as the multitudes participate in funerals and weddings, <b>the Torah says: Walk humbly,</b> then in <b>matters that tend to be conducted in private,</b> e.g., giving charity and studying Torah, <b>all the more so</b> should they be conducted privately.

### Part 9
§ <b>Rabbi Elazar said: One who performs</b> acts of <b>charity is greater than</b> one who sacrifices <b>all</b> types of <b>offerings, as it is stated: “To perform charity and justice is more acceptable to the Lord than an offering”</b> (Proverbs 21:3), including all types of offerings. <b>And Rabbi Elazar said: Acts of kindness,</b> assisting someone in need, <b>are greater than charity, as it is stated: “Sow to yourselves according to charity, and reap according to kindness”</b> (Hosea 10:12). This means: <b>If a person sows,</b> it is <b>uncertain</b> whether <b>he</b> will <b>eat or</b> whether <b>he</b> will <b>not eat,</b> since much can go wrong before the seed becomes food. However, if <b>a person reaps, he certainly eats.</b> In this verse, charity is likened to sowing, while acts of kindness are likened to reaping.

### Part 10
<b>And Rabbi Elazar said:</b> The reward for <b>charity is paid</b> from Heaven <b>only in accordance with the kindness</b> and generosity included <b>therein</b> and in accordance with the effort and the consideration that went into the giving. It is not merely in accordance with the sum of money, <b>as it is stated: “Sow to yourselves according to charity, and reap according to kindness.”</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> that <b>acts of kindness are superior to charity in three respects: Charity</b> can be performed only <b>with one’s money,</b> while <b>acts of kindness</b> can be performed <b>both with his person and with his money. Charity</b> is given <b>to the poor,</b> while <b>acts of kindness</b> are performed <b>both for the poor and for the rich. Charity</b> is given to the <b>living,</b> while <b>acts of kindness</b> are performed <b>both for the living and for the dead.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Elazar said: Anyone who performs charity and justice is</b> considered <b>as though he filled the whole world in its entirety with kindness, as it is stated: “He loves charity and justice; the earth is full of the kindness of the Lord”</b> (Psalms 33:5). <b>Lest you say that anyone who comes to leap</b> and perform an act of kindness may simply <b>leap</b> and do so without scrutiny, <b>the verse states: “How precious is your kindness, O God”</b> (Psalms 36:8). It is a precious and rare occurrence to perform an act of kindness properly. One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even a God-fearing</b> individual does not always encounter the opportunity to perform acts of kindness. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “But the kindness of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him”</b> (Psalms 103:17).

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥama bar Pappa said:</b> With regard to <b>any person who has grace about him, it is certain that he is God-fearing, as it is stated: “But the kindness of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear Him.”</b> When one sees that a certain individual is endowed with grace and kindness, one can be certain that he is a God-fearing person. <b>And Rabbi Elazar said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “She opens her mouth with wisdom, and a Torah of kindness is on her tongue”</b> (Proverbs 31:26)? The Gemara asks: <b>Is there, then, a Torah of kindness and a Torah that is not of kindness? Rather,</b> it is <b>Torah</b> studied <b>for its own sake that is a Torah of kindness,</b> as one studies it wholeheartedly; and it is Torah studied <b>not for its own sake</b> but for some ulterior motive <b>that is a Torah that is not of kindness. Some say</b> that it is <b>Torah</b> studied in order <b>to teach it</b> to others <b>that is a Torah of kindness;</b> it is Torah studied <b>with</b> the intent of <b>not teaching it</b> to others <b>that is a Torah that is not of kindness.</b>

### Part 14
§ The mishna continues: <b>As its performance during the week,</b> so is its performance on Shabbat, except that on Shabbat one would not draw water. Instead, on Shabbat eve, one would fill a golden barrel that was not consecrated and would place it in the Temple chamber, and water would be drawn from there on Shabbat. The Gemara asks: <b>And why</b> should one do so? <b>Let</b> him <b>bring</b> the water <b>in a consecrated</b> barrel. <b>Ze’iri said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> in the mishna <b>holds that there is no</b> requisite <b>measure for the water</b> to be poured for libation, and therefore more than three <i>log</i> could be consecrated; <b>and</b> that <b>Temple vessels consecrate</b> their content if it is fit to be consecrated, even <b>without intent</b> to consecrate it.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC