
### Part 1
therefore, one should be concerned that <b>perhaps she will become pregnant and her milk will dry up</b> during pregnancy, <b>and</b> the lack of milk will <b>kill</b> her newborn child. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, even</b> if his wife is pregnant with <b>his own</b> child, the same concern applies. The Gemara explains: For <b>his own</b> child, <b>she will feed [<i>memasmesa</i>] him with eggs and milk</b> as a substitute for the mother’s milk. The Gemara asks: Even if the child is not his, it is still the mother’s child, and for <b>her</b> child <b>she will also feed him with eggs and milk.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The husband will not give her</b> money to procure food for a child that is not his. The Gemara asks: <b>But she could sue</b> her first husband’s <b>heirs</b> to provide subsistence for the child. <b>Abaye said: A woman is embarrassed to come to court, and</b> therefore she will not obtain enough sustenance for him. Consequently, <b>she</b> effectively <b>kills her son</b> as a result.

### Part 2
§ The mishna states: The requirement to wait three months before remarrying applies <b>both to virgins and non-virgins,</b> both to divorcées and to widows, and both to women who were married to their previous husbands and to women who were only betrothed. The Gemara asks: <b>Which</b> women <b>are</b> referred to as <b>virgins and which are</b> referred to as those who were <b>betrothed?</b> Although the two terms appear to be synonymous, since a virgin will be subject to levirate marriage only if she was betrothed, they must certainly refer to two different categories of women. Similarly, <b>which</b> women <b>are</b> referred to as <b>non-virgins and which are</b> referred to as <b>married,</b> as a married woman is always considered to be a non-virgin?

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying:</b> The requirement to wait applies <b>to both virgins and non-virgins who were widowed or divorced, whether from betrothal or from marriage,</b> i.e., the mishna does not list different categories of women but instead establishes a general principle.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Elazar did not enter the study hall</b> one day. <b>He found Rabbi Asi</b> and <b>said to him: What was said by the Sages in the study hall</b> today? <b>He said to him: This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> that a woman is permitted to be betrothed even before three months have passed, since the reason for waiting does not apply in that case.

### Part 5
Rabbi Elazar said: <b>From the fact</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan needed to state this, it would seem <b>that</b> there is <b>an individual</b> opinion that <b>disagrees with him,</b> even though no such opinion is mentioned in the mishna. Rabbi Asi answered: <b>Yes,</b> that is correct, <b>and so it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> in the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Yevamot</i> 6:6): With regard to a woman who is certainly not pregnant, for example, a woman who, at the time of her husband’s death, had not lived with her husband for some time because she always eagerly hurried, like <b>one pursued, to go to her father’s house, or because she had</b> been subject to <b>anger in her husband’s house, or because her husband had been incarcerated in prison, or because her husband was elderly or infirm, or because she was infirm.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Or</b> a woman who could not be pregnant <b>because she miscarried after her husband’s death, or because she was barren, or elderly, or a minor, or a sexually underdeveloped woman [<i>aylonit</i>], or</b> if for some other reason <b>she was unsuited to give birth;</b> even though the reason for the decree to wait three months does not apply to such a woman, nevertheless, <b>she must wait three months.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda permits</b> such women <b>to be betrothed or to marry immediately.</b> It is apparent from the <i>baraita</i> that the question of whether a woman is required to wait the three months when the reason to do so does not apply is subject to a dispute.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: Rabbi Yoḥanan retracted</b> his statement that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei. <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> Even <b>if he</b> wanted to <b>retract</b> his statement, would <b>he retract from the <i>baraita</i></b> that records the opinions of the Sages <b>of the vineyard</b> of Yavne? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, said: I heard from the mouth of the Sages in the vineyard of Yavne</b> that <b>all</b> those women enumerated in the <i>baraita</i> above <b>need to wait three months.</b> If the great Sages of Yavne held in accordance with the opinion Rabbi Yosei, then the <i>halakha</i> is certainly in accordance with his opinion.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya said to Rabbi Zerika: When you come before Rabbi Abbahu, raise the</b> following <b>contradiction: Did Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> actually <b>say</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei? Didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i> is</b> always established <b>in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>an unattributed mishna? And we learned</b> in the mishna an unattributed ruling: <b>All women may not marry and may not be betrothed until they have</b> waited <b>three months</b> since their previous marriage ended; this applies to <b>both virgins and non-virgins.</b>

### Part 9
When Rabbi Zerika went and asked, Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him:</b> The one <b>who raised this contradiction to you is</b> clearly <b>not concerned for his flour;</b> this <b>is</b> a case of <b>an unattributed</b> ruling <b>followed by a dispute</b> on that ruling, and in such cases the <b><i>halakha</i> is not</b> necessarily <b>in accordance with the unattributed opinion. As Rav Pappa said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> who said the following principle: When the Mishna first records <b>a dispute, and afterward</b> it records only one side of that dispute as <b>an unattributed opinion,</b> then the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the unattributed opinion.</b> However, when the Mishna first records <b>an unattributed opinion and afterward</b> records that the ruling is subject to <b>a dispute, the <i>halakha</i> is not</b> necessarily <b>in accordance with the unattributed opinion.</b> In each case, the later reference is considered to be a summary of the matter.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Rabbi Abbahu would walk while leaning upon the shoulder of Rabbi Naḥum, his attendant,</b> and along the way Rabbi Naḥum would <b>walk and gather halakhic rulings from him.</b> Once, Rabbi Naḥum <b>asked him:</b> When the Mishna first records <b>a dispute, and afterward</b> it records only one side of that dispute as <b>an unattributed opinion, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the unattributed opinion.</b> Rabbi Naḥum then asked: When the Mishna first records <b>an unattributed opinion and afterward</b> records that the ruling is subject to <b>a dispute, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is not</b> necessarily <b>in accordance with the unattributed opinion.</b>

### Part 11
Rabbi Naḥum asked: When a ruling is recorded in <b>the Mishna as unattributed and</b> it is subject to <b>a dispute in a <i>baraita</i>, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the <b>unattributed opinion</b> in the Mishna. Rabbi Naḥum then asked: When <b>the Mishna</b> records that a matter is subject to <b>a dispute, and</b> only one side is recorded as <b>an unattributed opinion in a <i>baraita</i>, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Rabbi Abbahu <b>said to him:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC