
### Part 1
This <b>teaches that the Divine Presence does not rest upon less than two thousands and two ten-thousands of the Jewish people,</b> as the terms thousands and ten-thousands are both in the plural. Consequently, if <b>there were two thousands and two ten-thousands of the Jewish people, less one, and this</b> man <b>did not engage in</b> the mitzva to be <b>fruitful and multiply, is he not found</b> to have <b>caused the Divine Presence to be depart from the Jewish people?</b>

### Part 2
<b>Abba Ḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer:</b> A man who does not engage in procreation is <b>liable to death, as it is stated</b> with regard to the sons of Aaron: “And Nadav and Avihu died…<b>and they had no children”</b> (Numbers 3:4). This indicates that if they would have <b>had children they would not have died. Others say:</b> He <b>causes the Divine Presence to depart from the Jewish people, as it is stated: “To be a God to you and to your seed after you”</b> (Genesis 17:7). <b>When your seed is after you,</b> i.e., when you have children, <b>the Divine Presence rests</b> upon the Jewish people, but if <b>your seed is not after you, upon whom</b> can the Divine Presence <b>rest? Upon wood and stones?</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a man <b>married a woman and stayed with her</b> for <b>ten years and she did not give birth, he is no</b> longer <b>permitted to neglect</b> the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply. Consequently, he must either divorce her and marry someone else, or take another wife while still married to her. If <b>he divorced her she is permitted to marry another</b> man, as it is not necessarily on her account that she and her first husband did not have children, <b>and the second</b> husband <b>is permitted to stay with her</b> for <b>ten years. And if she had a miscarriage, he counts</b> the ten years <b>from the time of the miscarriage.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> If a man <b>married a woman and stayed with her</b> for <b>ten years and she did not give birth, he should divorce</b> her <b>and pay</b> her <b>marriage contract,</b> because <b>perhaps he did not merit to be built,</b> i.e., to have children, <b>from her.</b> It is not certain that their failure to have children is due to her, as it is possible that they are not a suitable match for bearing children.

### Part 5
<b>Although there is no</b> explicit <b>proof for the matter</b> that one must take another wife if he has not had children after ten years of marriage, there is <b>an allusion to the matter,</b> as the verse states: “And Sarai, Abram’s wife, took Hagar…<b>after Abram had dwelled ten years in the land of Canaan,</b> and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife” (Genesis 16:3). Incidentally, this verse also comes <b>to teach you that</b> the years spent <b>dwelling outside of Eretz Yisrael do not count</b> as part of <b>his tally. Consequently,</b> if <b>he was sick</b> during this period <b>or she was sick, or</b> if one of <b>the two of them</b> was <b>imprisoned in jail,</b> it <b>does not count</b> as part of <b>his tally.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: Let us derive from Isaac</b> that one may wait a longer period of time, <b>as it is written: “And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah</b>…to be his wife” (Genesis 25:20), <b>and it is written</b> with regard to the birth of Jacob and Esau: <b>“And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them”</b> (Genesis 25:26). This indicates that one may wait twenty years. Rav Naḥman <b>said to him: Isaac</b> knew that he <b>was infertile,</b> and therefore there was no reason for him to marry another woman, as Rebekah was not the cause of their infertility.

### Part 7
The Gemara responds: <b>If so, Abraham</b> also should not have married another woman, as he <b>was also infertile.</b> Rather, the <i>tanna</i> <b>requires that</b> verse that states when Jacob and Esau were born <b>for</b> that which <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba</b> taught. This is <b>because Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Why were Ishmael’s years counted</b> in the Torah, as they do not appear to be relevant to its narrative? <b>In order to determine through them the years of Jacob,</b> i.e., Jacob’s age at the time that various events took place, as explained in tractate <i>Megilla</i> (17a). The verse concerning Jacob’s birth was not meant to allude to a <i>halakha</i> about remaining married before having children, but to make it possible to determine Jacob’s age by relating it to the age of Ishmael.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Isaac our father was infertile, as it is stated: “And Isaac entreated the Lord concerning [<i>lenokhaḥ</i>] his wife</b> because she was barren” (Genesis 25:21). <b>It is not stated</b> that he entreated the Lord <b>for [<i>al</i>] his wife, but <i>lenokhaḥ</i>,</b> which can mean opposite, against, or corresponding to; this <b>teaches that they were both infertile.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> why does the verse continue: <b>“And</b> the Lord <b>let Himself be entreated of him”?</b> The verse <b>should say: And</b> the Lord <b>let Himself be entreated of them.</b> The Gemara answers that their prayers were answered due to Isaac, <b>because the prayer of a righteous individual</b> who is <b>the son of a righteous individual is not similar to the prayer of a righteous individual</b> who is <b>the son of a wicked individual,</b> and Rebekah’s father was the wicked Bethuel.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: For what reason were our forefathers</b> initially <b>infertile? Because the Holy One, Blessed be He, desires the prayers of the righteous,</b> and He therefore wanted them to pray for children. Similarly, <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Why are the prayers of the righteous compared to a pitchfork [<i>eter</i>],</b> as in the verse: “And He let Himself be entreated [<i>vaye’ater</i>]”? This indicates that <b>just as this pitchfork turns over produce from one place to another, so the prayer of the righteous turns over the attributes of the Holy One, Blessed be He, from</b> the <b>attribute of rage to</b> the <b>attribute of mercy. Rabbi Ami said: Abraham and Sarah were</b> originally <b><i>tumtumin</i>,</b> people whose sexual organs are concealed and not functional, <b>as it is stated: “Look to the rock</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC