
### Part 1
that <b>apostasy [<i>meshumadut</i>] disqualifies,</b> as the term “stranger” in this context is understood to refer to a Jew whose conduct makes him estranged from God, and he is disqualified from eating the Paschal lamb, <b>but apostasy does not disqualify</b> one from eating <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks further: If so, with regard to the phrase “from it” in the verse <b>“No uncircumcised person shall eat from it”</b> (Exodus 12:48), which again emphasizes “from it” and not from another item, <b>why do I</b> need it? The Gemara answers: This teaches that only <b>from it,</b> the Paschal lamb, one who is uncircumcised <b>may not eat, but he eats <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs.</b> One who is uncircumcised is obligated to eat <i>matza</i> and bitter herbs on Passover, just like any other Jew.

### Part 3
The Gemara continues: <b>And it was necessary</b> for the Torah <b>to write</b> the prohibition with regard to <b>an uncircumcised</b> man, <b>and it was necessary</b> for the Torah <b>to write</b> a separate prohibition with regard to <b>any stranger. As, if the Merciful One had written</b> only about <b>an uncircumcised</b> man, one might have thought that only for him is it prohibited to eat from the Paschal lamb <b>because</b> the foreskin <b>is repulsive, but</b> with regard to <b>a stranger,</b> who <b>is not repulsive, say</b> that it is <b>not</b> prohibited. <b>And if the Merciful One had written</b> only about <b>any stranger,</b> one might have concluded that only for him is it prohibited to eat from the Paschal lamb <b>because his heart is not</b> directed <b>toward Heaven</b> due to his apostasy, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>an uncircumcised</b> man, <b>whose heart is</b> directed <b>toward Heaven,</b> and it is only on account of unavoidable circumstances that he has not undergone circumcision, <b>say</b> that there is <b>no</b> prohibition against his eating the Paschal lamb. Therefore, <b>it is necessary</b> to teach both cases.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: With regard to the phrase <b>“of it”</b> in the verse “Do not eat of it raw, nor boiled in water, but roasted in fire” (Exodus 12:9), and the phrase <b>“of it”</b> in the verse “And you shall let nothing of it remain until the morning” (Exodus 12:10), both of which are terms of exclusion, <b>why do I</b> need them? The Gemara answers that they are necessary <b>for that which Rabba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak said,</b> as will be explained later (74a).

### Part 5
<b>The Master said</b> above in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Akiva says</b> that it <b>is not necessary</b> to derive by way of a verbal analogy the <i>halakha</i> that an uncircumcised priest may not eat <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> the verse <b>says: “Any man [<i>ish ish</i>]</b> from the seed of Aaron who is a leper or a <i>zav</i> shall not eat of the holy things” (Leviticus 22:4). The repetition of the word <i>ish</i> comes <b>to include an uncircumcised</b> man and indicate that he too may not partake of consecrated food. The Gemara asks: <b>But say</b> that the verse comes <b>to include an acute mourner</b> in the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i>. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said: The verse states: “No foreigner</b> may eat of the holy thing” (Leviticus 22:10), which indicates: A disqualification stemming from <b>foreignness I told you</b> prevents one from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>but not</b> a disqualification based on <b>acute mourning.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Say</b> that the verse comes to teach that a disqualification stemming from foreignness prevents one from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>but not</b> a disqualification based on the priest’s <b>lack of circumcision,</b> and so it should be permitted for an uncircumcised priest to partake of <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>Isn’t it written: “Any man [<i>ish ish</i>],”</b> where the repetition of the word <i>ish</i> comes to include an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition?

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> that led you to include an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i> and exclude an acute mourner? The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>lack of circumcision should be included</b> and should preclude a priest’s eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> the <i>halakhot</i> governing an uncircumcised man are stringent in several respects, as alluded to by the following mnemonic of key words: <b>Acts; <i>karetim</i>; the</b> divine <b>word; the slave.</b> The Gemara explains: An uncircumcised man <b>lacks</b> the <b>act</b> of circumcision, <b>and</b> this <b>act</b> is performed <b>on his body;</b> the failure to perform circumcision is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>;</b> circumcision <b>existed before the</b> divine <b>word</b> was spoken at Mount Sinai, as the mitzva of circumcision had already been given to Abraham; <b>and the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves precludes</b> one’s eating the Paschal lamb.

### Part 8
The Gemara counters: <b>On the contrary, acute mourning should be included</b> and it should prevent a priest from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> acute mourning <b>is</b> relevant <b>at any time, it applies to</b> both <b>men and women, and it is not in</b> the mourner’s <b>power to render himself fit</b> until after the deceased is buried.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>These</b> arguments for including an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition <b>are</b> more <b>numerous. Rava said:</b> Even <b>without</b> the rationale that <b>these</b> arguments <b>are</b> more <b>numerous, you still cannot say</b> that an acute mourner should be included and an uncircumcised priest should be excluded, as <b>the verse states: “Any man [<i>ish ish</i>],”</b> emphasizing maleness. Now, <b>what matter applies to a man and not to a woman? You must say</b> that <b>it is lack of circumcision,</b> and therefore it cannot be that the phrase comes to include acute mourning in the prohibition.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And what does Rabbi Akiva do</b> with <b>this</b> phrase: <b>“A sojourner and a hired servant,”</b> as it is not needed for the Paschal lamb? <b>Rav Shemaya said:</b> It serves <b>to include a circumcised Arab and a circumcised Gibeonite</b> in the prohibition against the eating of the Paschal lamb. Although they have been circumcised, it is prohibited for them to partake of the offering.

### Part 11
The Gemara poses a question: <b>And are these</b> considered <b>circumcised? But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Nedarim</i> 31b): If one vowed: <b>The benefit that I</b> might gain <b>from the uncircumcised is <i>konam</i></b> to me, i.e., forbidden to me like consecrated property, then it <b>is permitted</b> for him to derive benefit <b>from uncircumcised Jews, and</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to derive benefit <b>from the circumcised of the nations of the world,</b> as gentiles are considered uncircumcised even if they have their foreskins removed. And conversely, if he vowed: <b>The benefit that I</b> might gain <b>from the circumcised is <i>konam</i></b> to me, it is <b>permitted</b> for him to derive benefit <b>from the circumcised of the nations of the world,</b> as they are not considered circumcised, <b>and</b> it <b>is prohibited</b> for him to derive benefit <b>from uncircumcised Jews.</b> This indicates that the circumcision of gentiles is disregarded.

### Part 12
<b>Rather,</b> the phrase “a sojourner and a hired servant” comes <b>to include</b> in the prohibition against eating of the Paschal lamb <b>a convert</b> to Judaism <b>who was circumcised but did not</b> yet <b>immerse</b> in a ritual bath, <b>and a child who was born circumcised,</b> i.e., without a foreskin. Although he does not have a foreskin, he is still seen as lacking the act of circumcision. <b>And he,</b> Rabbi Akiva, <b>maintains</b> that <b>it is necessary to drip covenantal blood from him,</b> in lieu of circumcision, in order to usher him into the covenant of Abraham, even though he has no foreskin that can be removed.

### Part 13
<b>And Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who uses the words “a sojourner and a hired servant” for a verbal analogy, conforms <b>to his</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as he said: A convert who was circumcised but did not</b> yet <b>immerse is a proper convert</b> in every way. Therefore, the verse cannot come to exclude such an individual. <b>And he maintains</b> that in the case of <b>a child who was born circumcised, it is not necessary to drip covenantal blood from him.</b> Since he was born without a foreskin, no additional procedure is necessary.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And what does Rabbi Eliezer do</b> with <b>this</b> inclusive phrase <b>“any man [<i>ish ish</i>]”?</b> The Gemara answers: He maintains that <b>the Torah spoke in the language of men,</b> meaning that no special <i>halakha</i> is derived from this expression, as it is common biblical vernacular.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ḥama bar Ukva raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>an uncircumcised child</b> who is less than eight days old and not yet fit for circumcision, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with respect <b>to anointing him with oil of <i>teruma</i>?</b> The Gemara explains the two sides of the question: Does <b>lack of circumcision not at its</b> appointed <b>time,</b> meaning before the obligation of circumcision goes into effect, <b>preclude</b> the infant’s benefiting from <i>teruma</i>, as he has the status of an one who is uncircumcised, <b>or</b> perhaps it <b>does not preclude</b> his benefiting from <i>teruma</i>, as he is not considered uncircumcised until the mitzva of circumcision is applicable?

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Zeira said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>the circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>at the time of the preparation,</b> i.e., the slaughter, of the Paschal lamb, as it is stated: “Let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it” (Exodus 12:48), <b>and</b> the <i>halakha</i> concerning the circumcision of <b>one’s slaves at the time of the eating</b> of the Paschal lamb, as it is stated: “But every man’s servant…when you have circumcised him, then shall he eat from it” (Exodus 12:44). <b>From where</b> do I derive that it is proper <b>to apply</b> the prohibition <b>that was stated about this</b> case <b>to that</b> case, <b>and</b> the prohibition <b>that was said about that</b> case <b>to this</b> case, i.e., that the circumcision of both one’s male children and one’s slaves is indispensable both at the time of the preparation of the Paschal lamb and at the time of its consumption? The <i>tanna</i> answers that <b>the verse states</b> the term <b>“then”</b> with regard to male children and the term <b>“then”</b> with regard to slaves <b>as a verbal analogy.</b>

### Part 17
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted,</b> with regard to <b>one’s slaves you find</b> a case <b>where they are present at the time of eating but they were not present at the time of preparation; for example, if he purchased them in the meantime,</b> i.e., they did not belong to him when the Paschal lamb was slaughtered but he bought them immediately afterward, before it was time to eat it.

### Part 18
<b>However,</b> with regard to <b>his male</b> children, <b>how can you find</b> a case <b>where they are present at the time of eating, but they were not present at the time of preparation?</b> Does it <b>not</b> involve a situation <b>where they were born between</b> the time of the Paschal lamb’s <b>preparation and</b> the time of its <b>eating? Learn from this</b> that <b>lack of circumcision,</b> even <b>not at,</b> i.e., before, <b>its</b> appointed <b>time, is</b> nevertheless considered <b>lack of circumcision</b> that prevents the father from partaking of the offering.

### Part 19
<b>Rava said: And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it that way? How can you think that the lack of circumcision of a newborn child precludes his father’s eating from the Paschal lamb? Doesn’t <b>the Merciful One state: “Let all his males be circumcised,”</b> followed by <b>“and then let him come near and keep it”</b> (Exodus 12:48), <b>and</b> as <b>this</b> infant <b>is not</b> yet <b>fit for circumcision</b> he cannot possibly preclude the father’s partaking of the offering? <b>Rather, with what</b> case <b>are we dealing here?</b> With the case, <b>for example,</b> of a baby who was exempt from circumcision at the time of the preparation of the Paschal lamb because he was sick with a high fever, and subsequently <b>the fever left him</b> and he recovered. In such a case, failure to immediately circumcise his son precludes the father’s eating from the Paschal lamb.

### Part 20
The Gemara raises a difficulty: If the case is one of a child recovering from an illness, <b>let us give him the full seven</b> days that he needs to recuperate properly. <b>As Shmuel said:</b> In the case of a baby that was sick with a high fever, and subsequently <b>the fever left him, one gives him a full seven days</b> to heal and only then is he circumcised, but not before. The Gemara answers: The case is in fact one where <b>we</b> already <b>gave him a full seven</b> days to heal, but they culminated on the eve of Passover. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if the seven-day recovery period ended on the eve of Passover, why did the father wait until the time of eating the Paschal lamb, i.e., the first night of Passover? <b>He should have circumcised him</b> already <b>in the morning,</b> before the time of the preparation of the Paschal lamb. The Gemara answers: <b>We require</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC