
### Part 1
<b>a sleeping</b> man <b>has not acquired his <i>yevama</i>,</b> as he did not intend to perform the act of intercourse at all? <b>Rather,</b> the mishna was referring <b>to one who was inserted</b> into his <i>yevama</i> by accident. But <b>didn’t Rabba say:</b> One who <b>fell from a roof and was inserted</b> into a woman due to the force of his fall <b>is liable</b> to pay <b>four</b> of the five <b>types of indemnity</b> that must be paid by one who damaged another: Injury, pain, medical costs, and loss of livelihood. However, he is not liable to pay for the shame he caused her, as he did not intend to perform the act, <b>and if</b> she is <b>his <i>yevama</i>, he has not acquired</b> her in this manner.

### Part 2
<b>Rather,</b> it is a case <b>where he intended</b> to have intercourse with <b>his wife</b> and became erect, <b>and his <i>yevama</i></b> forcefully <b>grabbed hold of him and he had intercourse with her.</b> The Gemara further asks: If so, <b>what are the circumstances</b> of the case when <b>both of them were coerced</b> that was mentioned by <b>the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya?</b> The Gemara answers: It is a case <b>where he intended</b> to have intercourse with <b>his wife, and gentiles grabbed hold of him and pressed</b> him and his <i>yevama</i> <b>against each other, and he</b> thereby <b>had intercourse with her.</b>

### Part 3
§ The Gemara inquires as to the source of these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse <b>“Her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:5), that this indicates that the act of intercourse in this circumstance is <b>a mitzva,</b> i.e., it is preferable to the alternative, which is <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>Alternatively,</b> the verse <b>“Her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her,”</b> indicates that it does not matter how he had intercourse with her, <b>whether unwittingly or intentionally, whether</b> due to <b>coercion or willingly.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you derive</b> from this phrase that the act of intercourse in this case is a <b>mitzva?</b> How can the same phrase also indicate that it does not matter what the intentions of the two parties were during the act of intercourse? The Gemara answers: The fact that it is <b>a mitzva is derived from</b> the verse: <b>“And if the man does not wish</b> to take his <i>yevama</i>” (Deuteronomy 25:7), which indicates that if he <b>wishes, he performs levirate marriage,</b> which is preferable to <i>ḥalitza</i>. Therefore, <b>when</b> the <b>verse</b> cited above <b>came,</b> it indicated that levirate marriage has occurred <b>whether</b> the parties acted <b>unwittingly or intentionally, whether</b> due to <b>coercion or willingly.</b>

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i> that the phrase: <b>“Her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her”</b> indicates that levirate marriage has been performed if they engage in <b>typical</b> sexual intercourse. The next phrase, <b>“and take her,”</b> includes even <b>atypical,</b> i.e., anal, sexual intercourse. The concluding phrase of the verse, <b>“and consummate the levirate marriage,”</b> indicates that <b>sexual intercourse completes her</b> acquisition, <b>but money and a</b> marriage <b>document do not complete her</b> acquisition to him as his fully betrothed wife, in contrast to the regular <i>halakhot</i> of marriage. By emphasizing <b>“and consummate the levirate marriage with her,”</b> the verse teaches that he acquires her even if he acted <b>against her will. Alternatively: “Her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her”</b> indicates that levirate marriage has occurred <b>whether</b> the parties acted <b>unwittingly</b> or intentionally, whether due to coercion or willingly.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>Didn’t you derive</b> from this phrase that levirate marriage has been performed if they engage in <b>typical</b> sexual intercourse? How can it also indicate that it does not matter what the intentions of the two parties were during the act of intercourse? The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is derived from</b> a different verse: <b>“To establish a name for his brother”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7), which indicates that intercourse must occur <b>in the place where he establishes a name,</b> i.e., where it can lead to childbirth. Therefore, <b>when</b> the <b>verse</b> cited above <b>came,</b> it indicated that levirate marriage has occurred <b>whether</b> the parties acted <b>unwittingly or intentionally, whether</b> due to <b>coercion or willingly.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara addresses <b>the</b> matter <b>itself</b> cited in the previous discussion. <b>Rav Yehuda said: A sleeping</b> man <b>has not acquired his <i>yevama</i>, as the verse states: “Her brother-in-law will have intercourse with her”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:5), which indicates that he does not acquire her <b>unless he intends</b> to act <b>for the sake of sexual intercourse.</b> Since a sleeping man does not intend to engage in sexual intercourse, he does not acquire his <i>yevama</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that one acquires his <i>yevama</i> through sexual intercourse regardless of <b>whether he</b> was <b>awake or asleep?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Say</b> the <i>baraita</i> in the following emended form: <b>Whether she</b> was <b>awake or asleep.</b> The woman’s awareness is not a necessary component in order to perform levirate marriage.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks further: <b>Wasn’t it taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i> that one acquires his <i>yevama</i> through sexual intercourse regardless of <b>whether he was awake or he was asleep</b> and regardless of <b>whether she was awake or she was asleep?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>With what are we dealing here</b> when the <i>baraita</i> says that a sleeping man acquires his <i>yevama</i>? It is referring to a man <b>who is dozing.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of <b>dozing? Rav Ashi said:</b> One is <b>asleep but not asleep, awake but not awake, when,</b> if <b>they call him, he</b> will <b>answer, but he is unable to provide a reasonable</b> answer. <b>And when they</b> later <b>inform him</b> of what happened, <b>he remembers</b> it.

### Part 9
The Gemara returns to the statement of Rabba cited earlier in order to discuss <b>the</b> matter <b>itself</b> that Rabba addressed. <b>Rabba said:</b> One who <b>fell from a roof and was inserted</b> into a woman due to the force of his fall <b>is liable</b> to pay <b>four</b> of the five <b>types of indemnity</b> that must be paid by one who damaged another, <b>and if</b> she is <b>his <i>yevama</i> he has not acquired</b> her in this manner. He is liable to pay for <b>injury, pain, loss of livelihood,</b> and <b>medical costs. However, he is not liable</b> to pay for the <b>shame</b> he caused her, <b>as the Master said: One is not liable</b> to pay <b>for shame unless he intends</b> to humiliate his victim. Consequently, one who fell from a roof accidentally is not liable to pay for the shame he caused the woman.

### Part 10
<b>Rava said:</b> If <b>he intended to press</b> his sexual organ <b>into a wall, and he</b> accidentally <b>pressed</b> it <b>into his <i>yevama</i>, he has not acquired</b> her, as he did not intend to engage in an act of sexual intercourse. However, if he intended <b>to press</b> his sexual organ <b>into an animal, and he pressed</b> it <b>into his <i>yevama</i>, he has acquired</b> her, <b>as he</b> at least <b>intended</b> to act <b>for the purpose of sexual intercourse in general,</b> i.e., for some form of sexual intercourse.

### Part 11
§ We learned in the mishna that <b>both one who</b> merely <b>begins the act of intercourse</b> and one who completes it has acquired the <i>yevama</i> through this act. <b>Ulla said: From where</b> is it derived that <b>the initial stage of intercourse</b> is considered an act of sexual intercourse <b>by Torah law? As it is stated: “And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness and shall uncover her nakedness, he has made naked [<i>he’era</i>] her fountain”</b> (Leviticus 20:18). The verse is referring to the first stage of intercourse, and <b>from here</b> it is derived that <b>the initial stage of intercourse [<i>ha’ara’a</i>]</b> is considered sexual intercourse <b>by Torah law.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>We have found</b> a source for this <i>halakha</i> in the case of <b>a menstruating woman,</b> the subject of the verse cited above. <b>From where</b> is it derived that the initial stage of intercourse is considered sexual intercourse with regard to <b>the rest of those with whom relations are forbidden? And if you say we should derive it from</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a menstruating woman, what</b> comparison can be made <b>to a menstruating woman,</b> concerning whom the <i>halakha</i> is more stringent than others with whom relations are forbidden, <b>in that she causes one who has intercourse with her to become ritually impure?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> in other cases <b>comes from</b> a verse about <b>a brother’s wife, as it is written: “And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is impurity [<i>nidda</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 20:21). The word <i>nidda</i> generally refers to a menstruating woman, and so the Gemara asks: <b>Is his brother’s wife always menstruating? Rather,</b> it means that the <i>halakha</i> with regard to her is <b>like</b> that of <b>a menstruating woman: Just as</b> one is liable to receive punishment for violating the prohibition against engaging in sexual intercourse with <b>a menstruating woman through the initial stage of intercourse, so too,</b> one is liable to receive punishment for violating the prohibition against engaging in sexual intercourse with <b>a brother’s wife through the initial stage of intercourse.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> comparison can be made between <b>a brother’s wife</b> and other women with whom relations are forbidden? The prohibition with regard to a brother’s <b>wife is</b> more stringent in that <b>it is within his power to increase</b> the number of women forbidden by this prohibition, <b>as, if he wishes, he can go on betrothing a thousand</b> women, all of whom would be forbidden to his brother. Consequently, the prohibition with regard to a brother’s wife cannot serve as a model for other prohibitions.

### Part 15
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>halakha</i> in other cases <b>comes from</b> a verse with regard to <b>a father’s sister and a mother’s sister, as it is written: “And you shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister nor of your father’s sister; for he has made naked [<i>he’era</i>] his kin”</b> (Leviticus 20:19). The Gemara asks: <b>It is</b> possible <b>to refute</b> this source as follows: <b>What</b> comparison can be made between other women with whom relations are forbidden and <b>a father’s sister and a mother’s sister, which are</b> unique in that they are prohibited due to <b>a prohibition that comes on its own?</b> The prohibition with regard to a father’s sister and a mother’s sister does not stem from marriage, but from the biological fact that she is his father’s or mother’s sister. It is therefore dissimilar to prohibitions that result from marriage.

### Part 16
The Gemara states: The principle that the initial stage of intercourse is considered sexual intercourse <b>does not come from</b> any <b>one</b> of the sources cited above. <b>Let it come</b> by deriving the <i>halakha</i> in any <b>one</b> other case <b>from</b> the common denominator of <b>two</b> of the sources mentioned above. The Gemara asks: <b>From which</b> two sources could this principle <b>come</b> to be derived? If you say it can <b>comes</b> to be derived <b>from</b> the combination of the source with regard to <b>a brother’s wife and</b> the source with regard to <b>a father’s sister and a mother’s sister, what</b> comparison may be drawn from these cases, <b>which are</b> unique in that they are <b>prohibited because</b> they are <b>kin?</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rather, let it come from</b> the prohibition proscribing <b>a menstruating woman and</b> the prohibition with regard to <b>a father’s sister and a mother’s sister,</b> as a menstruating woman is not prohibited as a family relative. The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>What</b> comparison may be drawn from these cases, <b>which are</b> each a <b>prohibition that comes of its own</b> accord, as neither one is created through marriage? <b>Rather, let it come from</b> the prohibition proscribing <b>a menstruating woman and</b> the prohibition proscribing <b>a brother’s wife. As, what</b> can you say to <b>refute</b> this teaching? These two cases do not share any unique features that might be cause for stringency.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rav Ika, strongly objects to this: What</b> comparison may be drawn based upon the precedent of <b>a menstruating woman and a brother’s wife, which are</b> stringent in that <b>they cannot be permitted</b> to others for the duration of <b>the existence of the</b> factor <b>that renders them prohibited?</b> A menstruating woman is forbidden as long as she experiences a flow of menstrual blood, while a brother’s wife is forbidden for the duration of the brother’s lifetime. Can <b>you say</b> the same <b>with regard to a married woman, who can become permitted during the lifetime of the one who renders her prohibited,</b> i.e., if her husband divorces her?

### Part 19
<b>Rav Aḥa of Difti said to Ravina: Is that to say</b> that <b>it is</b> only during <b>the existence of the</b> factor <b>that renders them prohibited that a menstruating woman and a brother’s wife cannot be permitted</b> to others, <b>but afterward,</b> when the prohibiting factor has been resolved, <b>they can be permitted?</b> In the case of <b>a menstruating woman,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC