
### Part 1
<b>there is</b> a rabbinic <b>prohibition,</b> contrary to Rav Aḥa’s opinion. The Gemara answers: <b>The same is true that there is no prohibition, either. And since</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>wanted to teach in the latter clause</b> that if they were born in sanctity <b>they are liable, it also taught in the first clause</b> that <b>they are not liable.</b> For this reason, the <i>baraita</i> mentions only the absence of liability.

### Part 2
<b>Rava said:</b> With regard to <b>that which the Sages said,</b> that <b>a gentile has no patrilineage, do not say</b> that it is <b>because they are</b> so <b>steeped in licentiousness that they do not know</b> the identity of their fathers with certainty, <b>but</b> if that identity <b>is known, we are concerned</b> that the paternity is recognized, with regard to the prohibition of intercourse with forbidden paternal relatives and other halakhic issues. <b>Rather,</b> even <b>when it is known, we are still not concerned.</b>

### Part 3
The proof is <b>from</b> the case of <b>two</b> identical <b>twin brothers, who were one drop that was divided into two</b> and obviously have the same father, <b>and</b> yet it <b>is taught</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>They do not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> and they do not perform levirate marriage,</b> although they certainly have the same father. <b>Learn from this</b> that <b>the Merciful One dispossesses</b> the male gentile of <b>his offspring, as it is written</b> with regard to Egyptians: <b>“Whose flesh is the flesh of donkeys, and whose semen is the semen of horses”</b> (Ezekiel 23:20), i.e., the offspring of a male gentile is considered no more related to him than the offspring of donkeys and horses.

### Part 4
The Gemara resumes its discussion of the dispute between Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov and Rav Sheshet. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof, <b>as Rabbi Yosei said: An incident</b> took place <b>involving Niftayim the convert, who married the wife of his maternal</b> half <b>brother, and the incident came before the Sages, and they said</b> that <b>there is no</b> valid <b>marriage for a convert.</b> The Gemara asks: Is this possible? <b>And if a convert betroths</b> a woman who is not related to him, <b>is</b> his <b>betrothal to her indeed ineffective? Rather,</b> modify the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say</b> that <b>with regard to a convert there is no prohibition</b> proscribing <b>a brother’s wife.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>What, is</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where</b> the <b>brother,</b> her first husband, <b>married her when he was</b> already <b>a convert,</b> thereby proving that a convert is permitted to marry the wife of his deceased brother who was also a convert, even if they were maternal brothers?

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the brother <b>married her while he was</b> still <b>a gentile,</b> and since he converted they are no longer married. The Gemara asks: If he married her <b>while he was a gentile, what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> this obvious <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> the Sages <b>should decree</b> that the marriage is prohibited even in a case where the first husband married her <b>while he was a gentile, due to</b> the prohibition against their marriage if the brother married her <b>when he was</b> already <b>a convert.</b> The <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that there is no such decree.

### Part 6
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof, <b>as ben Yasiyan said: When I went to cities overseas, I found one convert who married the wife of his maternal</b> half <b>brother. I said to him: My son, who permitted</b> this to <b>you? He said to me: There is</b> a local <b>woman and her seven sons</b> to whom this was permitted. <b>On this</b> very <b>bench [<i>safsal</i>], Rabbi Akiva sat and said two statements:</b> He said that <b>a convert may marry the</b> former <b>wife of his maternal</b> half <b>brother, and he said</b> that the verse <b>“And the word of the Lord came to Jonah a second time, saying”</b> (Jonah 3:1) implies that the <b>Divine Presence spoke with him</b> only <b>a second</b> time. However, <b>a third</b> time the <b>Divine Presence did not speak with him,</b> i.e., Jonah did not receive any more prophecies. <b>In any event,</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that <b>a convert may marry the wife of his maternal brother. What, is it not</b> referring to a case <b>where</b> the convert’s <b>brother married her when he</b> himself <b>was</b> already <b>a convert?</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the brother <b>married her while he was</b> still <b>a gentile.</b> The Gemara asks: If so, <b>what</b> is the purpose <b>of stating</b> this obvious <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say we should decree</b> that marriage between a convert and the former wife of his brother is prohibited even if the brother married her <b>while he was</b> still <b>a gentile, due to</b> the prohibition against their marrying if the brother married her <b>when he was</b> already <b>a convert.</b> The <i>baraita</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that there is no such decree.

### Part 8
<b>And is</b> that convert who cited Rabbi Akiva <b>a reliable</b> witness, despite the fact that the ruling affects him personally? <b>Didn’t Rabbi Abba say</b> that <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> With regard to <b>any Torah scholar who teaches</b> a ruling of <b><i>halakha</i></b> in a certain case <b>and it comes</b> to be, <b>if he said it before the incident, one listens to him. And if not,</b> if the ruling followed the incident, one <b>does not listen to him.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the convert <b>taught</b> the ruling, <b>and</b> only afterward <b>it came</b> to be that he himself married his sister-in-law. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that he is reliable <b>because he</b> supported his ruling by <b>stating</b> that there was a practical case involving <b>a woman and her seven sons,</b> in which Rabbi Akiva ruled that this kind of marriage is permitted. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that <b>here it is different, as</b> the convert <b>stated a different incident with it.</b> Since he cited an unrelated teaching of Rabbi Akiva in the same testimony, this teaching is also considered reliable.

### Part 10
<b>The Master said</b> that Rabbi Akiva inferred from the verse <b>“And the word of the Lord came to Jonah a second time, saying”</b> that the <b>Divine Presence spoke with him</b> only <b>a second</b> time. However, <b>a third</b> time the Divine Presence <b>did not speak with him.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t it written</b> with regard to King Jeroboam ben Joash: <b>“He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath to the Sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the Lord,</b> the God of Israel, <b>which He spoke by the hand of His servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet”</b> (II Kings 14:25)? Evidently, Jonah prophesied at least once more.

### Part 11
<b>Ravina said:</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>was saying</b> that Jonah did not prophesize a third time <b>about the issue of Nineveh. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>this is</b> the meaning of the phrase <b>“According to the word of the Lord,</b> the God of Israel, <b>which He spoke by the hand of His servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet”:</b> It is not that Jonah had prophesized about the conquests of Jeroboam ben Joash, but rather that <b>just as</b> the fortune of <b>Nineveh turned from bad to good, so too, in the days of Jeroboam ben Joash, Israel’s</b> fortune <b>turned from bad to good.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara resumes discussion of the dispute between Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov and Rav Sheshet. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof: <b>A convert whose birth was in sanctity but whose conception was not in sanctity has maternal kinship,</b> i.e., his relationship to his mother’s relatives is recognized. <b>However, he does not have paternal kinship. How so?</b> If <b>he married his maternal</b> half <b>sister,</b> who was born before him and converted, <b>he must divorce</b> her. Although by Torah law they are considered unrelated, the Sages rendered it prohibited for them to marry, lest he marry a maternal half sister who was born after him and is forbidden to him. If she is his <b>paternal</b> half sister, <b>he may maintain</b> her as his wife. If he married his <b>father’s maternal</b> half <b>sister, he must divorce her.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC