### Part 1
<b>these are</b> the <b>years of</b> the <b>generations,</b> i.e., the allotted lifespan that is preordained for each individual before birth. If <b>he is deserving,</b> God <b>completes his</b> allotted lifespan. If <b>he is not deserving,</b> God <b>reduces his</b> lifespan; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b> Rabbi Akiva assumes one cannot outlive one’s preordained allotted lifespan. <b>The Rabbis say:</b> If <b>he is deserving,</b> God <b>adds</b> years <b>to his</b> lifespan. If <b>he is not deserving,</b> God <b>reduces his</b> lifespan. According to the Rabbis, Isaiah’s prophecy is referring to one who deserved to have extra years added to his allotted lifespan, and the verse in the Torah is referring to one who deserved to merely complete his lifespan.

### Part 2
The Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Akiva:</b> How can you claim that one cannot outlive one’s allotted lifespan when <b>there is</b> a verse that <b>states</b> that Isaiah prophesied to Hezekiah as Hezekiah lay on his deathbed: <b>“And I will add unto your days fifteen years”?</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>said to them:</b> Those additional years that God <b>added to his</b> lifespan are <b>from his own</b> allotted lifespan. When Hezekiah sinned God decreed that his lifespan be shortened, but when he repented God allowed him to live out those years. <b>Know</b> that this is so, <b>as a prophet</b> during the reign of King Jeroboam <b>stood and prophesied: “Behold, a son shall be born unto the House of David, Josiah is his name”</b> (I Kings 13:2). Josiah was the grandson of Manasseh, Hezekiah’s son, and at the time Hezekiah lay on his deathbed, <b>Manasseh had not yet been born.</b> Evidently, Hezekiah’s preordained allotted lifespan had still not been completed.

### Part 3
<b>And</b> what would <b>the Rabbis</b> respond to Rabbi Akiva’s proof? They could counter: <b>Is it written</b> that Josiah was to be born specifically <b>from</b> the descendants of <b>Hezekiah? It is written</b> only that he would be born <b>“unto the House of David,”</b> so <b>he could be born either from</b> the descendants of <b>Hezekiah or from a different person</b> of the House of David. Accordingly, no proof concerning Hezekiah’s allotted lifespan can be deduced from that verse.

### Part 4
§ The mishna details the prohibition with regard to one’s wife’s sister in various cases: If a man’s <b>wife died,</b> he is permitted to her sister; if <b>his <i>yevama</i> died,</b> he is permitted to her sister. <b>Rav Yosef said: Here Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught an unnecessary mishna,</b> since the prohibition with regard to one’s wife’s sister and the fact that the prohibition exists only in the lifetime of one’s wife is stated explicitly in the Torah, and there is no additional novelty in this mishna’s ruling.

### Part 5
end of chapter

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabban Gamliel says: A bill of divorce [<i>get</i>] is not</b> effective when given <b>after a bill of divorce</b> was previously given to a <i>yevama</i>. Once a <i>yevama</i> receives a bill of divorce from a <i>yavam</i>, no bill of divorce given by that <i>yavam</i> to her rival wife or a bill of divorce given to her by a different <i>yavam</i> is of any effect. <b>And levirate betrothal is not</b> effective <b>after</b> a previous <b>levirate betrothal</b> was performed, <b>and intercourse</b> with a second <i>yevama</i> <b>is not</b> effective <b>after intercourse</b> with the first one, <b>and <i>ḥalitza</i> is not</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i></b> was previously performed. <b>But the Rabbis say: A bill of divorce is</b> effective when given <b>after a bill of divorce, and levirate betrothal is</b> effective <b>after levirate betrothal, but nothing is</b> effective <b>after intercourse or after <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> If a <i>yavam</i> has relations with the <i>yevama</i> or performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with her, no other action performed afterward is effective, whether performed by that <i>yavam</i> toward a different <i>yevama</i> or by any <i>yavam</i> with the original <i>yevama</i>.

### Part 7
The mishna elaborates: <b>How</b> do these laws work in practice? If a <i>yavam</i> <b>performed levirate betrothal with his <i>yevama</i>, and he</b> later <b>gave her a bill of divorce, she</b> nevertheless <b>requires <i>ḥalitza</i> from him.</b> The bill of divorce does not fully exempt her from levirate marriage, as the levirate bond remains intact. If <b>he performed levirate betrothal and</b> then <b><i>ḥalitza</i>, she requires a bill of divorce from him</b> in order to cancel the levirate betrothal. If the <i>yavam</i> <b>performed levirate betrothal and</b> then engaged in <b>intercourse</b> with the <i>yevama</i>, <b>this is</b> the way to perform levirate marriage <b>in accordance with its mitzva,</b> as the Sages instituted this as the proper procedure for a <i>yavam</i> to perform levirate marriage.

### Part 8
If the <i>yavam</i> <b>gave</b> the <i>yevama</i> <b>a bill of divorce and</b> afterward <b>performed levirate betrothal</b> with her, <b>she requires</b> another <b>bill of divorce</b> to cancel the levirate betrothal, as well as <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> to nullify the levirate bond. If <b>he gave</b> her <b>a bill of divorce and</b> then <b>engaged in intercourse</b> with her, <b>she requires a bill of divorce</b> to cancel the betrothal that took place via intercourse, <b>and <i>ḥalitza</i></b> to nullify the levirate bond; the intercourse did not affect the levirate bond because once he gave her a bill of divorce she was forbidden to him. If <b>he gave</b> her <b>a bill of divorce and performed <i>ḥalitza</i>, nothing is</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> as the levirate bond was completely nullified.

### Part 9
Similarly, if he <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with her <b>and</b> then either <b>performed levirate betrothal,</b> or <b>gave a bill of divorce, or engaged in intercourse</b> with her; <b>alternatively,</b> if he <b>engaged in intercourse</b> with her <b>and</b> then either <b>performed levirate betrothal,</b> or <b>gave a bill of divorce, or performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> after they engaged in relations, <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i></b> or intercourse. Any action performed afterward is unrelated to the levirate bond.