
### Part 1
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says: “Her father”</b> means <b>her actual father</b> and <b>“her mother”</b> means <b>her actual mother. Rabbi Akiva says: Her father and her mother; this</b> is referring to the <b>idolatrous deity</b> that she had worshiped but will no longer be able to worship, <b>and so it says: “They say to a tree: You are my father,</b> and to a stone: You have given birth to us” (Jeremiah 2:27).

### Part 2
The verses states: <b>“A month of days</b> and after that you may come to her” (Deuteronomy 21:13). This means <b>a thirty-day month. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says:</b> She must wait <b>ninety days.</b> This is derived as follows: The phrase <b>“a month”</b> connotes <b>thirty</b> days; the word <b>“days”</b> adds another <b>thirty</b> days; <b>and</b> the words <b>“after that”</b> indicate another period equal to one previously mentioned, i.e., a further <b>thirty</b> days.

### Part 3
<b>Ravina strongly objects to this:</b> If the words “after that” indicate another period equal to one previously mentioned, then one should <b>say:</b> The phrase <b>“a month”</b> connotes <b>thirty</b> days; the word <b>“days”</b> adds another <b>thirty</b> days; <b>and</b> then the words <b>“after that”</b> add another period which is <b>equal to</b> the total sum of all <b>those</b> days she has already waited, i.e., an additional sixty days. The Gemara concedes: Indeed, this is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may maintain slaves that are not circumcised</b> under one’s control; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva says: One may not maintain</b> such slaves, even for a moment. <b>Rabbi Yishmael said to him: But it says</b> with regard to Shabbat: <b>“And the son of your maidservant will be refreshed”</b> (Exodus 23:12). The verse prohibits a Jewish master from allowing his slave to perform labor on Shabbat. The Gemara will explain that this is referring to an uncircumcised slave. It is therefore apparent that it is permitted to keep such a slave. Rabbi Akiva <b>said to him: The verse speaks of one who purchases a slave at twilight</b> on the eve of Shabbat <b>and</b> therefore <b>does not have the opportunity to circumcise him</b> before the onset of Shabbat.

### Part 5
The Gemara notes: <b>In any event,</b> in the opinion <b>of everyone</b> the verse: <b>“And the son of your maidservant will be refreshed,” is written with regard to an uncircumcised slave. From where</b> is this <b>inferred? As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And the son of your maidservant will be refreshed”; the verse speaks of an uncircumcised slave.</b> Do <b>you say</b> it speaks <b>of an uncircumcised slave, or</b> perhaps <b>it is</b> speaking <b>only of a circumcised slave? When it says</b> elsewhere: “And the seventh day is a Shabbat to the Lord your God, you shall not do any labor, you, and your son, and your daughter, and your slave, and your maidservant…<b>so that your slave and your maidservant may rest like you”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:13), <b>a circumcised slave is</b> already <b>mentioned; how,</b> then, <b>do I uphold</b> the verse <b>“And the son of your maidservant will be refreshed”?</b> It must refer <b>to an uncircumcised slave.</b>

### Part 6
The verse continues: <b>“And the stranger [<i>ger</i>]”</b> (Exodus 23:12). <b>This</b> is referring to <b>a gentile who observes certain mitzvot [<i>ger toshav</i>].</b> Do <b>you say</b> that <b>this is a <i>ger toshav</i>, or</b> perhaps <b>it is only a righteous convert [<i>ger tzedek</i>],</b> who is a Jew in every sense? <b>When it says</b> elsewhere: <b>“And your stranger [<i>ger</i>] that is within your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:13), <b>a righteous convert is</b> already <b>mentioned. How,</b> then, <b>do I uphold</b> the verse <b>“And the stranger [<i>ger</i>]”?</b> It must be that <b>this is a <i>ger toshav</i>.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said:</b> In the case of <b>one who purchases a slave from a gentile and</b> the slave <b>does not wish to be circumcised, he abides with him up to twelve months.</b> If, after this period, <b>he will</b> still <b>not be circumcised, he then sells him</b> on <b>to gentiles.</b>

### Part 8
<b>The Sages said this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>before Rav Pappa</b> and asked: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is it? It seems <b>that it is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, didn’t he say: One may not maintain</b> an uncircumcised slave even for a moment? Rav Pappa <b>said to them: You</b> can <b>even say</b> that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> since perhaps <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i> of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi <b>applies</b> only <b>where</b> the slave <b>did not make his</b> refusal to be circumcised <b>explicit; however, where he did make his</b> refusal to be circumcised <b>explicit,</b> since <b>he has made it explicit,</b> it is prohibited to maintain him, as Rabbi Akiva rules.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Kahana said: I said</b> this <b><i>halakha</i> before Rav Zevid from Neharde’a. He said to me: If so,</b> that Rabbi Akiva agrees that one may temporarily maintain a slave who has not explicitly refused to be circumcised, then <b>when Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Rabbi Yishmael that the verse with regard to an uncircumcised slave <b>is referring to one who purchases a slave at twilight</b> on the eve of Shabbat, <b>let him</b> instead <b>answer him</b> that the verse is referring to <b>this</b> case of a slave who has not explicitly refused to be circumcised. The Gemara explains: Rabbi Akiva <b>said</b> only <b>one out of two</b> possible <b>reasons</b> why it would be permitted to be in possession of such a slave.

### Part 10
<b>Ravin sent</b> a message citing a <i>halakha</i> <b>in the name of Rabbi Ilai: And all of my teachers said to me in his name: What is</b> the case of <b>an uncircumcised slave whom it is permitted to maintain? This is one whose master purchased him on condition not to circumcise him. The Sages said this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>before Rav Pappa</b> and asked: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is it? It seems <b>that it is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as, if</b> it were in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, didn’t he say: One may not maintain</b> an uncircumcised slave even for a moment? Rav Pappa <b>said to them: You</b> can <b>even say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> since perhaps <b>that</b> ruling of Rabbi Akiva <b>applies</b> only <b>where</b> the master <b>did not make a condition with regard to</b> the slave that he would not be circumcised; <b>however, where he did make</b> such <b>a condition,</b> since <b>he made a condition,</b> even Rabbi Akiva would concede it is permitted to maintain him.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Kahana said: I said</b> this <b><i>halakha</i> before Rav Zevid from Neharde’a and he said to me: If so,</b> that Rabbi Akiva agrees that one may maintain a slave who was purchased on condition that he would not be circumcised, then <b>when Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Rabbi Yishmael that the verse with regard to an uncircumcised slave <b>is referring to one who purchases a slave at twilight</b> on the eve of Shabbat <b>and</b> therefore <b>does not have the opportunity to circumcise him</b> before the onset of Shabbat, <b>let him</b> instead <b>answer him</b> that the verse is referring to <b>this</b> case of a slave who was purchased on condition that he would not be circumcised.

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: <b>But</b> even <b>according to your reasoning</b> that Rabbi Akiva disagrees, since you do agree with Rav Pappa’s resolution of Rabbi Akiva’s opinion with the <i>halakha</i> of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, <b>let</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>answer him</b> that the verse is referring to <b>that</b> case of a slave who has not explicitly refused to be circumcised. The Gemara answers: Rabbi Akiva <b>said</b> only <b>one out of two or three</b> possible <b>reasons</b> that it would be permitted to be in possession of such a slave.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina bar Pappi, and Rabbi Ami, and Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa were sitting in the courtyard of Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa. They were sitting and saying: There was one city in Eretz Yisrael whose slaves did not wish to be circumcised.</b> Their masters <b>abided with them until twelve months</b> had passed <b>and then sold them to gentiles. In accordance with whose</b> opinion did they act?

### Part 14
<b>It is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who purchases a slave from a gentile and</b> the slave <b>does not wish to be circumcised,</b> the master <b>abides with him</b> for <b>up to twelve months.</b> If, after this period, the slave <b>will</b> still <b>not be circumcised,</b> the master <b>then sells him to gentiles. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says: One may not allow him to remain in Eretz Yisrael due to the loss of ritually pure items</b> he could cause. As long as the slave remains uncircumcised, he is considered to be a gentile; therefore, by rabbinic decree, ritually pure items that he touches are considered to be impure. <b>And in a city that is near to the border he may not be allowed to remain at all, lest he hear some</b> secret <b>matter</b> concerning security <b>and go and say</b> it over <b>to his fellow gentile</b> in an enemy country. However, once he has been circumcised and accepted the yoke of mitzvot, this concern no longer exists.

### Part 15
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Ḥananya, son of Rabban Gamliel, says: For what</b> reason <b>are converts at the present time tormented and hardships come upon them?</b> It is <b>because</b> when they were gentiles <b>they did not observe the seven Noahide mitzvot. Rabbi Yosei says:</b> They would not be punished for their deeds prior to their conversion because <b>a convert who</b> just <b>converted is like a child</b> just <b>born</b> in that he retains no connection to his past life. <b>Rather, for what</b> reason <b>are they tormented?</b> It is <b>because they are not</b> as <b>well-versed in the intricacies of the mitzvot as</b> a born <b>Jew,</b> and consequently they often inadvertently transgress mitzvot. <b>Abba Ḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Elazar:</b> It is <b>because they observe</b> mitzvot <b>not out of love</b> of God, <b>but only out of fear</b> of the punishments for failing to observe them.

### Part 16
<b>Others say:</b> It is <b>because they waited before entering under the wings of the Divine Presence,</b> i.e., they are punished for not converting sooner than they did. <b>Rabbi Abbahu said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Ḥanina</b> who said: <b>What is the verse</b> from which it is derived that one should convert at the earliest opportunity? Boaz said to Ruth: <b>“The Lord shall recompense your work, and your reward shall be complete from the Lord, the God of Israel,</b> under whose wings <b>you have come to take refuge”</b> (Ruth 2:12).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC