
### Part 1
This <i>halakha</i> was also taught in the previous mishna (26a), and it is cited in this mishna according to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Shimon say: Two sisters neither perform <i>ḥalitza</i> nor enter into levirate marriage?</b> Because these women are eligible for levirate marriage according to Torah law, they are considered the sisters of a woman with whom he has a levirate bond. In this case, Rabbi Shimon exempts them from both <i>ḥalitza</i> and levirate marriage. Why, then, does the mishna require them to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>?

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: It is <b>a rabbinic decree due to the general case of a prohibition</b> resulting from <b>a mitzva.</b> If they did not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> in this case, where they are sisters, there is a concern that people would assume that their exemption from <i>ḥalitza</i> stemmed not from their status as sisters but rather due to the prohibition. This would lead to the mistaken conclusion that women who are forbidden due to a mitzva do not require <i>ḥalitza</i>. Therefore, the Sages issued a rabbinic decree requiring <i>ḥalitza</i> in this case.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well</b> for her, as <b>she</b> is forbidden due to the prohibition resulting from a mitzva. It is appropriate to require <i>ḥalitza</i> with her, to demonstrate that <i>ḥalitza</i> is generally applied in cases where there is a prohibition resulting from a mitzva. But with regard to <b>her sister, what is there to say?</b> Why must she perform <i>ḥalitza</i> as well? The Gemara answers: There is <b>a rabbinic decree</b> with regard to <b>her sister due to her.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: If Rabbi Shimon issues a decree in this case requiring <i>ḥalitza</i> for the sister, out of concern for confusion, then there is a difficulty: <b>But, with regard to a forbidden relative we do not issue a decree</b> requiring <i>ḥalitza</i> due to her sister; why does Rabbi Shimon issue a rabbinic decree requiring <i>ḥalitza</i> with a woman forbidden due to a prohibition resulting from a mitzva and not with a woman who is a forbidden relative? The Gemara answers: <b>Forbidden relatives are different, as people learn</b> the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to <b>them</b> because they are stated explicitly in the Torah and are well known to all, <b>and</b> the ruling <b>has publicity.</b> Therefore, there is no concern lest people mistakenly confuse this case with cases of <i>yevamot</i> who are not sisters. Prohibitions resulting from mitzvot are not, however, explicit in the Torah, nor are they generally known.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>three brothers, two</b> of whom <b>were married to two sisters, and one who was single,</b> the following occurred: <b>The husband of one of the sisters died</b> childless, leaving behind his wife, <b>and the single</b> brother <b>performed levirate betrothal [<i>ma’amar</i>]</b> to this wife. The single brother performed an act of betrothal to the <i>yevama</i> but did not yet consummate the marriage by engaging in sexual intercourse. <b>Afterward, the second brother died,</b> and therefore the second brother’s wife, the sister of the betrothed, happened before the single brother for levirate marriage as well.

### Part 6
In this case, <b>Beit Shammai say: His wife remains with him.</b> The woman he betrothed is considered like his wife, and he is not required to divorce her. <b>And this other</b> woman <b>leaves</b> the <i>yavam</i> and is exempt from levirate marriage <b>as the sister of a wife. Beit Hillel say:</b> Being as he had not yet entered into marriage with the first woman, he is required to perform levirate marriage with both women. Therefore, <b>he divorces his wife,</b> i.e., the woman to whom he performed levirate betrothal, <b>with a bill of divorce,</b> which nullifies levirate betrothal, <b>and by <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> which nullifies the levirate bond. <b>And,</b> he sends away <b>the wife of his</b> second <b>brother with <i>ḥalitza</i></b> as well. They comment: <b>This is</b> the case <b>that</b> was referred to when the Sages <b>said: Woe unto him for his wife and woe unto him for the wife of his brother.</b> Due to the combination of circumstances, he loses them both.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the mishna’s formulation of the term: <b>This is,</b> which indicates limitation and exactitude, come <b>to exclude?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>It excludes that</b> statement <b>of Rabbi Yehoshua</b> (109a). There, Rabbi Yehoshua holds that if a man is married to a minor when her sister happens before him for levirate marriage, he must send both of the women away. He said there: Woe unto him for his wife and woe unto him for the wife of his brother. From the language in the mishna here, we learn <b>that we do not act in accordance with his</b> opinion. <b>Rather,</b> we act <b>either in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel or in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar.</b> According to the opinion of both of these <i>tanna’im</i> in the mishna (109a), despite the conflict between the brother’s marriage to the minor and the levirate bond with her sister, there is still a way for him to marry one of the women.

### Part 8
§ With regard to the main issue of levirate betrothal, it would seem from this mishna that Beit Shammai hold that levirate betrothal has the legal force of levirate marriage. However, <b>Rabbi Elazar said: Do not say</b> that <b>levirate betrothal acquires</b> the woman <b>as a full-fledged acquisition according to</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> such that the first woman becomes his wife to the extent <b>that if he wants to divorce</b> her <b>a bill of divorce would suffice</b> without an act of <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>Rather, for Beit Shammai, levirate betrothal acquires</b> the woman <b>only</b> insofar <b>as it precludes a rival wife</b> from entering levirate marriage. The legal force of levirate betrothal is limited to preventing the rival wife of the sister from performing levirate marriage; she is exempt from both levirate marriage and <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Avin said: We, too, learn</b> in the mishna a proof that levirate betrothal is not a full-fledged act of acquisition, even according to Beit Shammai. The mishna at the beginning of this chapter (26a) teaches that when two sisters who are <i>yevamot</i> happen before two brothers for levirate marriage, if the brothers married their wives before consulting the court, then <b>Beit Shammai say: They may maintain them</b> as their wives. From here it can be deduced: If they already married them, <b>yes, they may maintain them.</b> However, marrying them <b><i>ab initio</i>, no,</b> this is prohibited due to the prohibition against marrying the sister of a woman with whom one has a levirate bond.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC