
### Part 1
<b>But isn’t it written</b> in that same section dealing with a woman after childbirth: <b>“She shall touch no hallowed thing,</b> nor come into the Sanctuary, until the days of her purification are completed” (Leviticus 12:4), which comes <b>to include <i>teruma</i>? Rather, the Torah considers several</b> distinct <b>matters</b> separately, and not all the verses refer to <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And why do I</b> need <b>three verses with regard to <i>teruma</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They are</b> all <b>necessary, as, had</b> <i>teruma</i> been derived solely from the verse: “He shall not eat of the holy things <b>until he be pure”</b> (Leviticus 22:4), <b>I would not have known by what</b> means ritual purity is achieved, whether by immersion alone or in some other way. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “And when the sun has set he shall be pure,</b> and afterward he may eat from the holy things” (Leviticus 22:7), to teach that he must also wait for sunset.

### Part 3
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only: <b>“And when the sun has set,”</b> I might have said that <b>this applies</b> only <b>to</b> one <b>who does not require</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering, <b>but</b> as for one <b>who requires</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering, one might <b>say</b> that he may not eat <i>teruma</i> <b>until he brings</b> his <b>atonement</b> offering. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes:</b> “She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the Sanctuary, <b>until the days of her purification are completed”</b> (Leviticus 12:4), which indicates that she may eat <i>teruma</i> as soon as her days of purification are completed, and she need not wait until after she has brought her atonement offering.

### Part 4
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only: <b>“Until</b> the days of her purification <b>are completed,” I would say</b> that upon the completion of the purification period she is immediately purified <b>even without immersion.</b> Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “Until he be pure.”</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to that <i>tanna</i> who disagrees with the <i>tanna</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael and says</b> that <b>the verse</b> “Any man from the seed of Aaron who is a leper or a <i>zav</i> shall not eat of the holy things until he be pure” (Leviticus 22:4) <b>is speaking of a <i>zav</i> who</b> already experienced <b>three sightings</b> of an emission, <b>and of a confirmed leper,</b> both of whom must bring an offering as part of their purification process; <b>and,</b> this being the case, <b>that</b> phrase <b>“until he be pure”</b> must mean <b>until he brings</b> his <b>atonement</b> offering; then <b>why do I</b> need <b>two verses with regard to sacrificial food,</b> this verse and the verse with regard to a woman after childbirth: “And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be pure” (Leviticus 12:8), to teach us that sacrificial food may not be eaten until after the atonement offering has been brought?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: <b>They are</b> both <b>necessary, as had the Merciful One written</b> this <i>halakha</i> only <b>with regard to a woman after childbirth,</b> one might have said that it applies only to her <b>because her</b> period of ritual <b>impurity is</b> so <b>long,</b> as she may not return to eating <i>teruma</i> or sacrificial food for either forty days, in the case of a male child, or eighty days, in the case of a female. <b>But with regard to a <i>zav</i>, say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case. <b>And had the Merciful One written</b> this <i>halakha</i> only <b>with regard to a <i>zav</i>,</b> one might have said that it applies only to him, <b>as no exemption is</b> ever <b>made from its general prohibition</b> and he is always impure. <b>But</b> as for <b>a woman after childbirth,</b> who is permitted to her husband for thirty-three or sixty-six days of that period, <b>say</b> that this is <b>not</b> the case. Both verses <b>are</b> therefore <b>necessary.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: As for the verse stated with regard to a vessel that contracted ritual impurity through contact with a creeping animal: <b>“It must be put into water, and it shall be impure until the evening;</b> then shall it be pure” (Leviticus 11:32), <b>why do I</b> need it? <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> It is necessary in order to teach about <b>touching.</b> An impure vessel, even after it has been immersed, still imparts ritual impurity to the <i>teruma</i> that it touches until nightfall. The same applies to an impure individual who has already undergone immersion; not only is it prohibited for him to eat <i>teruma</i>, but also he renders it impure if he touches it.

### Part 8
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Had the verse stated only: “It must be put into water, <b>and it shall be impure</b> until the evening,” one <b>might</b> have thought that it remains ritually impure until the evening <b>in all</b> regards. <b>Therefore, the verse states: “Then shall it be pure,”</b> indicating that it is pure following immersion, even before sunset. And <b>had</b> it stated only: <b>“Then shall it be pure,”</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that it is pure following immersion <b>in all</b> regards. <b>Therefore, the verse states: “And it shall be impure</b> until the evening.” <b>How so;</b> how can the apparent contradiction between the two parts of the verse be resolved? <b>Here,</b> the verse is referring <b>to</b> second <b>tithe,</b> for which immersion alone suffices; and <b>there</b> it is referring <b>to <i>teruma</i>,</b> for which sunset is required.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But I can reverse</b> this construct and say that the greater stringency should be applied to second tithe. The Gemara answers: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that <i>teruma</i> is subject to the greater stringency; <b>just as the eating of <i>teruma</i> is</b> subject to <b>greater stringency than the eating of</b> second <b>tithe, so too, the touching of <i>teruma</i></b> should be subject to <b>greater stringency than the touching of</b> second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And if you wish, say</b> that the prohibition with regard to the <b>touching of <i>teruma</i> is derived from here: “She shall touch no hallowed thing,</b> nor come into the Sanctuary, until the days of her purification are completed” (Leviticus 12:4); this is <b>a warning with respect to one who eats</b> <i>teruma</i> after having immersed but before sunset. <b>Or,</b> perhaps, <b>it is nothing other than</b> a warning <b>with respect to one who touches</b> <i>teruma</i> before sunset, as is implied by the plain reading of the verse?

### Part 11
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the Sanctuary,</b> until the days of her purification are completed” (Leviticus 12:4), thereby <b>juxtaposing consecrated</b> food <b>to the Sanctuary. Just as</b> the prohibition against entering <b>the Sanctuary is a matter that involves the taking of life,</b> as one who enters the Sanctuary while impure is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, <b>so too,</b> the prohibition against touching <b>consecrated</b> food must be <b>a matter that involves the taking of life,</b> e.g., eating <i>teruma</i> in a state of ritual impurity; <b>but</b> the prohibition against <b>touching</b> <i>teruma</i> in a state of impurity <b>does not involve the taking of life,</b> as there is no punishment of <i>karet</i> for mere touching.

### Part 12
<b>And</b> as for the fact <b>that</b> the verse <b>expressed</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in terms of touching, this is what</b> it <b>is saying:</b> The <i>halakha</i> governing <b>touching is like</b> that of <b>eating,</b> as they are both prohibited to an impure person, even after immersion, until sunset. But the verse is actually speaking of the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i> in a state of impurity.

### Part 13
§ It is taught in the mishna that the wife of a priest with <b>crushed testicles</b> or a severed penis may eat <i>teruma</i> on his account, provided that they have not engaged in sexual relations since his injury. The Gemara asks: <b>Who is</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>who taught</b> with regard to a woman <b>awaiting intercourse that would disqualify</b> her from marrying into the priesthood <b>by Torah</b> law, as in this case, where the woman would become disqualified from marrying into the priesthood if she had relations with her injured husband, that such a woman <b>may eat</b> <i>teruma</i>? <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> This <i>halakha</i> <b>is subject to dispute, and it is</b> taught in the mishna in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon,</b> who similarly stated that a widow betrothed to a High Priest may eat <i>teruma</i> on his account, provided that he has not engaged in sexual relations with her.

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The mishna can be understood <b>even</b> if <b>you say</b> that <b>it is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir,</b> who maintains that a widow betrothed to a High Priest may not eat <i>teruma</i> on his account, as <b>it is different here, as she</b> had <b>already eaten</b> <i>teruma</i> on her husband’s account before his injury. Since she has done nothing to disqualify herself, she retains her presumptive status as one for whom it is permitted to eat <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 15
<b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> counter this argument? He maintains that <b>we do not say that</b> since <b>she</b> had already <b>eaten</b> <i>teruma</i> on her husband’s account she continues to do so, <b>as, if you do not say</b> that <b>this</b> argument must be rejected, then it <b>should</b> be permitted for <b>an Israelite woman who married a priest and her husband died</b> without children to continue <b>eating</b> <i>teruma</i> on his account, <b>as she</b> had <b>already eaten</b> <i>teruma</i> because of him during his lifetime. However, such a conclusion is clearly incorrect. This <i>halakha</i> indicates that the fact that she had already eaten <i>teruma</i> is irrelevant.

### Part 16
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> holds that the two cases are not comparable, as <b>there,</b> where the husband died, <b>his acquisition</b> of his wife <b>has lapsed,</b> i.e., they are no longer married, and therefore she cannot continue to eat <i>teruma</i> on his account, whereas <b>here,</b> where his genitals were injured, <b>his acquisition has not lapsed.</b> While sexual relations between them are forbidden, their marriage remains intact.

### Part 17
§ It is taught in the mishna: <b>Who is</b> deemed <b>a man with crushed</b> testicles? <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Who is</b> deemed <b>a man with crushed testicles?</b> It is <b>anyone whose testicles have been wounded, even</b> if only <b>one of them.</b> Furthermore, a man is considered to have crushed testicles not only if they have been wounded, but <b>even</b> if they have been <b>punctured, or</b> have <b>decayed</b> as the result of an injury, <b>or are</b> partly <b>deficient</b> for some other reason. <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, said: I heard from the Sages in the vineyard in Yavne</b> that <b>anyone who has only one testicle is nothing other</b> than <b>a eunuch by natural causes, and he is fit.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara is puzzled by the wording of this last teaching: <b>Can it enter your mind</b> that he is <b>a eunuch by natural causes,</b> i.e., from birth? That designation refers to one who was born without testicles, whereas the reference here is to one who lost a testicle as the result of an injury. <b>Rather,</b> say that <b>he resembles a eunuch by natural causes, and he is fit.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: As for one whose testicles <b>were punctured, is he incapable of having children,</b> so that he should have the status of one whose testicles were crushed? <b>Wasn’t</b> there an incident where <b>a certain man was climbing up a palm tree,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC