
### Part 1
but <b>no, he may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> it is referring <b>to a</b> halakhically <b>competent woman who later became a deaf-mute,</b> and <i>ḥalitza</i> performed by a deaf-mute does not have the power to undo a levirate bond that is valid by Torah law.

### Part 2
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Two</b> halakhically <b>competent brothers</b> are <b>married</b> to <b>two unrelated</b> women, <b>one who is</b> halakhically <b>competent and one</b> who is a <b>deaf-mute.</b> If <b>the</b> halakhically <b>competent man</b> who is <b>the husband of the female deaf-mute, dies, what should the</b> halakhically <b>competent man</b> who is <b>the husband of the</b> halakhically <b>competent woman do? He consummates</b> the levirate marriage with the deaf-mute, <b>and if</b> he later <b>wishes to divorce her, he may divorce</b> her. <b>But if the</b> halakhically <b>competent man</b> who is <b>the husband of the</b> halakhically <b>competent woman dies, what should the</b> halakhically <b>competent man</b> who is <b>the husband of the female deaf-mute do? He may either perform <i>ḥalitza</i> or consummate the levirate marriage.</b>

### Part 3
<b>What, is it not</b> the case in this <i>baraita</i> <b>that since he is</b> halakhically <b>competent from the outset,</b> one may presume that <b>she is a deaf-mute from the outset as well? And it is taught yes, he may consummate</b> the levirate marriage with the <i>yevama</i> who is a deaf-mute, but <b>no, he may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> to her, thereby indicating that <i>ḥalitza</i> cannot be performed even though as a deaf-mute from the outset, she is a <i>yevama</i> by rabbinic law and not by Torah law. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Are the cases comparable? This</b> case is <b>as it is,</b> i.e., the husband is competent throughout, <b>and that</b> case is <b>as it is,</b> i.e., the wife was not a deaf-mute at the outset.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raised an objection to this</b> from a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 112b): <b>Two brothers, one</b> who is halakhically <b>competent and one</b> who is a <b>deaf-mute, are married</b> to <b>two sisters, one</b> who is halakhically <b>competent and one</b> who is <b>a deaf-mute.</b> If <b>the male deaf-mute</b> who is <b>the husband of the female deaf-mute dies, what shall the</b> halakhically <b>competent</b> man who is <b>the husband of the</b> halakhically <b>competent woman do?</b> The female deaf-mute <b>leaves</b> and is exempt from levirate marriage <b>due to</b> the prohibition against marrying <b>the sister of one’s wife.</b>

### Part 5
<b>If the</b> halakhically <b>competent man</b> who is <b>the husband of the</b> halakhically <b>competent woman dies, what should the male deaf-mute</b> who is <b>the husband of the female deaf-mute do? He releases his wife,</b> the female deaf-mute, <b>with a bill of divorce, and his brother’s wife is forbidden forever</b> and may never remarry. He cannot remain married because his wife is the sister of his <i>yevama</i> by Torah law. He cannot consummate the levirate marriage with her because she is the sister of his ex-wife. Apparently, <i>ḥalitza</i> is not an option because he is a deaf-mute, and his <i>ḥalitza</i> cannot dissolve a levirate bond that is established by Torah law.

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say: Here, too,</b> it is referring <b>to</b> a man who was halakhically <b>competent and later became a deaf-mute, can</b> such a person <b>divorce</b> his wife? <b>Didn’t we learn</b> the following in the mishna (112b): If a halakhically competent man married a halakhically competent woman and she <b>became a deaf-mute, he may divorce her; if she became mentally incompetent, he may not divorce her,</b> because of a rabbinic ordinance to protect her from harm. <b>If he himself became a deaf-mute or became mentally incompetent, he may never divorce her.</b> Since he was competent when he married her, he cannot dissolve a marriage that is by Torah law when he is incompetent.

### Part 7
<b>Rather, is it not</b> referring to <b>a male</b> who was <b>deaf-mute from the outset? And since he was a deaf-mute from the outset, she was also a deaf-mute from the outset. And since the sisters</b> in these cases <b>were deaf-mutes from the outset, then the unrelated women were also deaf-mutes from the outset, and we learned</b> in the mishna <b>with regard to the unrelated women</b> that <b>yes, he may consummate</b> the levirate marriage with them, <b>but no, he may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> When this question was presented to Rabba, he <b>was silent</b> and had no response.

### Part 8
<b>When</b> Abaye <b>came before Rav Yosef</b> and told him of the matter, Rav Yosef <b>said to him: What is the reason that you raised an objection to him</b> based <b>on this? For he could teach,</b> i.e., explain <b>to you,</b> as follows: <b>The sisters</b> the mishna referred to were <b>deaf-mutes at the outset,</b> whereas <b>the unrelated women</b> it referred to were halakhically <b>competent women who later became deaf-mutes.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rather, you should have raised an objection to him from this</b> mishna (112b): In the cases <b>of two deaf-mute brothers married</b> to <b>two</b> halakhically <b>competent sisters or</b> to <b>two deaf-mute sisters or</b> to <b>two sisters, one</b> halakhically <b>competent and one a deaf-mute; and likewise, two deaf-mute sisters married to two</b> halakhically <b>competent brothers or to two deaf-mute brothers or to two brothers, one halakhically competent and one a deaf-mute,</b> all <b>these</b> women <b>are exempt from <i>ḥalitza</i> and from levirate marriage</b> in the event of the death of one of the brothers while childless. <b>And if,</b> in these cases, the women <b>were unrelated</b> to one another, the surviving brothers <b>should consummate</b> levirate marriage with them, <b>and if they wish to divorce</b> them subsequently, <b>they may divorce</b> them.

### Part 10
The Gemara clarifies: <b>What are the circumstances? If we say</b> the mishna is referring to <b>men who were</b> halakhically <b>competent and later became deaf-mutes, then</b> in that case <b>can they release them? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna (112b): <b>If she became mentally incompetent, he may not divorce her; if he became a deaf-mute or mentally incompetent, he may never divorce her?</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rather, is it not</b> referring to <b>men who were deaf-mutes at the outset? And since they were deaf-mutes at the outset, the women were also deaf-mutes at the outset, and it is taught</b> there: <b>If,</b> in these cases, <b>they were unrelated</b> to one another, the surviving brothers <b>should consummate</b> levirate marriage with them. This implies: <b>Yes, they should consummate</b> levirate marriage with them, <b>but no, they should not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> From this conclusion is apparent that a female deaf-mute may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>; <b>the refutation</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabba is a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 12
§ It is taught in the mishna: If one wife is a <b>minor and</b> the other is <b>a deaf-mute,</b> consummation of levirate marriage or <i>ḥalitza</i> of the <i>yavam</i> with one of them does not exempt her rival wife. <b>Rav Naḥman said: I found Rav Adda bar Ahava and Rav Ḥana his son-in-law sitting and posing challenges [<i>kamakvu akvata</i>]</b> to one another <b>in the marketplace of Pumbedita, and saying</b> as follows: <b>That</b> which <b>we learned</b> in the mishna, <b>that in the case of a minor and a deaf-mute,</b> the <b>consummation</b> of levirate marriage <b>with one of them does not exempt her rival wife, applies when she happened</b> before <b>him</b> for levirate marriage as the widow <b>of his</b> halakhically <b>competent brother.</b> Under such circumstances, <b>we do not know if the minor was preferable to</b> the brother who married her initially, <b>or if the deaf-mute was preferable to him.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara explains: They wondered <b>if the minor was preferable to him, since she</b> eventually <b>would have come to full intellectual capacity</b> when she reached majority, <b>or if the deaf-mute was preferable, since she is an adult and she is suitable</b> for <b>sexual intercourse.</b> Given the uncertainty, it cannot be determined whose initial marriage was more complete and therefore the levirate marriage of one of them cannot exempt her rival wife. <b>However, if she happened</b> before him for levirate marriage as the widow of <b>his brother</b> who was <b>deaf-mute, certainly the female deaf-mute was preferable to him, as she was suitable for sexual intercourse and was of his kind,</b> and therefore the marriage to her was more complete.

### Part 14
<b>And I,</b> Rav Naḥman, <b>said to them: Even if she happened</b> before <b>him</b> as the widow <b>of his brother</b> who was <b>deaf-mute, it is still uncertain,</b> because the difference between the marriage of a minor and a deaf-mute in this case is independent of the original husband’s preferences. They are different types of relationships.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>How can their</b> situation <b>be rectified,</b> so that they can remarry? <b>Rav Ḥisda said that Rav said: He consummates</b> the levirate marriage with <b>the deaf-mute and</b> then <b>releases her by means of a bill of divorce.</b> He cannot stay married to her because the subsequent <i>ḥalitza</i> of the minor will disqualify her as the rival wife of his <i>yevama</i> who has performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>]. <b>The minor must wait until she reaches majority and then perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rav Ḥisda said: Learn from this</b> statement <b>that Rav holds</b> that <b>a married deaf-mute is partially acquired, and a minor is either acquired or not acquired,</b> i.e., there is uncertainty as to whether she was acquired completely or not acquired at all. <b>For if it enters your mind</b> to say the opposite, <b>that the deaf-mute is either acquired or not acquired, while the minor is partially acquired, then</b> with regard to <b>the deaf-mute</b> woman, <b>why should he consummate</b> the levirate marriage <b>and</b> then <b>release her with a bill of divorce?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC