
### Part 1
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that it was <b>because</b> the <b>north wind did not blow for them,</b> and the hot weather was likely to lead to medical complications following the procedure. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All those forty years that the Jewish people were in the wilderness,</b> the <b>north wind did not blow for them.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that this wholesome wind did not blow all those years? <b>If you wish, say</b> it was <b>because they were under censure</b> following the sin of the spies and were therefore undeserving of this salutary wind. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that it was so <b>that</b> the <b>clouds of glory</b> covering the Tabernacle <b>should not disperse.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Pappa said: Therefore,</b> learn from here that on <b>a cloudy day or</b> on <b>a day</b> that <b>a south wind [<i>shuta</i>]</b> blows, <b>we may neither circumcise nor let</b> blood <b>[<i>mesokhrinan</i>],</b> owing to the danger involved. <b>But nowadays, when many are accustomed to</b> ignoring these safeguards, the verse <b>“The Lord preserves the simple”</b> (Psalms 116:6) is applied, and it is assumed that they will come to no harm.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>All those forty years that the Jewish people were in the wilderness there was not a day in which</b> the <b>north wind did not blow at midnight, as it is stated: “And it came to pass at midnight, that the Lord smote all the firstborn</b> in the land of Egypt” (Exodus 12:29). The Gemara asks: <b>What is the</b> biblical <b>derivation?</b> How is it derived from this verse that speaks of the exodus from Egypt that a north wind blew at midnight during the forty years that the Jewish people wandered in the wilderness? The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> comes to <b>teach us that a time of favor is a</b> significant <b>matter.</b> Since midnight had once been a time of divine favor at the beginning of the exodus from Egypt, it continued to be a time of favor throughout the forty years that the Jewish people sojourned in the wilderness.

### Part 5
§ <b>Rav Huna said: By Torah law,</b> if one had been circumcised, but subsequently the residual foreskin was <b>drawn forward</b> by itself or manually so that it covered the corona, he may <b>partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> as he is considered circumcised. <b>However, from the words of</b> the Sages, <b>they decreed</b> that he must be circumcised again <b>because he looks</b> as if he were <b>uncircumcised.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based on the following <i>baraita</i>: One whose residual foreskin was <b>drawn forward</b> so that it covers the corona <b>requires</b> a second <b>circumcision,</b> indicating that he is not considered circumcised. The Gemara explains: This requirement is <b>by rabbinic law,</b> and by Torah law he is considered circumcised. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> the <i>amora</i> <b>who asked</b> this question, <b>why did he ask it</b> in the first place? The <i>baraita</i> merely <b>teaches</b> that such an individual <b>requires</b> circumcision, and does not indicate that it is a Torah obligation.

### Part 7
The Gemara explains: The <i>amora</i> who raised the question <b>erred due to the latter clause</b> of that same <i>baraita</i>, which states: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: He should not be circumcised because it would be dangerous for him</b> to do so. His colleagues <b>said to him: But weren’t</b> there <b>many</b> who had drawn their residual foreskins forward and subsequently <b>were circumcised</b> a second time <b>in the days of ben Koziva,</b> otherwise known as bar Kokheva, <b>and they fathered sons and daughters.</b> Such re-circumcision is necessary, <b>as it is stated: “He must surely be circumcised [<i>himmol yimmol</i>]”</b> (Genesis 17:13), the double verb form indicating: <b>Even one hundred times. And</b> furthermore, <b>it says: “He has broken My covenant”</b> (Genesis 17:14), which comes <b>to include one</b> whose foreskin was <b>drawn forward.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>it says?</b> Why was it necessary to cite two verses in support of the same <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara answers: The additional verse is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>this</b> first verse: <b>“He shall surely be circumcised,”</b> comes only <b>to include the shreds</b> of flesh <b>that invalidate the circumcision</b> if they are not cut and to indicate that they must be removed. If so, <b>come</b> and <b>hear</b> a second verse: <b>“He has broken My covenant,”</b> which comes <b>to include one</b> whose foreskin was <b>drawn forward.</b>

### Part 9
Now <b>he,</b> the <i>amora</i> who raised an objection based on the first part of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>thought</b> that <b>since</b> at the end of the <i>baraita</i> the <i>tanna</i> <b>brings a derivation</b> from <b>a verse,</b> this <i>halakha</i> must be <b>by Torah law. But</b> in fact <b>that is not so.</b> It is only <b>by rabbinic law, and the verse</b> quoted is <b>a mere support</b> but not the source of the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a different source: A priest who is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> but <b>his wives and slaves may partake</b> of it. A priest who had been circumcised, but subsequently the residual foreskin was <b>drawn forward, and</b> similarly <b>one who was born circumcised,</b> i.e., without a foreskin, <b>may partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. A priest who is <b>a hermaphrodite [<i>androginos</i>],</b> possessing both male and female genitals, and was circumcised <b>may partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> as whether he is male or female he is entitled to eat <i>teruma</i>, <b>but he may not partake of sacrificial food,</b> which is permitted only to male priests, as he might not be a male. A priest who is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i> or sacrificial food,</b> as he might be a male, and since his member is hidden he cannot be circumcised.

### Part 11
<b>In any event,</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches</b> that a priest whose foreskin was <b>drawn forward and</b> one who was <b>born circumcised may partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. This would seem to be <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna</b> that a priest whose foreskin was drawn forward may not eat <i>teruma</i> at least by rabbinic law. The Gemara concludes: This is in fact <b>a conclusive refutation</b> of his opinion.

### Part 12
<b>The Master said</b> above in the <i>baraita</i>: A priest who is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> but <b>his wives [<i>nashav</i>] and slaves may partake</b> of it. The Gemara is puzzled by this teaching: <b>From where does a <i>tumtum</i> have wives?</b> If he does not have a visible male organ, how can he marry a woman? <b>If we say that he</b> merely <b>betrothed</b> a woman, <b>as it is taught</b> in another <i>baraita</i>: If <b>a <i>tumtum</i> betrothed</b> a woman <b>his betrothal is</b> considered <b>a</b> valid <b>betrothal,</b> as he might be a male, and similarly if he <b>was betrothed</b> by a man, <b>his betrothal is</b> deemed <b>a</b> valid <b>betrothal</b> as he might be a female, there is a difficulty.

### Part 13
One could <b>say that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>said</b> that the betrothal of a <i>tumtum</i> is valid only <b>as a stringency,</b> i.e., out of concern that he might be a male, and therefore the woman cannot leave without a proper bill of divorce. But <b>should we say</b> that his betrothal is valid also <b>as a leniency,</b> to allow his wife to eat <i>teruma</i>? There is an <b>uncertainty</b> here that perhaps <b>he is a woman, and</b> one <b>woman cannot betroth</b> another <b>woman.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Abaye said:</b> The <i>tanna</i> is referring to a <i>tumtum</i> whose male organ is hidden, but he is speaking of a situation <b>where his testicles are visible externally.</b> Since it is evident that he is a male, he can betroth a woman even though he cannot have relations with her.

### Part 15
<b>Rava said</b> a different answer: <b>What is</b> meant here by the word <i>nashav</i>, which was translated earlier as his wives, but which can also be understood as <b>his women?</b> It refers here to the priest’s <b>mother,</b> who, after her husband the priest has passed away, may continue to eat <i>teruma</i> by virtue of her son. The Gemara questions this interpretation of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>His mother?</b> It <b>is obvious</b> that she may eat <i>teruma</i> on his account, as he is her offspring by a priest. The Gemara explains: This statement is nevertheless necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that only if the priest <b>is capable of having children</b> does he <b>enable</b> his mother <b>to eat</b> <i>teruma</i>, but if he <b>is incapable of having children</b> he <b>does not enable</b> his mother <b>to eat</b> <i>teruma</i>, and therefore a <i>tumtum</i>, who cannot have children, should not enable his mother to eat <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so, as a woman may eat <i>teruma</i> by virtue of the child she bore a priest, even if that child is incapable of having children.

### Part 16
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof in support of Abaye’s opinion from that which is taught in the latter part of the <i>baraita</i>: A priest who is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i> or sacrificial food.</b> There is a difficulty here, as the <i>halakha</i> that a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i> was already taught in the first part of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Granted, according to Abaye,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> in the <b>first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> the <i>halakha</i> governing a <i>tumtum</i> who is <b>definitely uncircumcised,</b> i.e., one whose testicles are visible externally, so that he is definitely male but cannot undergo circumcision because his member itself is hidden. <b>And</b> then <b>he teaches</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> the <i>halakha</i> governing a <i>tumtum</i> about whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether he is <b>uncircumcised,</b> i.e., one whose genitalia are completely hidden, so that he might not even be a male.

### Part 17
<b>But according to Rava, why do I</b> need the repetition of the <i>halakha</i> governing a <b><i>tumtum</i></b> in <b>the latter clause?</b> The <i>tanna</i> already stated this <i>halakha</i> in the first part of the <i>baraita</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>What is</b> this <b><i>tumtum</i></b> referred to in the latter clause? It is a man who is definitely <b>uncircumcised.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>Now,</b> if a <i>tumtum</i>, about whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether he is <b>uncircumcised, may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, as stated in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i>, can it be supposed that a man who is <b>definitely uncircumcised</b> may eat <i>teruma</i>, so that it was necessary for the <i>baraita</i> to teach in the latter clause that he may not do so? The Gemara answers: <b>He is saying: What is the reason.</b> The <i>baraita</i> should be understood as follows: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>a <i>tumtum</i> may not partake of <i>teruma</i>?</b> It is <b>because</b> there is <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether he is <b>uncircumcised, and an uncircumcised</b> priest <b>may not partake of <i>teruma</i> or sacrificial food.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this amoraic dispute as to whether or not one who had been circumcised but his residual foreskin was drawn forward is considered uncircumcised by Torah law is <b>parallel to</b> the following dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> As it is taught in the <i>Tosefta</i> (<i>Shabbat</i> 16:7): One whose foreskin was <b>drawn forward, and</b> similarly, <b>one who was born circumcised, and a convert who converted when he was</b> already <b>circumcised, and a child whose</b> appropriate <b>time</b> for circumcision already <b>passed</b> and he was still uncircumcised, <b>and all others</b> who require <b>circumcision,</b> which, as the Gemara parenthetically adds, comes <b>to include one who has two foreskins,</b> both of which must be removed, <b>may be circumcised only during the day. Rabbi Elazar bar Shimon says:</b> If the circumcision is performed <b>at its</b> appropriate <b>time,</b> i.e., on the eighth day,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC