
### Part 1
This verse is referring to a man <b>who has</b> potential <b>widowhood and divorce with her, excluding a gentile and a slave, who do not have widowhood and divorce</b> with her, as they cannot marry Jews at all. Therefore, they disqualify a woman from marrying into the priesthood through sexual intercourse, even if she does not have a child with them.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>We have found</b> a source for the <i>halakha</i> that a gentile and a slave disqualify <b>a priestess. From where do we</b> derive this with regard to <b>a Levite and an Israelite woman?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>as Rabbi Abba</b> said that <b>Rav said:</b> The verse <b>“But</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter</b> be a widow, or divorced” (Leviticus 22:13) could have begun with the words: If a priest’s <b>daughter.</b> The word “but,” the prefix <i>vav</i>, expands the prohibition to include additional women. <b>Here too,</b> it may be derived from the distinction between the phrase: If a priest’s <b>daughter,</b> and the phrase as it actually appears in the verse: <b>“But</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter,”</b> that Levite and Israelite women are subject to the prohibition as well.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this exposition possible? It is <b>in accordance</b> only <b>with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as he derives</b> <i>halakhot</i> from the prefix <b><i>vav</i>.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> it is accordance with <b>the Rabbis, the entire</b> phrase: <b>“But</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter,” is superfluous</b> in the <b>verse,</b> as the previous verses had already mentioned the priest’s daughter. Therefore, the inclusion of Levite and Israelite women in the prohibition may be derived from the entire expression.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>But</b> perhaps you should <b>say</b> a different interpretation of the mention of widowhood and divorce in the verse: In the case of <b>one who has</b> potential <b>widowhood and divorce with her, if he does not have offspring</b> from her <b>she may partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> upon her widowhood or divorce, whereas <b>if he does have offspring</b> from her <b>she does not partake.</b> However, in the case of <b>one who does not have widowhood and divorce with her, even if she has offspring</b> from him, <b>she should</b> be allowed to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, as the offspring is not considered his.

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>If so, why do I</b> need to <b>include a Levite and an Israelite woman?</b> If the daughter of a priest is not disqualified from <i>teruma</i> due to intercourse with a gentile or slave, certainly a Levite or Israelite woman is not. The fact that the verse indicates inclusion of Levite and Israelite women proves that the <i>halakha</i> that is derived from it is a stringency and not a leniency.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And according to Rabbi Akiva, who said</b> that <b>betrothal of those</b> who may not engage in intercourse, as they are <b>liable for</b> violating <b>a prohibition, does not take effect, and</b> therefore the meaning of the phrase <b>“And if</b> a priest’s daughter <b>be [<i>tihye</i>] to a common man”</b> (Leviticus 22:12) is not: If she marries him, but rather: <b>If she engages in intercourse</b> with him, <b>why do I</b> need the Torah to mention the phrase <b>“a widow, or divorced”</b> in the verse: “But if a priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced…she may eat of her father’s bread” (Leviticus 22:13)? It is not necessary for this phrase to teach that a gentile and a slave disqualify a woman from marrying into the priesthood through sexual intercourse, as suggested by Rabbi Yishmael, as they are included in the prohibition proscribing a woman who engaged in intercourse with a man who is unfit for her.

### Part 7
The Gemara answers: <b>A widow</b> is mentioned <b>to be stringent with her, and a divorcée to be lenient with her, and</b> both <b>are necessary. As, had</b> the Torah <b>taught us</b> only the case of <b>a widow,</b> you might have assumed that <b>specifically</b> if this daughter of a priest is <b>a widow</b> she <b>partakes</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>when she does not have offspring because she is fit for the priesthood,</b> as she may marry a common priest, <b>but</b> with regard to <b>a divorcée, who is not fit for the priesthood</b> at all, you might <b>say</b> that <b>even if she does not have offspring she does not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And had it taught us</b> only the case of <b>a divorcée,</b> you might have assumed that only <b>a divorcée does not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>when she has offspring</b> from a non-priest <b>because she is not fit for the priesthood, but</b> with regard to <b>a widow, who is fit for the priesthood,</b> you might <b>say</b> that <b>even if she has offspring she should also partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. It is therefore <b>necessary</b> for both cases to be stated.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> perhaps you should <b>say</b> that the category of a woman <b>who engaged in intercourse with</b> a man who is <b>unfit for her</b> and is therefore disqualified from the priesthood applies <b>even</b> to the case of a man <b>remarrying his divorcée</b> after she had been married to another man in the meantime, which is prohibited. The Gemara answers: <b>The Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“To a common man [<i>ish zar</i>],”</b> literally, a man who is a stranger, “she shall not eat of that which is set apart from the sacred.” The  Gemara understands the notion of a stranger to be one whom she was forbidden to marry and interprets homiletically: Only marriage to one <b>who was a stranger,</b> i.e., forbidden, <b>to her from the outset</b> precludes her from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, <b>to the exclusion of one who was not a stranger to her from the outset,</b> such as her ex-husband.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, a <i>ḥalal</i>, who was not excluded at the outset,</b> as he may marry even the daughter of a priest, <b>should not disqualify</b> a woman from marrying into the priesthood. The Gemara answers that <b>the verse states,</b> with regard to a priest who marries a woman unfit for the priesthood: <b>“He shall not profane his seed among his people”</b> (Leviticus 21:15), thereby <b>juxtaposing his seed to him. Just as he,</b> a priest who married a woman forbidden to him, <b>disqualifies</b> her from the priest-hood, <b>so too, his seed,</b> the <i>ḥalal</i>, <b>also disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> perhaps you should <b>say</b> that a woman who engaged in intercourse with a man unfit for her is disqualified <b>from the time of</b> their <b>betrothal,</b> even before they engaged in intercourse. The Gemara answers that this is <b>similar to a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow: Just as a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow</b> has disqualified her <b>through intercourse,</b> not betrothal, <b>so too, this</b> unfit man has <b>also</b> disqualified her <b>through intercourse.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> perhaps you should <b>say</b> that he does not disqualify her <b>until there is</b> both <b>betrothal and intercourse.</b> The Gemara again answers that this is <b>similar to a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow: Just as a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow</b> disqualifies her <b>through intercourse alone, so too, this</b> man <b>also</b> disqualified her <b>through intercourse alone.</b>

### Part 12
§ It was taught in the <i>baraita</i> under discussion (68a) that <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Of the men unfit to enter the assembly of Israel, <b>anyone whose offspring are</b> also <b>unfit disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse from the priesthood. However, <b>anyone whose offspring are not unfit does not disqualify</b> her. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there between the first <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>and Rabbi Yosei?</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The practical difference <b>between them</b> pertains to <b>a second-</b>generation <b>Egyptian and a second-</b>generation <b>Edomite.</b> The children of these men, i.e., the third generation, may marry Jews of unflawed lineage. Therefore, according to Rabbi Yosei, they too do not disqualify a woman from the priesthood through intercourse with them. The first <i>tanna</i>, however, holds that they have the same status as a first-generation Egyptian or Edomite convert, in that they disqualify a woman from the priesthood through intercourse.

### Part 14
<b>And both</b> <i>tanna’im</i> <b>derived</b> their respective opinions <b>only from</b> the case of <b>a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow,</b> although they reached different conclusions. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> reasoned: Just as</b> with regard to <b>a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow, his</b> act of <b>intercourse</b> with her <b>is a transgression, and</b> therefore <b>he disqualifies</b> her from the priesthood, <b>so too, this</b> man, a second-generation Egyptian or Edomite, <b>also disqualifies</b> her.

### Part 15
<b>And Rabbi Yosei</b> also <b>reasoned:</b> This is <b>like a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse with a widow. <b>Just as</b> the <b>High Priest’s children are unfit</b> for the priesthood, <b>and he</b> himself <b>disqualifies</b> the widow from marrying into the priesthood, <b>so too, any</b> man <b>whose children are unfit</b> to marry Jews of unflawed lineage <b>disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse from marrying into the priesthood. This inference comes <b>to exclude a second-</b>generation <b>Egyptian, whose children are not unfit, as it is written: “The children of the third generation that are born to them may enter into the assembly of the Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:9).

### Part 16
It is taught in the <i>baraita</i> under discussion that <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Anyone whose daughter you may marry, you may marry his widow;</b> anyone whose daughter you may not marry, you may not marry his widow. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there between Rabbi Yosei and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel?</b> They appear to be stating the same principle, that a man disqualifies a woman from the priesthood only if his children are unfit to marry Jews of unflawed lineage as well.

### Part 17
<b>Ulla said:</b> The practical difference <b>between them</b> is in the case of <b>an Ammonite and a Moabite convert. And both of them derived</b> their respective opinions <b>from none other than</b> the case of <b>a High Priest with a widow. Rabbi Yosei reasoned: Just as</b> with regard to <b>a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow, his children are unfit</b> for the priesthood <b>and</b> he himself <b>disqualifies</b> the widow, <b>so too, any</b> man <b>whose children are unfit disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse.

### Part 18
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel reasoned: Just as</b> in the case of <b>a High Priest</b> who engaged in intercourse <b>with a widow, where all of his children</b> from her <b>are unfit</b> for the priesthood <b>and he disqualifies</b> her as well, <b>so too,</b> in the case of a man <b>all of whose children are unfit, he disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse. This is <b>to the exclusion of an Ammonite or a Moabite</b> convert, <b>as not all of his children are unfit</b> to marry Jews of unflawed lineage, <b>as the Master said: An Ammonite man</b> is unfit to enter the assembly <b>but not an Ammonite woman; a Moabite man</b> is unfit <b>but not a Moabite woman.</b> Since only the sons of an Ammonite or Moabite convert are unfit, they do not disqualify a woman with whom they engaged in intercourse from marrying into the priesthood.

### Part 19
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who rapes</b> a woman without marrying her; <b>or one who seduces</b> a woman without marrying her; <b>or an imbecile</b> who engages in intercourse with a woman, even if he did marry her, if they are non-priests <b>they do not disqualify</b> the daughter of a priest from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, <b>and</b> if they are priests <b>they do not enable</b> an Israelite woman <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And if they are not fit to enter</b> the assembly of <b>Israel</b> through marriage, <b>they disqualify</b> the daughter of a priest from partaking of <i>teruma</i>. <b>How so?</b> If <b>it was an Israelite who engaged in</b> extramarital <b>intercourse with the daughter of a priest, she may partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> as this act of intercourse does not disqualify her.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC