
### Part 1
<b>Because if she wanted</b> to lie <b>she</b> would have <b>said:</b> There was <b>peace in the world,</b> and the court would have accepted her testimony. <b>Or perhaps</b> it can be argued: <b>Since she has maintained</b> that there was a war and this claim of hers has already been accepted, with regard to her report concerning her husband, <b>she will say</b> what <b>she imagines</b> to be the case, <b>and</b> the argument of: <b>Why would I lie, does not come and undermine the</b> established <b>presumption</b> that there was a war.

### Part 2
The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> in an attempt to resolve this dilemma. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear:</b> It was taught that if a woman comes and says: <b>They set our house</b> on fire and the house became filled with <b>smoke,</b> or: <b>They set our cave</b> on fire to <b>smoke</b> us out, and she adds: My husband <b>died and I was saved, she is not deemed credible.</b> In this case, she herself related the entire story, and even so her version of events is not accepted. The Gemara answers that this is no proof. <b>There,</b> in the case of the fire, <b>it is different, as one says to her: Just as a miracle occurred for you</b> and you were saved, <b>likewise a miracle</b> might have <b>occurred for</b> your husband and he too survived.

### Part 3
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from another <i>baraita</i>. If a woman comes and says: A group of <b>gentiles attacked us,</b> or: A group <b>of bandits attacked us,</b> and she adds: My husband <b>died and I was saved, she is deemed credible.</b> This indicates that her testimony is accepted due to the argument of: Why should she lie? The Gemara rejects this proof. <b>There,</b> in that <i>baraita</i>, her testimony is accepted because it stands to reason that she is speaking the truth, <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Idi. As Rav Idi said:</b> With regard to <b>a woman, her weapons are upon her.</b> In other words, a woman is generally not killed by thieves, because the very fact of her being a woman protects her. They would most likely rape her and not kill her. Consequently, it is reasonable to assume that she is speaking the truth.

### Part 4
§ The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain man who</b> got married. <b>At the end of his wedding a fire broke out in the bridal chamber,</b> where the bride and groom were standing, during the ceremony. <b>His wife</b> screamed and <b>said to them: Look at my husband, look at my husband! They went and saw</b> an unrecognizable <b>burnt man fallen down, and a palm</b> of a hand <b>lying</b> there.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin thought to say: This is</b> the same as the case of: <b>They set our house</b> on fire and the house became filled with <b>smoke,</b> or: <b>They set our cave</b> on fire to <b>smoke</b> us out, i.e., we cannot rely on her claim that her husband died. <b>Rava said: Is</b> this case <b>comparable</b> to those? <b>There she did not say: Look at my husband, look at my husband. And furthermore,</b> there is another difference: Here, there is <b>a burnt man who has fallen down and a palm that is lying</b> there. In other words, her statement is substantiated by facts.

### Part 6
<b>And</b> why didn’t <b>Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin</b> accept her testimony? In his opinion, <b>a burnt man who has fallen down</b> is not conclusive proof, as one might still <b>say:</b> Perhaps <b>another person came to the rescue and the fire burned him. And</b> as for <b>the palm lying</b> there, perhaps <b>the fire burned him and caused a deformity</b> through which he lost his hand, <b>and due to his embarrassment he went and ran away to</b> somewhere else <b>in the world,</b> but he is still alive. Consequently, Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin did not want to rely upon the testimony of the wife.

### Part 7
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before them:</b> In the case of <b>one witness</b> who testifies to the death of someone <b>during a war, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains the sides of the dilemma: <b>The reason that one witness is deemed credible</b> when he provides testimony concerning the death of a husband is <b>because</b> the husband being alive <b>is a matter that is likely to be revealed,</b> and one would <b>not lie</b> in a case of this kind. <b>Here, too,</b> one witness would <b>not lie. Or perhaps the reason that one witness</b> is trusted <b>is because</b> his account is supported by the fact that <b>she herself is exacting</b> in her investigation before she <b>marries</b> again. <b>And here, since sometimes</b> she <b>hates him,</b> and war is a situation that requires especially careful investigation and it is tempting for her to rely on the witness, <b>she is not exacting</b> in her investigation before she <b>marries</b> again, and therefore the testimony of one witness is not accepted.

### Part 8
<b>Rami bar Ḥama said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to this dilemma. <b>Rabbi Akiva said: When I descended to Neharde’a</b> in Babylonia <b>to intercalate the year, I found</b> there the Sage <b>Neḥemya of Beit D’li, and he said to me: I heard that</b> the Sages <b>do not</b> allow <b>a woman to marry in Eretz Yisrael based on</b> the testimony of <b>one witness, apart from Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava,</b> as the other Sages are reluctant to rely on his opinion. <b>And I said [<i>namti</i>] to him: This is so. He said to me: Say to them in my name:</b> Do <b>you know that this country is riddled with troops? This is</b> the tradition that <b>I received from Rabban Gamliel the Elder, that</b> the Sages do allow <b>a woman to marry based on one witness.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara analyzes this <i>baraita</i> in relation to the issue at hand. <b>What</b> is the significance of his comment that this <b>country is riddled with troops? Isn’t</b> he saying: <b>Even though this country is riddled</b> with troops, <b>this is</b> the tradition that <b>I received, that</b> the Sages do allow <b>a woman to marry based on one witness,</b> notwithstanding the war. <b>Apparently, one witness is deemed credible</b> in the case of a missing husband during a time of war.

### Part 10
<b>Rava said: If this is</b> how you interpret the matter, in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this <b>country different</b> from any other? In other words, why did Neḥemya of Beit D’li mention a particular place? <b>He should have</b> said: <b>Any place where there are troops. Rather, Rava said: This is what he said: You know that this country is riddled with troops, and I cannot leave the members of my household and come before the Sages,</b> due to the danger. Therefore, I cannot testify in person that <b>this is</b> the tradition that <b>I received from Rabban Gamliel</b> the Elder, <b>that</b> the Sages allow <b>a woman to marry based on one witness.</b> According to this interpretation, his statement has no bearing on the matter at hand.

### Part 11
The Gemara continues. <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i> that relates <b>an incident involving two Torah scholars who were coming with Abba Yosei ben Simai by boat, and</b> that boat <b>sank. And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi allowed <b>their wives to marry based on</b> the testimony given by <b>women</b> that these men were dead. <b>But</b> consider: <b>Water,</b> i.e., the sea, <b>is like war</b> with respect to this <i>halakha</i>, as there is room in both cases for conjecture and error. <b>And women, even one hundred</b> of them, <b>are considered as one witness</b> with regard to their testimony about a husband’s death. <b>And</b> yet the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught:</b> He allowed them <b>to marry,</b> which indicates that one may rely on one witness even during a war.

### Part 12
The Gemara rejects this proof. <b>And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it that way? Apparently, the women testified only that the boat sank, <b>and this is</b> a case of <b>an endless body of water,</b> as the boat sank at sea in a spot from which it is impossible to see the shore. <b>And</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that if a man was on a boat that sank in <b>an endless body of water his wife is prohibited</b> to marry, as there is no proof that he actually drowned and didn’t emerge from the water on a different shore. <b>Rather,</b> one must say: <b>What are the circumstances? That</b> those women <b>said: Those</b> drowned men <b>were brought up before us</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC