
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i></b> is performed as follows: <b>He and his <i>yevama</i> come to the court, and</b> the scholars of the court <b>give him advice appropriate for him,</b> whether to enter levirate marriage or to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>as it is stated: “And the Elders of his city shall call him and speak to him”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:8).

### Part 2
If they decide to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>she says: “My brother-in-law refused to establish a name for his brother in Israel, he did not wish to consummate the levirate marriage”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7), <b>and</b> afterward <b>he says: “I do not wish to take her”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:8). <b>And they would say</b> these statements <b>in the sacred</b> Hebrew <b>language</b> and not in any other language. Afterward, the shoe is removed and she spits before him, as is written: <b>“His <i>yevama</i> shall approach him, before the Elders, and remove his shoe from on his foot and spit before him”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:9), which indicates that <b>this spittle</b> must be <b>visible to the judges. “And</b> she shall <b>respond and say: So shall it be done to the man who does not build his brother’s house”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:9). <b>Up until this point</b> the judges <b>would prompt</b> the parties <b>to recite</b> the text that they are required to say.

### Part 3
<b>And when Rabbi Hyrkanus once prompted</b> the participants in <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>under the <i>ela</i> tree in the village</b> of <b>Eitam, he</b> prompted them to <b>finish reciting the whole</b> Torah <b>passage,</b> after which <b>they established the custom of completing the whole</b> Torah <b>passage.</b> Therefore, they continue and say the following verse: <b>“And his name shall be called in Israel: The house of he who had his shoe removed”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:10). <b>This mitzva</b> of saying: The house of he who had his shoe removed, applies <b>to the judges, but not to the students,</b> i.e., the students of the judges and other onlookers who are present. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: It is a mitzva upon all those present to say: He who had his shoe removed.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> This is the correct order for <b>the mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i>: She recites</b> the sentence beginning with “My brother-in-law refused” (Deuteronomy 25:7), and afterward <b>he recites</b> “I do not wish to take her” (Deuteronomy 25:8). Then <b>she removes</b> the shoe, <b>and spits, and recites:</b> “So shall it be done to the man who does not build his brother’s house” (Deuteronomy 25:9). The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Rav Yehuda <b>teaching us? This is</b> already explicit in <b>the mishna.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us</b> that <b>the mitzva is like this,</b> i.e., this is the proper order, <b>but if one switched the order, we have no</b> problem <b>with it,</b> as even though he did not fulfill the mitzva properly, the <i>ḥalitza</i> is still valid, since the order is not indispensable.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Whether the removal of the shoe preceded the spitting, or whether the spitting preceded the removal of the shoe, what he did is done,</b> i.e., the <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid.

### Part 6
§ <b>Abaye said</b> concerning the details of these <i>halakhot</i>: <b>The one who prompts</b> the <i>yavam</i> and the <i>yevama</i> <b>to read</b> the text for the <b>bill of <i>ḥalitza</i> should not prompt her</b> by reciting <b>“He did not”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7) <b>by itself, and “wish to consummate the levirate marriage”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7) <b>by itself, because</b> such a way of reading <b>sounds</b> to one who hears only the second phrase <b>like</b> he is saying: <b>My <i>yavam</i> does wish to consummate the marriage. Rather,</b> he should prompt her all at once consecutively: <b>“He did not wish to consummate the levirate marriage”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7), which will ensure that the intended meaning is clear.

### Part 7
<b>And he should not read to the</b> <i>yavam</i>: “I <b>do not” by itself,</b> followed by: <b>“Wish to</b> take her” <b>by itself, as it sounds</b> to one who heard only the second phrase <b>like: I do wish to take her. Rather,</b> he should read together at once: <b>“I do not wish to take her.” Rava said: It is a</b> mere <b>interruption in the matter. And we have no</b> problem with regard to <b>an interruption in the matter</b> as it is basically just a pause for taking a breath<b>.</b>

### Part 8
It is told: <b>Rav Ashi found Rav Kahana painstakingly trying to prompt</b> a certain <i>yevama</i>, so that she would recite: <b>“He did not wish to consummate the levirate marriage”</b> all at once, but the <i>yevama</i> did not understand and was distorting the meaning by not reciting the words together. Rav Ashi <b>said to him: Does the Master not hold that which Rava said,</b> that the proper pausing during the recitation is not indispensable?

### Part 9
<b>He said to him:</b> Although Rava disagreed with Abaye about interruptions in the recitation of: “I do not wish to take her,” <b>Rava concedes concerning</b> the recitation of: <b>“He did not wish to consummate the levirate marriage,”</b> as this recitation is essential and must be recited properly. Rav Kahana added that <b>Abaye</b> also <b>said: One who writes a bill of <i>ḥalitza</i> must write as follows: We prompted her to recite from “My brother-in-law refused” until “he did not wish to consummate the levirate marriage”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7); <b>and we prompted him to recite from</b> “I do <b>not” until “take her”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:8). <b>And we prompted her to recite from “So shall”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:9) <b>until “he who had his shoe removed”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:10).

### Part 10
<b>Mar Zutra would score</b> lines of a parchment <b>and write the whole</b> <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>passage</b> on it as a bill of <i>ḥalitza</i>, so it would be displayed before the <i>ḥalitza</i> participants. <b>Mar bar Idi strongly objected to this: But it is unable to be written</b> like this on its own, as the Torah may be written only in a complete state, and it is prohibited to write parts of the Torah when there is no mitzva to write them separately. The Gemara comments: Even so, <b>the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Mar Zutra,</b> because there is an aspect of a mitzva here, as it is being written as part of a bill of <i>ḥalitza</i>, not for its own purpose.

### Part 11
§ <b>Abaye said:</b> If the <i>yevama</i> <b>spat, but the wind seized</b> her saliva and it never landed in front of the face of the <i>yavam</i>, <b>she did nothing,</b> and her actions have no halakhic significance. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>We require</b> that <b>“she spit before him,”</b> as is mentioned in the verse. <b>Therefore, if he is tall and she is short and the wind seized it,</b> the requirement of <b>“before him” is satisfied,</b> because the moment the saliva left her mouth it was in front of the face of the <i>yavam</i>. <b>But if she is tall and he is short, we require that the saliva reach the space across from his face, and afterward it may go</b> with the wind; i.e., if she was taller than him and the saliva was taken by the wind before it reached the height of his face, she did not fulfill her obligation.

### Part 12
<b>Rava said:</b> If <b>she ate garlic and spat,</b> or if <b>she ate <i>gargishta</i> clay,</b> i.e., a type of clay once chewed for medicinal purposes, <b>and spat, she did nothing</b> and her actions have no halakhic significance, for this is not called spitting. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? <b>We require that “she shall spit” on her own, and this is not</b> satisfied here, for in this case she spits only on account of another thing that causes a pooling of saliva in her mouth. <b>And Rava said: The judges must see the spittle when it leaves the mouth of the <i>yevama</i>,</b> and the mere fact that she spat on the ground is insufficient, <b>as it is written: “Before the Elders…and spit,”</b> indicating that the spitting must take place before the eyes of the judges.

### Part 13
§ It was taught in the mishna: With regard to the verse <b>“And his name shall be called in Israel: The house of he who had his shoe removed,” there is a mitzva upon the judges to recite this but</b> it is <b>not</b> a requirement <b>for the students</b> or onlookers. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Once we were sitting before Rabbi Tarfon and a <i>yevama</i> came to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>. He said to us: You must all answer: “He who had his shoe removed,” “He who had his shoe removed,” “He who had his shoe removed,”</b> stating that portion of the verse three times.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC