
### Part 1
The Gemara rejects this assertion: <b>That</b> verse <b>is necessary to</b> teach <b>its own</b> basic <i>halakha</i>, that a non-priest is prohibited from partaking of <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara responds: <b>Two</b> prohibitions with regard to <b>a “common man” are written,</b> one in the verse previously cited and the other in Leviticus 22:13: “But there shall no common man eat of it.” One of them prohibits a non-priest from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, while the other is referring to the daughter of a priest married to a non-priest.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: One of these verses <b>is still necessary to</b> teach another <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> is taught <b>by Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, as Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, said</b> that the phrase <b>“no common man”</b> indicates that <b>I,</b> God, <b>said to you</b> that <b>commonness,</b> i.e., non-priesthood, renders one unfit to partake of <i>teruma</i>, <b>but acute mourning,</b> i.e., mourning on the day when one’s close relative died, does <b>not</b> render one unfit to eat <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: This teaching <b>of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, is derived from</b> a superfluous word in the verse, as it could have stated: <b>A common man</b> may not eat of the holy thing, and it actually states: <b>“No common man.”</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: The verse “And if a priest’s daughter be married to a common man” (Leviticus 22:12), from which Rav derived the <i>halakha</i> being discussed, that intercourse with an unfit man renders a woman unfit to partake of <i>teruma</i> and marry a priest, <b>is still necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When</b> a priest’s daughter <b>returns</b> to her father’s house after the death of her Israelite husband, <b>she resumes</b> partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>, but she does not resume</b> partaking of the <b>breast and</b> the right <b>hind leg</b> of sacrificial offerings. <b>And Rav Ḥisda said</b> that <b>Ravina, son of Rav Sheila, said: What is the verse</b> from which this is derived? <b>As it is written: “And if a priest’s daughter be married to a common man, she may not eat of that which is set apart from the sacred”</b> (Leviticus 22:12). This implies that even after her husband’s death, <b>she may not partake of the</b> portion <b>separated from consecrated</b> offerings. Therefore, the verse cannot be the source for the above <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>If so,</b> if this is the only <i>halakha</i> derived from this verse, <b>let the verse</b> merely <b>write: She may not eat of the sacred. What is</b> the significance of the seemingly superfluous expression <b>“that which is set apart from the sacred”? Conclude from this</b> that the prohibition is referring to <b>two</b> deeds: The daughter of a priest who engaged in intercourse with an unfit man may not partake of <i>teruma</i>, and if she weds a non-priest she may not partake of the priestly portion of offerings, the breast and right hind leg.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for <b>a priestess; from where do we</b> derive the same <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>a Levite or an Israelite</b> woman who engaged in intercourse with an unfit man, i.e., that they do not partake of <i>teruma</i> even if they marry a priest? The Gemara answers that it is <b>as Rabbi Abba</b> said that <b>Rav said:</b> The verse states: <b>“But</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter</b> be a widow, or divorced” (Leviticus 22:13). It could have begun: If a priest’s <b>daughter.</b> The word “but,” the prefix <i>vav</i>, is seemingly superfluous, and therefore it may indicate the expansion of the prohibition to include additional women. <b>Here too,</b> it may be derived from the distinction between the phrase: If a priest’s <b>daughter,</b> and the phrase: <b>“And</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter,”</b> which utilizes the prefix <i>vav</i>, that Levite and Israelite women are subject to the prohibition as well.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with whose</b> opinion is this exposition possible? It is <b>in accordance</b> only <b>with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as</b> he <b>derives</b> <i>halakhot</i> from the prefix <b><i>vav</i>,</b> which means “and” or “but.” The Gemara responds: <b>Even</b> if <b>you say</b> it is in accordance with <b>the Rabbis,</b> who do not derive <i>halakhot</i> from the prefix <i>vav</i>, <b>the entire</b> phrase: <b>“And</b> if a priest’s <b>daughter,” is superfluous</b> in the <b>verse,</b> as the previous verse already mentioned the priest’s daughter. Therefore, the inclusion of Levite and Israelite women in the prohibition may be derived from the entire expression.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>We found</b> a source for the woman’s disqualification from partaking of <b><i>teruma</i>; from where do we</b> derive that she is disqualified <b>from</b> marrying into the <b>priesthood?</b> The Gemara counters: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>we did not include a Levite and an Israelite woman</b> in the verse “But if a priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, etc.” (Leviticus 22:13), with regard to their marriage <b>to</b> a member of <b>the priesthood?</b> The derivation that a Levite and an Israelite woman are included in this verse was clearly with regard to their marriage to a priest; <b>as if</b> the inclusion was with regard <b>to <i>teruma</i>, are</b> these women <b>fit to partake of <i>teruma</i></b> at all, regardless of their having engaged in intercourse with an unfit man? Clearly, their inclusion pertains to their marriage to a priest and their partaking of <i>teruma</i> as his wife.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this assertion: <b>Why not?</b> Why can’t the inclusion be referring to the partaking of <i>teruma</i> exclusively? <b>You find that</b> possibility <b>when she partakes</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>due to her son.</b> If an Israelite woman has a son from a priest, she may partake of <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, it is necessary to include a Levite or Israelite woman in the prohibition against partaking of <i>teruma</i> if she engaged in intercourse with an unfit man.

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: The <i>halakha</i> that this woman does not partake of <i>teruma</i> <b>due to her son is</b> deduced through <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If a priestess, who partakes</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>by</b> virtue of <b>her own sanctity, is disqualified</b> from partaking of <i>teruma</i> by an unfit man who engaged in intercourse with her, then with regard to <b>a Levite or Israelite woman, who partakes</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>only due to her son,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> that it should be prohibited for her to partake of <i>teruma</i> after this act?

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects that response: <b>But that provides</b> support for the contrary reasoning. It is logical that <b>a priestess, who is herself sacred, is disqualified</b> by intercourse with an unfit man. However, with regard to <b>this</b> woman, <b>who is not sacred herself,</b> and who eats <i>teruma</i> only due to her son, intercourse with an unfit man should <b>not disqualify her. Rather,</b> the prohibition against these women marrying <b>into the priesthood</b> is derived by <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference <b>from</b> the case of <b>a divorcée: If a divorcée</b> who is the daughter of a priest, <b>who is permitted to</b> partake of <b><i>teruma</i>, is</b> nevertheless <b>prohibited</b> from marrying <b>into the priesthood,</b> as is written in the Torah (Leviticus 21:7), then with regard to <b>this</b> woman, for <b>whom</b> it <b>is prohibited to</b> partake of <b><i>teruma</i>, is it not right that</b> she should be <b>disqualified</b> from marrying <b>into the priesthood?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara raises an objection to that inference: <b>But do we warn,</b> i.e., do we deduce a prohibition through <b>logical derivation?</b> The Gemara answers: This is not a new prohibition; rather, <b>it is merely a revelation</b> of the above prohibition’s scope. In other words, the prohibition against marrying a priest is subsumed under the prohibition against partaking of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 12
Now that the source has been established, the Gemara asks: <b>And</b> perhaps you should <b>say</b> that this <i>halakha</i> pertaining to a woman who <b>engaged in intercourse with</b> a man <b>unfit for her</b> applies only to <b>those liable to receive <i>karet</i></b> for their act of intercourse, but not to intercourse with a man who is unfit to marry into the assembly of Israel. The Gemara answers that <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“If</b> a priest’s daughter <b>be married”</b> (Leviticus 22:12), indicating that this <i>halakha</i> is referring to <b>those who</b> can <b>have</b> a valid <b>marriage,</b> while <b>those liable to receive <i>karet</i></b> for their act of intercourse <b>are not fit for marriage.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, a gentile or a slave</b> who engaged in intercourse with a Jewish woman <b>should not have disqualified</b> her from marrying into the priesthood, as they cannot marry her. The Gemara answers: <b>These disqualify</b> her, <b>as</b> derived <b>by Rabbi Yishmael, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said in the name of Rabbi Yishmael: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to a gentile or a slave who engaged in intercourse with an Israelite woman, or with a priestess, or a Levite woman, that they have disqualified her? As it is stated: “But if a priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced,</b> and have no child, and is returned to her father’s house, as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s bread” (Leviticus 22:13).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC