
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: Is this relationship not forbidden <b>by Torah law? As it is written: “You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law”</b> (Leviticus 18:15). The Gemara emends: <b>Say</b> instead <b>his son’s daughter-in-law.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And does</b> the prohibition against having a relationship with <b>his son’s daughter-in-law indeed have a conclusion? Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>His daughter-in-law is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, <b>his son’s daughter-in-law is a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relation, and similarly, you say</b> the daughter-in-law of <b>his son and</b> the daughter-in-law of <b>his son’s son until the end of all generations</b> are secondary forbidden relationships. <b>Rather, say</b> instead that Rav was referring to <b>his daughter’s daughter-in-law.</b>

### Part 2
<b>As Rav Ḥisda said: I heard this matter from a great man, and who was that</b> great man? It was <b>Rabbi Ami,</b> and he said: <b>They prohibited a daughter-in-law only due to</b> the <b>daughter-in-law.</b> Rav Ḥisda heard this in his youth but did not understand the meaning. <b>The Chaldean</b> astrologers <b>said to me: You will be a teacher.</b>

### Part 3
Rav Ḥisda further said: <b>I said</b> to myself: <b>If</b> the astrologers meant that <b>I will become a great man</b> and one who teaches the public, <b>I will</b> certainly be able to <b>reason</b> and understand this matter <b>with my knowledge. If</b> the astrologers meant that <b>I will become the teacher of children, I will ask it of the Sages who come to the synagogue</b> and in that way I will learn the meaning of Rabbi Ami’s teaching. <b>Now I understand</b> the matter <b>on my own.</b> Rabbi Ami meant: <b>They prohibited his daughter’s daughter-in-law only due to his son’s daughter-in-law,</b> to avoid confusion between these daughters-in-law. The rabbinic decree prohibited one’s daughter’s daughter-in-law but did not extend to subsequent generations.

### Part 4
Various Sages proceed to give contemporary examples of families where the halakhic status of the daughters-in-law of the sons and the daughters-in-law of the daughters could be confused with each other. <b>Abaye said to Rava: I will explain to you</b> with an example how one might become confused about these daughters-in-law. <b>For example,</b> this would be possible in the case of <b>the daughter-in-law of the house of bar Tzitai,</b> as there the children of the sons and the daughters of the same family lived together, and it was possible to confuse the halakhic status of the sons’ daughters-in-law and the daughters’ daughters-in-law. <b>Rav Pappa said: For example, the daughter-in-law of the house of Rav Pappa bar Abba. Rav Ashi said: For example, the daughter-in-law of the house of Mari bar Isak.</b>

### Part 5
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the wife of</b> one’s <b>mother’s maternal</b> half <b>brother?</b> The Gemara presents the different sides of the question: Both <b>the wife of</b> one’s <b>father’s maternal</b> half <b>brother and the wife of</b> one’s <b>mother’s paternal</b> half <b>brother contain</b> some <b>aspect of a father, and</b> perhaps <b>this</b> is the reason that <b>the Sages enacted</b> a prohibition. That is, they were both forbidden rabbinically to avoid confusion with the case of the wife of one’s father’s paternal half brother, who is forbidden by Torah law. <b>But</b> in the case of the wife of one’s mother’s maternal half brother, <b>where there is no aspect of a father</b> whatsoever, perhaps <b>the Sages did not make a decree? Or perhaps</b> this case <b>is no different?</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Safra said: She herself,</b> the wife of the mother’s paternal half brother, <b>is</b> forbidden <b>by rabbinic decree,</b> and <b>will we</b> then <b>proceed to issue a decree to</b> prevent violation of <b>a decree? Rava said: Is that to say that all of these</b> rabbinic decrees with regard to secondary relations <b>are not decrees</b> to prevent violation of <b>a decree?</b> For example, <b>his mother</b> is <b>a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, and the Sages decreed that <b>his mother’s mother is a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationship. And they decreed</b> that <b>his father’s mother</b> is also a secondary forbidden relationship <b>due to his mother’s mother. And what is the reason? They are all called the house of the grandmother,</b> and therefore people may confuse their halakhic status.

### Part 7
Rava continues: Similarly, <b>his father’s wife is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, and the Sages decreed that <b>his father’s father’s wife is a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationship. And they decreed</b> that <b>his mother’s father’s wife</b> is also a secondary forbidden relationship <b>due to his father’s father’s wife. And what is the reason? They are all called the house of the grandfather.</b>

### Part 8
Also, <b>the wife of his father’s paternal</b> half <b>brother,</b> his uncle, who is mentioned explicitly in the Torah (Leviticus 18:16), <b>is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, and the Sages decreed that <b>the wife of his father’s maternal</b> half <b>brother is a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationship. And they decreed</b> that <b>the wife of his mother’s paternal</b> half <b>brother</b> is also a secondary forbidden relationship <b>due to the wife of his father’s maternal</b> half <b>brother. And what is the reason?</b> It is <b>because they are all called the house of the uncle;</b> it seems that in the realm of forbidden relations the Sages did issue decrees to prevent violation of a decree, and Rav Safra’s claim is incorrect.

### Part 9
If so, then <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in this case of the wife of his mother’s maternal half brother? <b>Come</b> and <b>hear: As when Rav Yehuda bar Sheila came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said: In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they say</b> this principle: For <b>every female</b> relative who is <b>a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, the Sages <b>decreed on the wife of</b> the equivalent <b>male</b> relative <b>due to</b> her similarity to <b>a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationship.</b>

### Part 10
<b>And Rava said: Is</b> this really an established <b>principle?</b> Isn’t <b>his mother-in-law a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, while <b>his father-in-law’s wife is permitted?</b> Also, <b>his mother-in-law’s daughter is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, as she is his wife’s sister, yet <b>his mother-in-law’s son’s wife is permitted. His father-in-law’s daughter is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, yet <b>the wife of his father-in-law’s son is permitted. His stepdaughter is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, yet <b>his stepson’s wife is permitted. His stepdaughter’s daughter,</b> i.e., his wife’s granddaughter, <b>is a forbidden relation,</b> yet <b>the wife of his stepson’s son is permitted.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara continues: If so, <b>what did that</b> statement of <b>Rav Yehuda bar Sheila come to include?</b> Since his principle is not true in every case, it must be intended to include a specific <i>halakha</i>. <b>Does it not come to include</b> the case of <b>the wife of</b> one’s <b>mother’s maternal</b> half <b>brother, since</b> for <b>every female</b> relative <b>who is a forbidden relation</b> by Torah law, such as his mother’s maternal half sister, the Sages <b>decreed on the wife of</b> the equivalent <b>male</b> relative, in this case his mother’s maternal half brother’s wife, <b>due to</b> her similarity to <b>a secondary relation.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> with regard to <b>these</b> cases, the wife of his father-in-law or the wife of his mother-in-law’s son, who are permitted, <b>and this</b> case of the wife of a mother’s maternal half brother, who is prohibited? The Gemara answers: <b>This,</b> the wife of a mother’s maternal half brother, <b>is related by a single act of betrothal.</b> One’s mother’s brother is a blood relative, and his wife is therefore a secondary relation. In contrast, <b>these</b> other cases with regard to which the Sages did not issue a decree <b>are related</b> only <b>when there are two acts of betrothal.</b> For example, one’s father-in-law is related to one through one’s marriage to his own wife, and his father in law’s wife is related to him through his father-in-law’s marriage.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rav Mesharshiyya from Tusneya sent</b> a message <b>to Rav Pappi: Let our Master teach us: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>the wife of a father’s father’s brother and the sister of a father’s father?</b> Did the Sages prohibit these as secondary forbidden relations? The Gemara presents the different sides of the dilemma: Since one generation <b>below is a forbidden relation,</b> i.e., a father’s sister and the wife of a father’s paternal brother, who are both forbidden by Torah law, perhaps the Sages <b>also decreed</b> about the women one generation <b>above. Or, perhaps the generations are separate</b> and the women in the generation above are not considered to be forbidden relatives.

### Part 14
The Gemara attempts to answer: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from that <i>baraita</i> cited above, which taught: <b>What are</b> the <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships</b> that were prohibited? <b>And these</b> women, i.e., the wife of one’s father’s father’s brother and the sister of his father’s father <b>were not reckoned among them.</b> This implies that these women are permitted.

### Part 15
The Gemara replies that this is not conclusive. Perhaps the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> some examples <b>and omitted</b> other examples of secondary forbidden relations; i.e., perhaps the list is not exhaustive. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> else <b>did he omit that he omitted this?</b> It cannot be that the <i>tanna</i> had an exhaustive list except for one case. He either left out more than one case or he included all possible cases. The Gemara answers: <b>He omitted</b> the list of <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships</b> that were enumerated by <b>the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> which is listed later. Therefore, this <i>baraita</i> is not conclusive, as the <i>tanna</i> left out many cases.

### Part 16
The Gemara states that <b>Ameimar permitted the wife of one’s father’s father’s brother and the sister of one’s father’s father. Rav Hillel said to Rav Ashi,</b> challenging Ameimar’s statement: <b>I myself saw</b> a list of <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships</b> written by <b>Mar, son of Rabbana, and it was written</b> there that <b>sixteen</b> women <b>were forbidden. What, is it not</b> that these sixteen must be the <b>eight</b> cases listed <b>in the <i>baraita</i>, and six from the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya, and these two</b> cases of the wife of one’s father’s father’s brother and one’s father’s father’s sister, and <b>this</b> totals <b>sixteen?</b>

### Part 17
Rav Ashi defended Ameimar’s opinion: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> Rav Hillel, that these cases should be included, <b>there are seventeen</b> cases, <b>as there is</b> the additional case of <b>the wife of a mother’s maternal</b> half <b>brother, whose</b> status <b>was resolved</b> earlier, concluding <b>that she is forbidden.</b> If it is as you say, then there should be seventeen cases. The Gemara answers on behalf of Rav Hillel: <b>This</b> is <b>not difficult.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC