### Part 1
§ It is stated in the mishna that if <b>both</b> uncertain fathers <b>were priests,</b> the son is exempt from punishment for striking and for cursing them. <b>The Sages taught:</b> If <b>he struck this</b> uncertain father, <b>and then struck that one,</b> or if <b>he cursed this one and then cursed that one,</b> or if <b>he cursed both of them simultaneously</b> or <b>struck both of them simultaneously,</b> in all these cases <b>he is liable</b> to receive capital punishment, as one of them is certainly his father. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> Although if he struck or cursed both of them <b>simultaneously he is liable,</b> if he struck or cursed them <b>one after the other, he is exempt.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: He is exempt</b> even if he struck or cursed them <b>simultaneously?</b> The Gemara answers: These are the opinions of <b>two <i>tanna’im</i>,</b> and they each expressed their opinion <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>of Rabbi Yehuda.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the one who exempts</b> the son from punishment? <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said: Blessing is stated below</b> (Leviticus 20:9), with regard to cursing parents, <b>and blessing is stated above</b> (Exodus 22:27), with regard to cursing God. The Sages used the word blessing as a euphemism for cursing, as it was their custom to avoid uncouth language. <b>Just as</b> the statement <b>above,</b> in Exodus, is referring to a curse <b>that does not involve partnership,</b> as God is One, <b>so too</b> the statement <b>below,</b> in Leviticus, is referring exclusively to a curse of a parent <b>that does not involve partnership,</b> i.e., when there is no doubt with regard to his identity. <b>And striking is juxtaposed with cursing.</b> Just as one is not liable for cursing when it is unclear who his father is, the same applies to striking.

### Part 4
§ It is stated in the mishna: <b>And he ascends</b> to the Temple service <b>with the priestly watch</b> of both uncertain fathers. However, he does not receive a share of the offerings of either watch. The Gemara asks: <b>Since he does not receive a share, why does he ascend?</b> The Gemara is puzzled by this question: <b>Why does he ascend? Doesn’t he</b> naturally <b>say: I wish to perform a mitzva</b> by serving as a priest? The Gemara explains: <b>However,</b> note that the mishna <b>does not state:</b> If <b>he ascended, but rather: He ascends,</b> in the present tense. Apparently he is obligated to ascend, even <b>against his will.</b>

### Part 5
Why is he under obligation to serve in the Temple? <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ḥanina said</b> that <b>Abaye said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> He is obligated <b>due to</b> the potential <b>family flaw,</b> i.e., harm to the family name. If he does not serve with these watches, people will infer that both families are unfit for the priesthood, which is not the case.

### Part 6
It is stated in the mishna: <b>And if both</b> uncertain fathers <b>were in one priestly watch,</b> he receives one share. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about the case in which the uncertain fathers belonged to <b>two priestly watches,</b> with regard to which the mishna states <b>that</b> the son <b>does not</b> receive a share, and the case in which they belonged to the same watch? Just <b>as</b> in the case where they belonged to two watches, <b>he goes to this watch</b> to receive a share <b>and they reject him,</b> claiming that he belongs to the other watch, <b>and he goes to that watch and they reject him</b> in the same manner, <b>so too,</b> where they belonged to <b>one watch, he goes to this patrilineal family</b> to receive a share on their day, <b>and they reject him,</b> and the other patrilineal family rejects him too, as his true patrilineal family is unknown.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Pappa said</b> that <b>this is what</b> the mishna <b>is saying: If they were both in one priestly watch and one patrilineal family, he receives one share,</b> as he cannot be rejected.

### Part 8
end of chapter

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> the ritual through which the <i>yavam</i> frees the <i>yevama</i> of her levirate bonds, <b>must be</b> performed before <b>three judges, and</b> the ritual does not require the judges to be experts fit to adjudicate other matters, as <b>even if all three are laymen,</b> it is acceptable. <b>If she performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> while he was wearing <b>a shoe</b> made of soft leather that covers the whole foot, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid,</b> but if she performed <i>ḥalitza</i> while he was wearing <b>a soft shoe [<i>anpileya</i>]</b> made of cloth, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is invalid,</b> as it is not considered a real shoe. If <i>ḥalitza</i> was performed while he was wearing <b>a sandal,</b> i.e., footwear made of hard leather, <b>that has a heel,</b> it is <b>valid; but</b> if performed with a sandal <b>without a heel, it is invalid</b> <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 10
If the leg of the <i>yavam</i> was amputated anywhere <b>from the knee down</b> and she performed <i>ḥalitza</i> as he wore a shoe on the stump of his leg, <b>it is valid <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> If, however, the leg was amputated anywhere <b>from the knee and above,</b> and she performed <i>ḥalitza</i> as he wore a shoe on the stump of his leg, <b>it is invalid <i>ḥalitza</i>. If she performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> while the man was wearing <b>a sandal that did not belong to him, or a sandal made of wood, or on the left</b> shoe, <b>which was</b> being worn <b>on his right</b> foot, <b>it is valid <i>ḥalitza</i>. If she performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> as the man was wearing a shoe that was too <b>large</b> for him but <b>which he can</b> still <b>walk in, or</b> a shoe that was too <b>small</b> but <b>that covered most of his foot, her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Now that</b> the mishna says that <b>even three laymen</b> are qualified for <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>why do I</b> need it to mention <b>judges?</b> It would be sufficient to say that the mitzva requires three people. The Gemara answers: <b>This teaches us that we require three</b> people <b>who can</b> at least <b>dictate</b> the verses read during the <i>ḥalitza</i> ritual to the participants <b>like judges,</b> as they are not complete laymen in that they are literate. The Gemara comments: <b>We</b> already <b>learned this</b> <i>halakha</i> in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>as the Sages taught: The mitzva of <i>ḥalitza</i> is</b> performed <b>before three</b> individuals <b>who know</b> how <b>to dictate</b> the verses <b>like judges. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> <i>Ḥalitza</i> must be performed <b>before five</b> individuals acting as judges.

### Part 12
The Gemara discusses the dispute as to how many individuals must conduct the <i>ḥalitza</i>: <b>What is the reason of the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> who requires three? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> concerning <i>ḥalitza</i>: “His <i>yevama</i> shall ascend to the gate to the <b>Elders”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:7). Since the minimum number of the plural term “Elders” is <b>two, and</b> since, in order to prevent a paralyzing disagreement between an even number of judges, <b>a court may not</b> be composed of an <b>even</b> number of judges, <b>one more is added to them. Therefore, there are three</b> judges. <b>And Rabbi Yehuda</b> interprets the verse otherwise, for one verse states: “And the <b>Elders of</b> his city shall call him” (Deuteronomy 25:8), indicating a minimum of <b>two</b> judges, and it says in the following verse <b>“Elders”</b> another time, indicating an additional <b>two</b> people, <b>and</b> since <b>a court may not</b> be composed of an <b>even</b> number of judges, <b>one more is added to them. Therefore, there are five</b> judges.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And what does the first <i>tanna</i> do with this</b> second appearance of the word <b>“Elders”?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>He requires it for</b> allowing the <b>inclusion</b> of <b>even three laymen</b> as presiding judges for <i>ḥalitza</i>. The word “Elders” would seem to limit <i>ḥalitza</i> to recognized judges, but since it is mentioned twice, it becomes an instance of the hermeneutic principle that one restrictive expression appearing after another restrictive expression comes to include some additional <i>halakha</i>. Therefore, repeating the restrictive term “Elders” twice actually comes to include laymen rather than exclude them.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>From where does Rabbi Yehuda derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <i>ḥalitza</i> can be done in the presence of <b>laymen?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> what is written: <b>“Before the eyes of</b> the Elders” (Deuteronomy 25:9), <b>for the Master said: “Before the eyes of” excludes blind individuals</b> from being the judges conducting the <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 15
<b>And since it was necessary</b> to say <b>“before the eyes of” to exclude blind individuals</b> from being judges for <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>learn from here</b> that <b>even laymen</b> are qualified to be judges for <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>For if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b>we require</b> expert judges who are fit to sit on the high court of the <b>Sanhedrin,</b> then <b>why do I</b> need <b>to exclude blind individuals? For that</b> matter can be <b>derived from</b> a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rav Yosef taught, as Rav Yosef taught: Just as a court must be clean in righteousness,</b> as they are careful to judge others justly, and are free of guilt and suspicion, <b>likewise a court must be clean of any</b> physical <b>blemish,</b> with judges who are physically complete.