
### Part 1
<b>But perhaps</b> Shmuel’s ruling in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Yosei is referring to the ruling that <b>he does not disqualify</b> his brother-in-law’s wife to his brother-in-law, in a case where his wife and brother-in-law left. <b>Alternatively,</b> the contradiction can be resolved in the following manner: <b>From where</b> do we know <b>that there is</b> a reason <b>to</b> accept the explanation of <b>Rav Huna</b> with regard to the dispute between Rav and Shmuel? <b>Perhaps there is no</b> cause to agree with <b>Rav Huna at all, and</b> it can be explained that Rav and Shmuel <b>disagree with regard to</b> the statement <b>of Rav Hamnuna. As Rav Hamnuna said: A widow waiting for her <i>yavam</i> who engaged in licentious sexual relations is forbidden to her <i>yavam</i>.</b>

### Part 2
According to this interpretation, the dispute is as follows: <b>As Rav said, she is like a married woman and she is</b> therefore <b>disqualified by licentious sexual relations. And Shmuel said</b> that <b>she is not like a married woman and is not disqualified by licentious sexual relations. And alternatively,</b> one can explain <b>that</b> Rav and Shmuel <b>disagree with regard to</b> the issue of whether <b>betrothal takes effect with a <i>yevama</i>: As Rav said, she is like a married woman</b> with regard to all men other than her <i>yavam</i>, <b>and</b> therefore <b>betrothal</b> performed by anyone else <b>does not takes effect with her. And Shmuel said</b> that <b>she is not like a married woman, and</b> this means that <b>betrothal does take effect with her.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks with regard to this last answer: How can the dispute be explained in this manner? <b>But</b> Rav and Shmuel already <b>disagreed over this once.</b> The Sages would certainly not record the same dispute twice. The Gemara answers: It is possible that they did not in fact disagree twice with regard to the same case. Rather, <b>one</b> ruling <b>was stated by inference from the other.</b> In other words, their dispute was recorded in two different ways, the second time by inference from their original dispute.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Witnesses <b>said to</b> a husband: <b>Your wife is dead, and he married her paternal sister,</b> and witnesses subsequently told him that his second wife <b>was dead and he married her maternal sister;</b> afterward witnesses said that this one too <b>was dead and he married her paternal sister;</b> finally they told him that she <b>was dead and he married</b> the last woman’s <b>maternal sister, and</b> then <b>they were all discovered to be alive.</b> In this case he is <b>permitted to</b> his <b>first</b> wife, <b>and to the third and to the fifth.</b> Since these women are not sisters, his betrothal to them is effective. Consequently, if he died <b>and</b> one of them entered into levirate marriage, <b>they exempt their rival wives.</b>

### Part 5
<b>But</b> he is <b>forbidden to the second and fourth</b> wife, each of whom is the sister of his original wife. Therefore, if he passed away <b>and</b> the <i>yavam</i> had relations with one of them, his <b>relations with</b> any <b>one of them does not exempt her rival wife,</b> as she was forbidden to his brother, which means there was no mitzva of levirate marriage here at all.

### Part 6
<b>And if he had relations with the second</b> woman in the aforementioned list <b>after the death of the first,</b> i.e., the first one indeed died but the other rumors were all false, in that case he is <b>permitted to the second and the fourth,</b> who are his lawful wives, <b>and they exempt their rival wives, and</b> he is <b>forbidden to the third and the fifth,</b> the sisters of the women married to him, <b>and the sexual relations</b> of the brother <b>with</b> any <b>one of them does not exempt her rival wife.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna addresses a different issue: If a boy <b>aged nine years and one day</b> had relations with his <i>yevama</i> <b>he</b> thereby <b>disqualifies</b> his <b>brothers</b> from levirate marriage, despite the fact that as a minor he has not acquired the <i>yevama</i> through this act of intercourse, <b>and the brothers</b> likewise <b>disqualify</b> the woman from <b>him</b> if they have intercourse with the <i>yevama</i>. <b>However,</b> there is a difference between them, as <b>he disqualifies</b> them only if he engaged in relations with her <b>first, and the brothers disqualify</b> him whether they had relations <b>first or last.</b>

### Part 8
The mishna explains: <b>How so?</b> A boy <b>aged nine years and one day who had relations with his <i>yevama</i> has disqualified his brothers,</b> as they are no longer eligible to marry her. If his <b>brothers had relations with her,</b> or <b>performed levirate betrothal with her,</b> or <b>gave</b> her <b>a bill of divorce, or performed <i>ḥalitza</i> with her, they</b> permanently <b>disqualify him</b> from engaging in relations with her.

### Part 9
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna states: And if he had relations with the second after the death of the first. The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>all of them,</b> all the other cases in the mishna, <b>are not</b> dealing with a situation <b>after the death of the first</b> woman? The entire case starts with the report: Your wife is dead. <b>Rav Sheshet said: After the definite death of the first one.</b> In other words, the mishna means that this did not follow a mere rumor that she was dead, but it was positively established that she had actually died.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that a boy <b>aged nine years</b> and one day who had relations with his <i>yevama</i> has disqualified her from his brothers. Throughout this discussion, whenever the Gemara refers to a nine-year-old boy, it is understood that he is actually nine years and one day old. The Gemara asks: Does a boy <b>aged nine years and one day disqualify</b> her to the brothers only if he had relations with her <b>first,</b> but if he had relations <b>last he does not disqualify</b> them? <b>But didn’t Rav Zevid bar Rav Oshaya teach: One who performs levirate betrothal with his <i>yevama</i>, and afterward his brother, who is nine years and one day old, had relations with her, he has disqualified her.</b> This indicates that the intercourse of a nine-year-old disqualifies his brother even if it occurred after that of his brother.

### Part 11
<b>They say</b> in response: The <b>intercourse</b> of a nine-year-old <b>disqualifies</b> his brothers <b>even</b> if it happens <b>last;</b> however, in the case of a boy who merely performed <b>levirate betrothal</b> with her, if he did so <b>first he disqualifies</b> his brothers, whereas if he was <b>last, he does not disqualify</b> his brothers. The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> do the <b>sexual relations</b> of a nine-year-old <b>disqualify</b> his brothers <b>even</b> when performed <b>last? But isn’t it taught</b> in the mishna: <b>However, he disqualifies</b> them only if was <b>first, and the brothers disqualify</b> him whether they were <b>first or last. How so?</b> A boy <b>aged nine years and one day who had relations with his <i>yevama</i></b> has disqualified his brothers. The example the mishna uses for a boy who disqualifies his brothers first is an act of intercourse.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: The mishna <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching:</b> With regard to a boy <b>aged nine years and one day, he disqualifies</b> his brothers <b>first, and they disqualify</b> him <b>first and last. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> This is said <b>with regard to levirate betrothal,</b> i.e., if they performed levirate betrothal with her. <b>However,</b> if the minor had <b>relations</b> with her, he <b>disqualifies</b> them <b>even</b> if he did so <b>last. How so?</b> If a boy <b>aged nine years and one day had relations with his <i>yevama</i></b> after his brother performed levirate betrothal with her, he <b>has disqualified</b> his <b>brothers.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And does</b> a nine-year-old boy <b>have</b> the ability to perform <b>levirate betrothal at all</b> that would have any effect <b>with regard to</b> the eligibility of his brothers in levirate marriage? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a boy <b>aged nine years and one day, he disqualifies</b> the <i>yevama</i> to his brothers <b>in one way, and the brothers disqualify him in four ways.</b> How so? <b>He disqualifies the brothers by relations,</b> i.e., the <i>yevama</i> is forbidden to the other brothers if she has sexual relations with him, <b>and the brothers disqualify him by relations, by levirate betrothal, by a bill of divorce, and by <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The <i>tanna</i> does not mention the levirate betrothal of a minor at all.

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this claim: No proof can be derived from that source, as with regard to the <b>sexual relations</b> of a minor, <b>which disqualifies</b> his brothers <b>whether</b> it came <b>first or last,</b> the <i>tanna</i> can teach a <b>definite</b> ruling, i.e., he can state this <i>halakha</i> in an unambiguous and unqualified manner. Conversely, with regard to the <b>levirate betrothal</b> of a minor, <b>which</b> if it occurred <b>first disqualifies</b> his brothers but if it happened <b>last,</b> after one of the brothers performed levirate marriage with her, it <b>does not disqualify</b> them, the <i>tanna</i> <b>cannot</b> teach it in a <b>definite</b> and unqualified manner, but would have to elaborate and explain the precise circumstances. Therefore he omitted this case entirely.

### Part 15
§ <b>It was also stated</b> by other <i>amora’im</i>: <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> A minor boy <b>has</b> the ability to give <b>a bill of divorce</b> in the case of a <i>yevama</i>, i.e., if he gave her a bill of divorce he has disqualified her to his brothers. <b>And similarly Rav Taḥalifa bar Avimi said: He has</b> the ability to perform <b>levirate betrothal.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: A minor <b>has</b> the ability to give <b>a bill of divorce and he has</b> the ability to perform <b>levirate betrothal;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>Rabbi Meir hold</b> that a minor boy <b>has</b> the ability to give <b>a bill of divorce? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They established the sexual relations of a nine-year-old like a levirate betrothal</b> performed by <b>an adult. Rabbi Meir says: They established the <i>ḥalitza</i> of a nine-year-old like a bill of divorce of an adult.</b> The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>And if it is so, let</b> Rabbi Meir <b>teach:</b> They established the <i>ḥalitza</i> of a nine-year-old <b>like his</b> own <b>bill of divorce,</b> as he too can give a <i>yevama</i> a bill of divorce. <b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said: He does have</b> the ability to give a bill of divorce, <b>but</b> it is <b>less</b> powerful than the bill of divorce of an adult <i>yavam</i>, as explained by Rav Huna below.

### Part 17
Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, elaborates: <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Gamliel, who said</b> that <b>there is no bill of divorce after a bill of divorce</b> for a <i>yevama</i>, i.e., if one of the brothers gave her a bill of divorce, no bill of divorce given later by a different brother is of any significance, <b>this applies only</b> when the bill of divorce was given <b>by an adult after an adult, or</b> by <b>a minor after a minor.</b> However, if <b>an adult</b> gave a bill of divorce <b>after a minor,</b> the bill of divorce of the adult <b>is effective</b> and disqualifies the <i>yevama</i>, as the bill of divorce of a minor is of less importance.

### Part 18
<b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that <b>there is a bill of divorce after a bill of divorce, this applies only</b> to the case <b>of an adult after an adult, or to a minor after a minor. However,</b> they too agree that the bill of divorce of <b>a minor after an adult is not effective,</b> as a minor’s bill of divorce is certainly weaker than that of an adult. For this reason Rabbi Meir said that they established the <i>ḥalitza</i> of a nine-year-old like a bill of divorce of an adult, to emphasize that a subsequent bill of divorce of a minor is of no account.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC