
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> there is the prohibition for priests to contract <b>ritual impurity</b> from a corpse, <b>which is a prohibition that is not equally</b> applicable <b>to all,</b> as only priests are bound by this prohibition, <b>and the reason</b> that this command applies only to male priests is <b>that the Merciful One writes:</b> “Speak to the priests <b>the sons of Aaron,</b> and say to them: None shall defile himself” (Leviticus 21:1), from which it is inferred: <b>The sons of Aaron and not the daughters of Aaron. Therefore,</b> were it <b>not</b> for <b>this</b> specific derivation, <b>I would say</b> that <b>women</b> from priestly families <b>are</b> also <b>obligated</b> to avoid becoming ritually impure. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? Is it <b>not due to</b> the principle that <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav</b> said, that women are equated to men with regard to all punishments in the Torah, including those that are not equally applicable to all?

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>No,</b> that initial assumption, that the daughters of priests might be obligated to avoid ritual impurity, is not due to the <i>halakha</i> that Rav Yehuda said that Rav said, but rather it is something that <b>we learn</b> through tradition <b>from</b> the words <b>“they may not take.”</b> This phrase teaches that women are included in the marital prohibitions of the priesthood, and we might therefore have thought that they are included in all <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to priests.

### Part 3
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> a different version of this answer: With regard to that verse about <b>taking,</b> it <b>was necessary for him</b> to mention this explicitly, for <b>it might enter your mind to say: We should learn</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the prohibition of <b>impurity</b> and conclude that just as only male descendants of Aaron are prohibited from contracting <b>ritual impurity,</b> the restrictions of marriage also apply only to men. The verse therefore <b>teaches us,</b> with the words “they may not take,” that this is not the case.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, arrived at</b> the town of <b>Hintzevu, to the place</b> of <b>Rav Idi bar Avin.</b> The townspeople <b>asked them:</b> Is it <b>prohibited</b> for daughters of priests who are <b>fit</b> to marry priests to <b>marry</b> men <b>disqualified</b> from the priesthood <b>or not?</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa said to them: You learned it</b> in a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 69a): People of <b>ten</b> types of <b>lineages ascended from Babylonia: Priests, Levites, and Israelites, <i>ḥalalim</i>, converts, and freed</b> slaves, <b>and <i>mamzerim</i>, Gibeonites, children of unknown paternity [<i>shetukim</i>], and foundlings.</b> With regard to <b>Priests, Levites,</b> and <b>Israelites,</b> they <b>are permitted to marry</b> into <b>one another’s</b> families; <b>Levites, Israelites, <i>ḥalalim</i>, converts,</b> and <b>freed</b> slaves <b>are permitted to marry</b> into <b>one another’s</b> families; <b>converts, freed</b> slaves, <b>and <i>mamzerim</i>, Gibeonites, <i>shetukim</i>, and foundlings are permitted to marry</b> into <b>one another’s</b> families; <b>whereas</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>does not teach</b> that <b>priestesses,</b> i.e., daughters of priests, are permitted <b>to</b> marry <b>a <i>ḥalal</i>.</b> This must mean they are forbidden to them.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said to him:</b> There is no proof from here, for <b>he teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>anywhere that these</b> men <b>may marry those</b> women, <b>and</b> there is also a parallel case where <b>these</b> women <b>may marry those</b> men. With regard to the case of <b>a priest,</b> however, <b>since if he wants to marry a <i>ḥalala</i> this is prohibited</b> to him, the <i>tanna</i> <b>does not teach</b> this <i>halakha</i>. Consequently, there is no proof from this mishna that daughters of priests who are fit to marry priests are warned against marrying men disqualified from the priesthood. <b>They came before Rav Idi bar Avin</b> and told him about the question and their debate about the matter. <b>He said to them: Children, this</b> is what <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> Daughters of priests who are <b>fit</b> to marry priests <b>are not warned against marrying</b> men <b>disqualified</b> from the priesthood.

### Part 7
§ We learned in the mishna that <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relatives,</b> whose status is established <b>by rabbinic law,</b> are sometimes forbidden to the husband and sometimes to the <i>yavam</i>. <b>The residents of</b> the town of <b>Biri inquired of Rav Sheshet:</b> Is a woman who is <b>a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relative of the husband but not a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relative of the <i>yavam</i></b> entitled to <b>a marriage contract from the <i>yavam</i> or not?</b> The Gemara clarifies the sides of the dilemma: Perhaps, <b>since the Master said</b> that in a levirate marriage, the payment of <b>her marriage contract is</b> due <b>from the property of her first husband,</b> and this woman, who was a secondary relative of her first husband, does not receive a marriage contract from him, <b>she</b> consequently <b>does not have</b> the right to one from the <i>yavam</i> either.

### Part 8
<b>Or perhaps, since</b> there is a principle in levirate marriage <b>that if she does not have</b> a marriage contract <b>from</b> the <b>first</b> husband, e.g., he died without leaving behind any property, <b>the Sages instituted</b> a marriage contract <b>for her from</b> the <b>second</b> one, we should say that <b>she has</b> a marriage contract from the <i>yavam</i>?

### Part 9
<b>Rav Sheshet said to them: You learned it</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Payment of <b>her marriage contract is</b> due <b>from the property of her first husband, and if she was a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relative of the husband, she does not have</b> one <b>even from the <i>yavam</i>.</b> This <i>baraita</i> clearly answers the question.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: Can it be concluded <b>by inference</b> from the <i>baraita</i> <b>that there is</b> a case of a woman in a levirate marriage <b>who</b> does <b>have</b> a marriage contract <b>from the <i>yavam</i>?</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and this is</b> what <b>it is teaching:</b> Payment of <b>her marriage contract is</b> due <b>from the property of her first husband, and if she does not have</b> anything <b>from the first husband</b> because he died without property, <b>they instituted</b> a marriage contract <b>for her from the second</b> one. <b>And if she was a secondary</b> forbidden <b>relative of the husband, she does not have</b> one <b>even from the <i>yavam</i>.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Elazar inquired of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> Do women in cases like <b>a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest</b> and <b>a divorcée or a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> married <b>to a common priest have</b> rights to payment for their <b>sustenance</b> from their husbands, <b>or do they not have</b> a right to <b>sustenance?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the case under discussion? <b>If we say that</b> she <b>is dwelling under his</b> roof, he <b>stands in</b> a position where he is obligated to <b>arise and divorce</b> her. In such a situation, does <b>she have</b> a right to <b>sustenance?</b> It is obvious that she does not. The Gemara clarifies: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to ask this question with regard to a case <b>where he went overseas</b> and therefore is not present to divorce her, <b>and</b> in the meantime <b>she borrowed</b> money for her sustenance <b>and ate. What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> is in that case?

### Part 12
Is it correct to say that <b>sustenance is a stipulation in the marriage contract,</b> and <b>since she has a marriage contract she</b> also <b>has</b> a right to <b>sustenance,</b> and therefore the husband must pay her debt? <b>Or perhaps</b> there is a difference between the cases: Concerning <b>a marriage contract, which</b> gives her motivation to <b>take</b> the money <b>and leave</b> him, <b>she has</b> rights to it, as the Sages wanted to motivate her to seek divorce and end the prohibited marriage. However, with regard to <b>sustenance,</b> we are worried that if he provides for her sustenance, <b>perhaps she might tarry with him,</b> as she would have no reason to rush the divorce, and consequently <b>she</b> does <b>not have</b> rights to it. <b>He said to him: She does not have</b> a right to sustenance.

### Part 13
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>she does have</b> a right to sustenance? The Gemara answers: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught,</b> it is referring to sustenance she receives <b>after</b> his <b>death.</b> At that point, she is no longer in violation of a prohibition, while the obligation to sustain her remains intact.

### Part 14
<b>Some say</b> a different version of the discussion, which is that <b>he said to him:</b> It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>she has</b> a right to sustenance. He replied: He <b>stands in</b> a position where he is obligated to <b>arise and divorce</b> her. He should not be required to provide for her sustenance. He again asked: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>she has</b> a right to sustenance? He responded: <b>When that</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught</b> it is referring to the period <b>after</b> his <b>death.</b>

### Part 15
<b>The Sages taught: A widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest,</b> or <b>a divorcée or a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> married <b>to a common priest has</b> the right to receive payment for her <b>marriage contract;</b> and for the <b>produce of</b> her property that her husband used; and <b>sustenance;</b> and she gets back her <b>worn clothes</b> and other objects she brought to the marriage; <b>and she is disqualified</b> as a <i>ḥalala</i> from marrying a priest; <b>and her offspring is disqualified</b> from the priesthood as a <i>ḥalal</i>; <b>and</b> the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> her. A woman who is <b>a secondary relative</b> prohibited <b>by rabbinic law has neither a marriage contract; nor</b> payment for the <b>produce</b> of her property; <b>nor sustenance; nor</b> does she get back her <b>worn clothes; and she is fit</b> to marry a priest <b>and her offspring is fit</b> for the priesthood; <b>and</b> the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> her.

### Part 16
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: For what</b> reason did they <b>say</b> that <b>a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest has a marriage contract? Because he is disqualified</b> from the priesthood by his marriage to her, as a priest who marries a woman forbidden to him is barred from the Temple service until he divorces her and agrees not to remarry her, <b>and she is</b> rendered a <i>ḥalala</i> and <b>disqualified</b> from the priesthood by intercourse with him, <b>and any place where he is disqualified and she is disqualified,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC