
### Part 1
§ It was taught in the mishna: If <b>he performed <i>ḥalitza</i> and</b> then proceeded to either <b>perform levirate betrothal, or give</b> a bill of divorce, or engage in intercourse with a second woman, nothing is effective after <i>ḥalitza</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted, it was necessary</b> to teach that in the case of one who <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i> and then performed levirate betrothal</b> the levirate betrothal is not effective. For <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>we should issue a decree</b> with regard to <b>levirate betrothal that</b> takes place <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i> due to levirate betrothal that</b> takes place <b>before <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> and rule that all levirate betrothal is effective. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us that we do not issue a decree</b> in this case. <b>However,</b> the case of one who <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i> and gave a bill of divorce, why do I</b> need this case? What novelty is there in the teaching that a bill of divorce after <i>ḥalitza</i> is not effective?

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> that each new case must teach something new, <b>say the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If <b>he engaged in intercourse and</b> then proceeded to <b>perform levirate betrothal, or give a bill of divorce, or perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with a second woman, nothing is effective. In this case the same question can be asked: <b>Granted, it was necessary</b> to teach the case of one who <b>engaged in intercourse and gave a bill of divorce.</b> This is because <b>it might enter your mind to say</b> that <b>we should issue a decree</b> with regard to <b>a bill of divorce that</b> is given <b>after intercourse, due to a bill of divorce that</b> is given <b>before intercourse,</b> and decree that this bill of divorce alone is insufficient and she requires <i>ḥalitza</i> as well. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us that we do not issue</b> such <b>a decree. But</b> the case of a <i>yavam</i> who <b>engaged in intercourse and performed levirate betrothal, why do I</b> need to state it? Once he has engaged in intercourse with her she is his wife in all regards; what difference does levirate betrothal make?

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> one must say that <b>since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> the case of one who <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i> and</b> then <b>performed levirate betrothal, he also taught</b> the case of one who <b>engaged in intercourse and</b> then <b>performed levirate betrothal,</b> due to the similarity between them. <b>And since he wished to teach</b> the case of one who <b>engaged in intercourse and</b> then <b>gave a bill of divorce, he also taught</b> the case of one who <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i> and</b> then <b>gave a bill of divorce.</b> We should therefore not infer anything from these superfluous cases, as they are merely stated for stylistic reasons.

### Part 4
§ The mishna taught: With regard to intercourse, <b>when it is</b> at the beginning nothing is effective after it, but if it was in the middle or at the end, something is effective after it. The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Abba Yosei ben Yoḥanan, a man of Jerusalem, says in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> With regard to <b>both intercourse and <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> if one of them were performed <b>at the beginning, nothing is effective after it,</b> but if they were done <b>in the middle or at the end,</b> i.e., they were preceded by some other action, <b>something is</b> effective <b>after it.</b> According to the mishna, however, nothing is effective after <i>ḥalitza</i> regardless of when it was performed.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> therefore it can be concluded that there are <b>three disputes with regard to</b> this <b>matter,</b> i.e., three opinions on this issue. <b>The first <i>tanna</i> holds:</b> In the case of <b>intercourse</b> that is preceded by a disqualifying action, <b>where there is</b> a reason <b>to issue a decree,</b> lest one violate a prohibition by engaging in intercourse after <i>ḥalitza</i> or intercourse was performed, <b>we issue a decree</b> establishing that invalid intercourse should not be as effective as valid intercourse. With regard to <b><i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> however, <b>where there is no</b> reason <b>to issue a decree</b> as there is no concern of a prohibition even if an action is performed after <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>we do not issue a decree.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And Rabbi Neḥemya holds</b> that with regard to <b>intercourse there is also no</b> reason <b>to issue a decree. And as</b> for what <b>you said</b> in justification of your ruling, <b>that we should issue a decree</b> in a case of <b>intercourse after a bill of divorce due to intercourse after <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> there is no cause for such a concern. <b>Since <i>ḥalitza</i></b> is effective <b>by Torah</b> law, people <b>know</b> that it is fully effective and cannot be followed by anything, and they will not confuse it with laws instituted by the Sages. <b>And as</b> for what <b>you said that we should issue a decree</b> with regard to <b>intercourse after levirate betrothal due to intercourse after intercourse, since</b> the acquisition of <b>intercourse</b> is <b>by Torah</b> law, <b>this</b> matter <b>is known</b> by people, and they will not err in this regard. <b>And Abba Yosei ben Ḥanan holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who issue a decree with regard to intercourse,</b> but he adds <b>and issues a decree</b> with regard to <b><i>ḥalitza</i> due to intercourse.</b> He therefore does not differentiate between <i>ḥalitza</i> and intercourse at all.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC