
### Part 1
<b>Those two,</b> the wife of a father’s father’s brother and the sister of a father’s father, <b>are similar to each other</b> and <b>are counted as a single</b> case, <b>and</b> so <b>there are sixteen.</b> The Gemara restates Rav Hillel’s challenge to Ameimar’s opinion: <b>But in any case I myself saw them written as prohibited.</b> Rav Ashi <b>said to</b> Rav Hillel: <b>And according to your reasoning, if</b> in the list <b>it was written that they were permitted, would you have relied on that?</b> Is the signature of <b>Mar, son of Rabbana, signed on it?</b> Although you saw the list, you don’t know for certain who wrote it. <b>Now too, that it is written that they are prohibited,</b> the same holds true; the signature of <b>Mar, son of Rabbana, is not signed on it,</b> and so it cannot be relied upon to reject the opinion of Ameimar.

### Part 2
§ One of the Sages <b>of the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya taught: The third</b> generation <b>from one’s son and one’s daughter,</b> i.e., one’s great-grandchildren, <b>and</b> the third generation <b>from his wife’s son and his wife’s daughter,</b> i.e., one’s wife’s great-grandchildren, are all forbidden as <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships.</b> So too, <b>the fourth</b> generation <b>from his father-in-law and from his mother-in-law,</b> i.e., his wife’s great-grandmothers, are prohibited as <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi: What is different between</b> the generations <b>above,</b> referring to his wife’s great-grandmothers, such <b>that</b> the Sage <b>counts his wife</b> as one of the generations and refers to them as the fourth generation, <b>and what is different</b> with regard to the generations <b>below,</b> referring to his great-granddaughters, such <b>that he did not count his wife</b> and referred to them as only the third generation? The Gemara answers: When counting <b>above, the prohibition stems from his wife,</b> as they are not his blood relatives but his wife’s. Therefore, <b>she is counted.</b> When counting <b>below,</b> however, <b>the prohibition does not stem from his wife,</b> as they are his own blood relatives, <b>and so she was not counted.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> he includes the granddaughter of <b>his wife’s son and his wife’s daughter</b> in his list of those <b>forbidden due to his wife, yet he does not count her</b> and refer to this as the fourth generation. The Gemara answers: <b>Since he</b> already <b>taught three generations below himself,</b> i.e., his own great-granddaughter, <b>and</b> there <b>he did not count</b> from his wife because it is his own blood relative, <b>he taught three generations below</b> his wife <b>and did not count her.</b> Instead, he referred to her great-granddaughter also as three generations below to maintain the uniform style of his words.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi said to Rav Kahana:</b> Do those <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships</b> taught by one of the Sages <b>of the school of Rabbi Ḥiyya have a conclusion, or do they not have a conclusion?</b> Are those specified cases alone forbidden, or are all generations above and below also forbidden?

### Part 6
<b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> that <b>which Rav said: Four women have a conclusion.</b> This implies that it is only these four <b>and no more.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>Perhaps when Rav said this he was referring</b> only <b>to</b> the relationships listed in <b>the <i>baraita</i></b> and not to all cases of secondary relationships. The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> from the <i>baraita</i> itself, which states: <b>The third</b> generation from his son and his daughter <b>and the fourth</b> generation from his father-in-law and mother-in-law. This implies that with regard to <b>the third and the fourth</b> generations, <b>yes,</b> they are forbidden; but <b>more</b> than that, <b>no.</b> The Gemara rejects this: <b>Perhaps</b> this means <b>from the third onward and from the fourth onward.</b> The Gemara does not resolve this issue.

### Part 7
§ <b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman: Did the Master see this one of the Sages who came from the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>who said: In the West they asked</b> whether the Sages <b>issued a decree</b> prohibiting <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships for converts, or</b> whether <b>they did not issue a decree</b> prohibiting <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships for converts?</b>

### Part 8
Rav Naḥman did not answer whether he had seen this Sage, but <b>said to him: Now, with regard to</b> all the <b>forbidden relationships themselves, were it not</b> for the fact that if converts would find that as Jews they were permitted to enter into relationships that were forbidden to them as gentiles and <b>would say</b> that they went from <b>a state of more stringent sanctity</b> as gentiles <b>to a state of lesser sanctity</b> as Jews, <b>then the Sages would not have decreed</b> to prohibit these relationships. Without the rabbinic decree it would have been permitted for a convert to marry even a close female relative, even his twin sister, who also converted. This is because a convert has the legal status of a newborn, with no family ties. <b>Is it necessary</b> to state that the Sages did not extend that decree to include <b>secondary</b> forbidden <b>relationships?</b> The purpose of the rabbinic prohibitions is to protect the Torah prohibitions, but in the case of converts this particular Torah prohibition does not apply.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Naḥman said: Since</b> the issue of <b>converts</b> and their relatives <b>has come to hand</b> and is the topic of discussion, <b>let us say a matter</b> of <i>halakha</i>: <b>Maternal</b> half <b>brothers</b> who both convert <b>may not testify</b> together as a pair of witnesses before the court, <b>but if they did testify, their testimony is valid.</b> Although blood relatives are invalid as witnesses, converts are considered as though they have no relations. <b>Paternal</b> half <b>brothers</b> who both convert <b>may testify</b> together <b><i>ab initio</i>,</b> since the <i>halakha</i> does not consider paternal half brothers of gentiles to be true relatives. <b>Ameimar said: Even maternal</b> half <b>brothers may also testify</b> together <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b>

### Part 10
In <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from forbidden relations,</b> where a convert may not marry his maternal sister due to rabbinic decree? The <i>halakhot</i> of <b>forbidden relations are handed over to all,</b> and every individual chooses his own wife. Therefore, the Sages issued a decree to prevent confusion between the status of a convert and that of a born Jew. However, <b>testimony is handed over to the court,</b> and the court knows to distinguish between the status of a born Jew and that of a convert. <b>And</b> the legal status of <b>a convert who</b> just <b>converted</b> is <b>like</b> that of <b>a child</b> just <b>born,</b> and all previous family ties become irrelevant.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>anyone who has a brother of any kind,</b> that brother <b>creates a levirate bond</b> causing his <b><i>yevama</i> to</b> be required to <b>perform levirate marriage</b> if the first brother dies childless. <b>And he is his brother in all respects, except for one who has a brother</b> born <b>from</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant or from a gentile woman,</b> as these do not have the legal status of brothers. Similarly, in the case of <b>anyone who has a child of any kind,</b> that child <b>exempts his father’s wife from levirate marriage,</b> since his father did not die childless. <b>And</b> that child <b>is liable</b> to receive capital punishment <b>if he strikes</b> his father <b>or curses him. And he is his child in all respects, except for whoever has a child</b> born <b>from</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant or from a gentile woman,</b> as these do not have the halakhic status of children.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: With regard to the statement that a brother <b>of any kind</b> causes his <i>yevama</i> to be required to perform levirate marriage, <b>what</b> additional case does this come <b>to add? Rav Yehuda said: This adds</b> the case of <b>a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> who, notwithstanding his status, is considered a brother. The Gemara wonders: But <b>isn’t</b> that <b>obvious? He is his brother.</b> The Gemara explains: This is necessary <b>lest you say: Let us derive</b> a verbal analogy between the word <b>“brother”</b> stated in the verse with regard to levirate marriage and <b>“brother”</b> stated with regard to <b>the children of Jacob. Just as there,</b> Jacob’s children <b>are</b> of <b>unflawed</b> lineage <b>and not</b> of <b>flawed</b> lineage and are not <i>mamzerim</i>, <b>so too here,</b> one might think that only brothers of <b>unflawed</b> lineage <b>and not</b> brothers of <b>flawed</b> lineage, i.e., <i>mamzerim</i>, obligate the <i>yevama</i> in levirate marriage. Therefore, <b>this teaches us</b> that a <i>mamzer</i> is considered a brother for the purposes of levirate marriage.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And say that</b> is <b>indeed</b> the <i>halakha</i>. Perhaps a brother who is a <i>mamzer</i> does not obligate his <i>yevama</i> in levirate marriage. The Gemara answers: <b>Since with regard to levirate marriage,</b> if the husband had a child who was a <i>mamzer</i> he would <b>exempt</b> the wife from levirate marriage,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC