
### Part 1
The practical difference <b>between them is</b> in a case <b>where he initiated the quarrel.</b> In this situation there is no concern that she might knowingly lie, as she loves him. However, due to the quarrel between them she might not be meticulous in her investigations.

### Part 2
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If there was <b>one witness</b> who testified that the husband died, <b>in</b> a case that involved <b>a quarrel</b> between them, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara explains the different sides of this dilemma: <b>What is the reason that one witness is deemed credible?</b> Is it <b>because</b> it <b>is a matter that is likely to be revealed,</b> and one does <b>not lie</b> in a case of this kind? <b>Here too,</b> one witness would <b>not lie. Or perhaps the reason that one witness is deemed credible is because she</b> herself <b>is exacting</b> in her investigation before she <b>marries</b> again. <b>And here, since there is a quarrel</b> between them, <b>she is not exacting</b> in her investigation before she <b>marries</b> again, despite the testimony of the witness. The Gemara comments: The question <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 3
§ The mishna taught that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that a wife <b>is never</b> deemed credible when she testifies that her husband died, unless she came crying and her clothing was torn, while the Rabbis say she may remarry in any case. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Yehuda: According to your statement, a crafty woman</b> who knows how to deceive will come with torn clothes crying, and it <b>will</b> be permitted for her to <b>marry.</b> However, <b>a foolish woman</b> who does not know how to deceive <b>will not</b> be permitted to <b>marry.</b> Is this a fair outcome? <b>Rather, both this</b> woman <b>and that</b> woman <b>may marry.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> woman <b>who came to the court of Rabbi Yehuda.</b> The people sitting there <b>said to her: Lament your husband, tear your clothing, unbind your hair,</b> so that you have the appearance of a mourner, and the court will believe you. The Gemara asks: Did <b>they instruct her to lie?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>They thought, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> that it is permitted for her to marry in any case. However, they were concerned that Rabbi Yehuda would rule that she may not remarry if she did not display her grief, in accordance with his opinion. Therefore, <b>they said</b> that <b>she should do this, so that</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>would</b> also <b>permit her</b> to marry, and she would avoid any complications.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Beit Hillel say: We heard</b> that one may accept the testimony of a woman concerning the death of her husband <b>only when she comes from the grain harvest, and</b> when she testified <b>in the same country</b> where he died, <b>and</b> in circumstances <b>similar to the incident that occurred,</b> in which a lenient ruling was issued, as will be explained.

### Part 6
<b>Beit Shammai said to</b> Beit Hillel: The <b>same</b> <i>halakha</i> applies to a wife <b>who comes from the grain harvest, and one who comes from the olive</b> harvest, <b>and</b> also <b>one who comes from the grape harvest, and</b> even <b>one who comes from one country to</b> another <b>country.</b> Although the incident in question took place during the grain harvest, <b>the Sages spoke of the grain harvest only</b> because it was the <b>present</b> occurrence, i.e., that is what happened in practice, but this is no proof that she is deemed credible only when she arrived specifically from the grain harvest. The mishna comments: <b>Beit Hillel retracted</b> their opinion, and decided <b>to teach in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai</b> on this issue.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Beit Shammai said to Beit Hillel: According to your statement</b> that this <i>halakha</i> applies solely in circumstances similar to the incident that occurred, if so, <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that it applies in <b>the wheat harvest. From where</b> do I derive that the same applies in <b>the barley harvest? And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that it applies to <b>one who reaps</b> grain. <b>From where</b> do I derive that this <i>halakha</i> includes <b>someone who harvests</b> grapes, <b>or harvests</b> olives, <b>or harvests</b> dates, <b>or harvests</b> figs?

### Part 8
<b>Rather, that incident which occurred during the grain harvest, and the same is true of all these</b> other circumstances. <b>Here too,</b> concerning a woman who comes from another country, and other, similar cases, <b>the incident that occurred</b> took place <b>in that country, but the same is true of all these</b> other cases.

### Part 9
<b>And Beit Hillel,</b> how did they respond to this argument? <b>In that same country, where people are</b> commonly <b>found</b> moving from place to place, <b>she is scared</b> to lie, lest her account be contradicted. However, <b>between one country and another country, where people are not</b> commonly <b>found</b> moving back and forth, <b>she is not scared,</b> and therefore she might be lying when she says he died. <b>And Beit Shammai</b> reason: <b>Here too caravans are found,</b> and if he was alive the truth would eventually be revealed.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> was this <b>incident that occurred? As Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: It was at the end [<i>shilfei</i>] of the wheat harvest, and ten people went to harvest wheat. A snake bit one of them and he died, and his wife came and told the court</b> that her husband died. <b>And they sent</b> messengers, who <b>discovered</b> that it happened <b>in accordance with her statement. At that time they said: The woman who says: My husband died, may marry</b> on the basis of this testimony. Furthermore, if she says: <b>My husband died</b> without children, and he has a brother, <b>she enters into levirate marriage.</b> This is the case to which Beit Hillel referred.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara analyzes this dispute. <b>Let us say</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akiva and the Rabbis,</b> who argued in this case, <b>disagree with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between Beit Shammai and Beit Hillel. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A person may not carry the waters of purification,</b> i.e., the water containing the ashes of the red heifer for the ritual purification of one who became impure through contact with a corpse, <b>and the ashes of purification,</b> of the red heifer, <b>and transport them on the Jordan</b> River. <b>And</b> one may not transfer them across the river <b>in a boat.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And one may not stand on one side</b> of the river <b>and throw</b> the ashes <b>to the other side, nor float them upon the water</b> as he crosses, <b>nor ride with them</b> across the river, <b>neither on the back of an animal nor on the back of another</b> person, as this is similar to a boat that passes over the water, <b>unless the legs</b> of the rider <b>were touching the ground. However, one may transport them</b> across the water <b>over a bridge.</b> This prohibition applies to <b>both the Jordan</b> River <b>and</b> all <b>other rivers. Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akiva says: They said</b> this prohibition <b>only</b> with regard to <b>the Jordan, and</b> transporting <b>in a boat, and in</b> circumstances similar <b>to</b> the <b>incident that occurred,</b> when ritual impurity was found in a boat on the Jordan River.

### Part 13
<b>Let us say</b> that <b>the Rabbis say in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> that when a decree is enacted due to a specific case that occurred, this <i>halakha</i> applies to all similar circumstances. <b>And Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akiva says in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel,</b> that the decree applies only in the exact circumstances as the precedent case.

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this suggestion. <b>The Rabbis</b> could <b>say to you: We stated</b> our ruling <b>even in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Hillel,</b> as there is a difference between the two cases. <b>Beit Hillel state</b> their opinion, that she is not deemed credible when she comes from one country to another, <b>only</b> in that case <b>there, because she is scared. In a nearby place she is scared</b> to give false testimony, as her lie can easily be discovered, whereas <b>in a distant place she is not scared.</b> However, <b>here,</b> concerning the ashes of the red heifer, <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if it is <b>the Jordan</b> River, and <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if it is one of the many <b>other rivers?</b>

### Part 15
Meanwhile, <b>Rabbi Ḥananya ben Akiva</b> could have <b>said to you: I stated</b> my ruling <b>even in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai,</b> as <b>Beit Shammai state</b> their opinion <b>only there, because she</b> herself <b>is exacting</b> in her investigation before she <b>marries</b> again. Since this is the decisive consideration, <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if <b>the place is near,</b> and <b>what</b> difference does it make <b>to me</b> if <b>the place is far? Here,</b> however, the Sages issued their decree <b>due to</b> a specific <b>incident that occurred. And</b> therefore <b>the Sages issued</b> their <b>decree with regard to the Jordan</b> River <b>and in a boat,</b> the circumstances in <b>which</b> the <b>incident occurred.</b> Conversely, <b>the Sages did not issue</b> the <b>decree with regard to other rivers, where the incident did not occur.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> is <b>this incident that occurred,</b> involving the ashes of the red heifer? <b>As Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving a person who was transporting waters of purification and ashes of purification on the Jordan</b> River, <b>and in a boat, and an olive-bulk of a corpse was found stuck to the bottom of the boat,</b> which rendered the waters and ashes ritually impure. <b>At that time they said: A person may not carry waters of purification and ashes of purification and transport them on the Jordan</b> River, <b>and in a boat.</b> Later Sages dispute whether this decree applies to similar cases, or only to the exact circumstances of this specific incident.

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> A woman who testifies that her husband died <b>may marry, and take</b> the money guaranteed in <b>her marriage contract. Beit Hillel say: She may marry, but she may not take her marriage contract,</b> as qualified witnesses are required for monetary matters. <b>Beit Shammai said to them:</b> If <b>you have permitted</b> a <b>woman</b> potentially <b>forbidden to him, which is</b> a relatively <b>stringent</b> prohibition, based merely upon her own testimony, <b>will we not permit a monetary matter,</b> which is more <b>lenient,</b> as the money can be returned and this sin does not entail such a severe punishment? <b>Beit Hillel said to them:</b> This is no proof, as <b>we find</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC