
### Part 1
<b>as he acquired her by means of betrothal. And if she is an Israelite woman</b> betrothed <b>to a priest, he does not enable her to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>due to</b> the reason given by <b>Ulla:</b> Although by Torah law a priest’s betrothed partakes of <i>teruma</i>, the Sages rendered it prohibited for her to do so, lest she allow other members of her family to eat it.

### Part 2
It is <b>also</b> taught in the mishna that <b>a deaf-mute</b> disqualifies a woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i> and does not enable her to do so. The Gemara elaborates: <b>If she is the daughter of a priest</b> married to a deaf-mute <b>Israelite, he disqualifies her, as he acquired her through</b> marriage sanctioned by <b>an ordinance of the Sages.</b> Although the marriage of a deaf-mute is invalid by Torah law, the Sages instituted an ordinance validating this type of marriage. <b>And if she is an Israelite woman</b> married <b>to</b> a deaf-mute <b>priest, he does not enable</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, as <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“The purchase of his money,</b> he may eat of it” (Leviticus 22:11), <b>and this</b> deaf-mute <b>is not capable of acquisition</b> by Torah law, as he is not legally competent.

### Part 3
§ It is <b>also</b> taught in the mishna that <b>a nine-year-old</b> boy disqualifies a woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i> and does not enable her to partake. <b>It enters our mind</b> that the mishna is referring <b>to a widow waiting for her <i>yavam</i>,</b> who is <b>nine</b> years <b>and one day old.</b> The Gemara therefore inquires: With regard <b>to what</b> is this taught? <b>If</b> it is with regard <b>to disqualifying</b> her from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, <b>a younger</b> <i>yavam</i> <b>also disqualifies</b> her, as a levirate bond was created and she cannot return to her father’s house. And <b>if</b> it was with regard <b>to enabling</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>an older</b> <i>yavam</i> <b>does not enable</b> her <b>to partake either,</b> as discussed above.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said: Here we are dealing with a nine-year-and-one-day-old <i>yavam</i> who</b> already <b>engaged in intercourse with his <i>yevama</i>, as she was</b> thereby <b>acquired by him by Torah</b> law. It might <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>since by Torah</b> law <b>she was acquired by him, as</b> the legal status of <b>his</b> act of <b>intercourse is</b> that of <b>intercourse,</b> perhaps <b>he enables</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. The mishna therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the Sages <b>rendered the</b> legal status of the <b>intercourse of a nine-year-and-one-day-old</b> boy <b>like</b> that of <b>levirate betrothal</b> by means of money or a document performed <b>by an adult man,</b> which is not sufficient for her to partake of <i>teruma</i>. Since levirate betrothal is effective only by rabbinic law, the <i>yevama</i> is not considered the acquisition of his money by Torah law and may not partake of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said to him: If so,</b> consider <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna, <b>which teaches</b> that a boy with regard to whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> whether <b>he is nine years and one day old</b> and <b>uncertainty</b> whether <b>he is not,</b> disqualifies a woman from partaking of <i>teruma</i>, and he does not enable her to partake. <b>Now</b> that, according to your explanation, one who is <b>definitely nine</b> years <b>old does not enable</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to teach the same concerning a boy with regard to whom there is <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether or not he reached that age?

### Part 6
<b>Rather, Rava said</b> that the mishna <b>is teaching</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a nine-year-and-one-day-old</b> boy who is one <b>of those unfit</b> males listed in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>who disqualify</b> a woman from marrying a priest <b>by their intercourse,</b> as they are unfit to enter the assembly of Israel through marriage, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>A nine-year-and-one-day-old</b> boy who is <b>an Ammonite or a Moabite convert;</b> or who is <b>an Egyptian or an Edomite</b> convert; or who is either <b>a Samaritan [<i>kuti</i>], a Gibeonite, a <i>ḥalal</i>, or a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> when he <b>engaged in intercourse with a priestess,</b> i.e., the daughter of a priest, <b>a Levite, or an Israelite,</b> he thereby <b>disqualified her</b> from marrying a priest, and, in the case of the daughter of a priest, from partaking of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause,</b> the next mishna (69a), <b>teaches</b> that <b>if</b> men who <b>are unfit to enter</b> the assembly of <b>Israel</b> by marriage engage in extramarital intercourse with women, <b>they disqualify</b> them from marrying into the priesthood: <b>It may be inferred that</b> in <b>the first clause,</b> the mishna above, <b>we are dealing not with unfit</b> individuals but with men fit to marry Jews of unflawed lineage. The Gemara answers: That inference is incorrect. <b>The first clause</b> of the mishna is dealing with those <b>unfit to</b> enter <b>the assembly</b> of Israel by marriage, while <b>the latter clause</b> is dealing with those who are merely <b>unfit for</b> the <b>priesthood.</b> That is why the mishna is referring to them separately. Accordingly, Rava’s explanation that the mishna is referring to an unfit nine-year-old boy is viable.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara addresses the matter <b>itself</b> and cites the complete <i>baraita</i>. <b>A nine-year-and-one-day-old</b> boy who is <b>an Ammonite or a Moabite convert;</b> or who is <b>an Egyptian or an Edomite</b> convert; or who is either <b>a Samaritan, a Gibeonite, a <i>ḥalal</i>, or a <i>mamzer</i>,</b> when he <b>engaged in intercourse with a priestess,</b> or <b>a Levite, or an Israelite,</b> he thereby <b>disqualified her</b> from marrying into the priesthood.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> Of the individuals mentioned above, <b>anyone whose offspring is unfit</b> to enter the assembly of Israel, <b>disqualifies</b> a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse from marrying into the priesthood. However, <b>anyone whose offspring is not unfit does not disqualify</b> a woman through intercourse. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Anyone whose daughter you may marry, you may marry his widow,</b> even if you are a priest. Anyone whose daughter may marry a Jew of unflawed lineage does not disqualify a woman with whom he engaged in intercourse from marrying into the priesthood. <b>And anyone whose daughter you may not marry, you may not marry his widow</b> if you are a priest.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived, that intercourse with an unfit man renders a woman unfit to partake of <i>teruma</i> and marry a priest? <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: The verse states: “And if a priest’s daughter be married to a common man [<i>ish zar</i>],</b> she shall not eat of that which is set apart from the sacred” (Leviticus 22:12). It may be derived that <b>since she engaged in intercourse with one who is unfit for her, he disqualified her</b> from marrying into the priesthood, as the literal meaning of the expression <i>ish zar</i> is a man who is excluded.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>That</b> verse <b>is necessary</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> <b>that the Merciful One says: The daughter of a priest who marries a non-priest,</b> even one that she is permitted to marry, <b>may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, it cannot be the source for the <i>halakha</i> that intercourse with an unfit man renders a woman unfit to partake of <i>teruma</i> and marry a priest.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> prohibition <b>is derived from</b> the verse “But if a priest’s daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, <b>and is returned to her father’s house, as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s bread” (</b>Leviticus 22:13). <b>From the fact that the Merciful One says: “And is returned to her father’s house…she may eat,” it may be inferred that initially,</b> while married to a non-priest, <b>she</b> was <b>not</b> permitted to <b>eat.</b> Therefore, the prohibition against a woman who engaged in intercourse with an unfit man partaking of <i>teruma</i> may be derived from the former verse, as it is not necessary for this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 13
The Gemara rejects this answer: <b>If</b> the prohibition against the daughter of a priest who married a non-priest partaking of <i>teruma</i> had been derived only <b>from that</b> latter verse, <b>I would have said</b> that it is a prohibition that stems from a positive mitzva, as it is stated in positive form, and according to the principle that <b>a prohibition that stems from a positive mitzva is a positive mitzva,</b> she would not be liable to receive a court-imposed punishment. <b>The Merciful One</b> therefore <b>writes that</b> former verse, <b>to</b> establish an explicit <b>prohibition.</b> The Gemara counters: The <b>prohibition</b> against the wife of a non-priest partaking of <i>teruma</i> <b>is derived from</b> a different verse: <b>“No common man may eat of the sacred”</b> (Leviticus 22:10).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC