
### Part 1
<b>or</b> a sandal <b>belonging to</b> an inhabitant of <b>an idolatrous city,</b> a city the majority of whose inhabitants committed idolatry, which stands to be destroyed with all of the city’s property; <b>and</b> likewise, the sandal <b>of an Elder made in accordance with his dignity</b> to be worn upon his death as part of his shroud, i.e., it is not meant for walking as a normal shoe, the <i>yevama</i> <b>may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> using any of these shoes. <b>And if she did perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, her <i>ḥalitza</i> is invalid</b> even after the fact, as these are not halakhically considered shoes.

### Part 2
<b>Ravina said to Rav Ashi: What is different</b> about the sandal of <b>an Elder that is made in accordance with his dignity</b> that one should say that even though it is the proper size for his foot, it is not valid <b>because it was not made for walking,</b> but merely for him to wear after his death. But <b>the court’s</b> sandal <b>also was not made for walking,</b> as the court kept a sandal that met all the other necessary qualifications for a sandal for <i>ḥalitza</i> and gave it to the <i>yavam</i> to be worn during the <i>ḥalitza</i> procedure. Since the <i>yavam</i> would return the <i>ḥalitza</i> sandal after the conclusion of the <i>ḥalitza</i>, therefore, the sandal was never used for walking and should be invalidated for <i>ḥalitza</i> just as the sandal made for the dignity of an Elder?

### Part 3
<b>He said to him: If a messenger of the court had walked in</b> the <i>ḥalitza</i> shoe used by the court, <b>would the judge reprimand him?</b> Although the court’s sandal was designed for the express purpose of <i>ḥalitza</i>, it may also be used for walking. A shoe designed for a dead person, on the other hand, is forbidden for any other use and is not made for walking at all, and it is consequently disqualified.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a woman <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i> at night, her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid, but Rabbi Elazar invalidates it.</b> If she performed <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>on</b> the <b>left foot, her <i>ḥalitza</i> is invalid, but Rabbi Elazar validates it.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Let us say that they disagree about this</b> issue: One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Elazar, <b>holds that we compare</b> the <i>halakhot</i> governing monetary <b>disputes,</b> which category includes <i>ḥalitza</i>, as <i>ḥalitza</i> carries with it monetary ramifications and requires payment of the marriage contract to the <i>yevama</i>, <b>with</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>leprosy.</b> Just as leprosy cases are judged only during the day (see Leviticus 13:14), likewise, monetary cases may take place only during the day. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds that we do not compare</b> monetary <b>disputes with leprosy.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: <b>No, everyone</b> holds <b>that we do not compare</b> monetary <b>disputes with leprosy, for if we would compare</b> them fully, then <b>even</b> delivering the <b>verdict</b> of the court <b>case</b> could <b>not</b> be done <b>at night,</b> but it is permitted to complete monetary judgments and deliver the verdict at night, provided the proceedings began during the day. <b>And here,</b> with respect to performing <i>ḥalitza</i> at night <b>they disagree about this</b> issue: One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Elazar, <b>holds</b> that <b><i>ḥalitza</i> is considered like the commencement of judgment</b> of monetary cases, <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> the first <i>tanna</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b><i>ḥalitza</i> is considered like the verdict</b> of a monetary judgment, and therefore it may also be conducted at night.

### Part 7
It is told: <b>Rabba bar Ḥiyya Ketosfa’a,</b> from Ctesiphon, <b>conducted</b> <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>using a slipper</b> that was not made of leather, <b>and</b> he did so <b>in private,</b> as he was the only judge, <b>and by night. Shmuel said</b> disparagingly: <b>How great is the power</b> of this master <b>who follows an individual</b> opinion, as in his practice he relied on individual opinions that are not accepted as <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What is difficult</b> for Shmuel about Rabba bar Ḥiyya’s actions? <b>If it was</b> the fact that he conducted <i>ḥalitza</i> using <b>a slipper, an unattributed opinion is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> stating that this is valid. As the opinion is unattributed, this indicates that it is not the view of one individual, but rather the opinion of the majority. <b>If it was</b> the fact that he performed <i>ḥalitza</i> at <b>night, an unattributed opinion is taught</b> in the mishna stating that it is valid as well.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, it was difficult for him</b> that Rabba bar Ḥiyya conducted <i>ḥalitza</i> <b>in private,</b> as the sole judge: <b>How could he do so in private, as that is taught only in accordance with an individual</b> opinion, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>If she performed <i>ḥalitza</i> before two or three</b> judges <b>and one of them is found to be a relative or disqualified, her <i>ḥalitza</i> is invalid. And Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Yoḥanan the Cobbler validate</b> the judge who is not a relative or disqualified. If there are two judges who are not relatives, then they hold that the <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid, as they validate a <i>ḥalitza</i> performed before two judges. <b>And an incident</b> occurred <b>involving one who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> between him and her</b> alone <b>in prison,</b> as there was no judge present at all, <b>and the incident came before Rabbi Akiva and he validated</b> it.

### Part 10
<b>And Rav Yosef bar Minyumi said</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman said: The <i>halakha</i> does not follow that pair,</b> i.e., Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Yoḥanan the Cobbler. Evidently, Rabba bar Ḥiyya relied on the individual opinion of Rabbi Akiva, who permitted <i>ḥalitza</i> in private, and therefore Shmuel commented regarding Rabbi bar Ḥiyya’s power to rule based on an individual’s opinion. <b>And if you wish, say</b> that not only does this detail follow an individual opinion, but rather <b>all of these</b> details <b>are taught by an individual</b> opinion. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yosei, said: I saw that Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha</b> performed <b>a <i>ḥalitza</i> using a slipper, in private, and at night.</b> This statement implies that these details are all according to his individual opinion, contrary to the opinion of the rest of the Sages.

### Part 11
It was taught in the mishna that if <i>ḥalitza</i> was performed <b>using</b> his <b>left foot, her <i>ḥalitza</i></b> is invalid, while Rabbi Elazar validates it. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of the Rabbis’</b> opinion? <b>Ulla said: We derive</b> a verbal analogy from the word <b>“foot”</b> stated here, and the word <b>“foot” stated regarding the leper. Just as there,</b> with respect to the leper, <b>it is the right</b> foot (Leviticus 14:14), <b>so too here,</b> with respect to <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>it is the right</b> foot that must be used.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> this would seem to indicate that <b>Rabbi Elazar does not derive “foot”</b> with regard to <i>ḥalitza</i> from the word <b>“foot” from the leper. But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Elazar says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that piercing</b> a Hebrew slave’s ear with an awl when the slave chooses to remain in servitude <b>is done</b> specifically <b>on the right ear? “Ear” is stated here</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> pertaining to a pierced slave, <b>and “ear” is stated there</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> of the leper. <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to leprosy, <b>it is the right</b> ear, as it is stated explicitly there, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to piercing the ear, <b>it is the right</b> ear. This statement of Rabbi Elazar implies that he does learn a verbal analogy about the word “right.”

### Part 13
<b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The</b> attribution of <b>the opinions is reversed,</b> meaning that it is Rabbi Elazar who invalidates <i>ḥalitza</i> on the left foot, as he learns an analogy from the <i>halakha</i> with regard to piercing the ear that the right must be used.

### Part 14
<b>Rava said: Actually, do not reverse</b> the opinions. The words <b>“ear”</b> and <b>“ear” are free</b> terms, i.e., they are superfluous in their context and therefore it is clear that the Torah included those terms for the express purpose of establishing the verbal analogy. A verbal analogy that is based on otherwise extraneous terms cannot be logically refuted. Therefore, the superfluous “ear” teaches that piercing is done on the right ear. However, the words <b>“foot”</b> and <b>“foot” are not free,</b> because the word “foot,” written with regard to the <i>yavam</i>, is necessary in its context and is not superfluous. Therefore, the verbal analogy of the word “foot” is incomplete.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And even if they are not</b> both <b>free</b> to be used for exposition, <b>what refutation is there?</b> A verbal analogy that is free to be used for exposition in only one place is still valid, provided there is no reason to refute the comparison. The Gemara explains: It <b>can be refuted, as the leper</b> is unique in that there is a very specific process necessary for his purification: He requires that the blood of the offering be sprinkled upon him, and <b>he requires cedarwood, hyssop, and scarlet thread.</b> Therefore, it is possible to say that the Torah also specified the use of the right foot in the case of the leper. However, this would not necessarily be required with respect to <i>ḥalitza</i>, which lacks such specific <i>halakhot</i>. Consequently, <i>ḥalitza</i> performed using the left foot could be valid.

### Part 16
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If she, i.e., the <i>yevama</i>, <b>removed</b> the shoe <b>and spat</b> in accordance with the <i>halakha</i> <b>but did not recite</b> the necessary text, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid.</b> If <b>she recited</b> the text <b>and spat but did not remove</b> the shoe, <b>her <i>ḥalitza</i> is disqualified.</b> If <b>she removed</b> the shoe <b>and recited</b> the text <b>but did not spit, Rabbi Elazar says: Her <i>ḥalitza</i> is disqualified,</b> while <b>Rabbi Akiva says: Her <i>ḥalitza</i> is valid.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC