
### Part 1
that <b>perhaps he is a charmer [<i>ḥabbar</i>]</b> of snakes and scorpions who knows magic or some stratagem to keep them from harming him. <b>And the first <i>tanna</i></b> holds that we need not be concerned about this possibility, <b>as, due to the pressure</b> of his body falling on top of them, <b>they will harm him,</b> even if he could control them under other circumstances.

### Part 2
<b>The Sages taught:</b> If one <b>fell into a blazing furnace, one may testify about him</b> that he has died. If he fell <b>into</b> a boiling <b>cauldron filled</b> with <b>wine or oil, one may</b> also <b>testify about him</b> that he has died. <b>In the name of Rabbi Aḥa, they said:</b> If he fell into a cauldron <b>of oil, one may testify about him</b> that he has died, <b>because this ignites</b> the fire even more. Through the force of his fall, oil will splash into the fire and increase the heat of the cauldron. However, if he fell into a cauldron <b>of wine, one may not testify about him</b> that he has died, <b>because</b> when wine splashes into the fire <b>it extinguishes</b> the fire. <b>They said to him: At first it</b> partially <b>extinguishes</b> the fire <b>but eventually it ignites</b> it even more, and therefore it can be assumed that he has died.

### Part 3
§ The mishna stated that <b>Rabbi Meir said: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving a certain</b> individual <b>who fell into the Great Cistern</b> and emerged after three days. It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>They said to Rabbi Meir: One does not mention miraculous acts</b> to teach general <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> about that story defines it as an example of <b>miraculous acts? If we say</b> the fact <b>that he did not eat or drink</b> for three days and still survived is miraculous, <b>but isn’t it written: “Fast for me, and neither eat nor drink</b> three days, night or day” (Esther 4:16), demonstrating that one may survive this experience naturally?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the miraculous element is <b>that he did not sleep</b> during those three days, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If one says: I hereby take on <b>an oath that I will not sleep for three days,</b> the court <b>flogs him</b> for taking an oath in vain, <b>and he may sleep immediately</b> because it is impossible to remain awake for three consecutive days.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to <b>Rabbi Meir, what is the reason</b> this was not a miraculous incident? The Gemara answers that <b>Rav Kahana said: There were</b> several levels of <b>arches</b> built <b>on top of</b> other <b>arches</b> within the Great Cistern, and he supported himself on the arches and slept. <b>And the Rabbis</b> said that <b>they were</b> made <b>of marble</b> and it was impossible to hold onto them and sleep. <b>And Rabbi Meir</b> assumed that <b>it is inconceivable that he didn’t grasp</b> some part of an arch for a short time <b>and sleep a little,</b> and therefore this incident does not qualify as a miracle.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving the daughter of Neḥunya the well digger, who fell into the Great Cistern, and they came and notified Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa</b> and asked that he pray for her. After <b>the first hour, he said to them:</b> She is at <b>peace</b> and unharmed. After <b>the second</b> hour, <b>he said to them:</b> She is at <b>peace.</b> After <b>the third</b> hour <b>he said to them: She has ascended</b> from the cistern.

### Part 7
When she came to Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, <b>he said to her: My daughter, who pulled you up</b> from the cistern? <b>She said to him: A male sheep,</b> i.e., a ram, <b>happened by</b> and sensed <b>me</b> in that cistern, <b>and</b> there was <b>an old man leading him</b> who pulled me out. <b>They said</b> to Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa: <b>Are you a prophet</b> with knowledge of what is happening far away? <b>He said to them,</b> using a figure of speech from the Bible: <b>“I am not a prophet, nor the son of a prophet am I”</b> (Amos 7:14). <b>Rather,</b> I reasoned as follows: Could it be that concerning <b>the endeavor that the righteous</b> Neḥunya <b>is engaged</b> in, i.e., digging for the benefit of the public, <b>his offspring would stumble upon</b> its fruits and thereby be killed? I therefore knew that God would certainly save her.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Abba said: Even so, the son</b> of Neḥunya the well digger <b>died of thirst,</b> and the merit of his father, who attended to the water supply, did not protect him, <b>as is stated: “And around Him it storms [<i>nisara</i>] mightily”</b> (Psalms 50:3), <b>which teaches that the Holy One, Blessed be He, is exacting with His surroundings,</b> i.e., the righteous who are close to Him, <b>up to a hairsbreadth [<i>sa’ara</i>],</b> so that even slight deviations can elicit severe punishment. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina said:</b> This idea is derived <b>from here: “A God dreaded in the great council of the holy ones, and feared by all that are about Him”</b> (Psalms 89:8). This indicates that God is most feared by those that are nearest to Him, i.e., the righteous, because He is more exacting of them.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Even</b> if one <b>heard from the women,</b> who were <b>saying: So-and-so died, this is sufficient</b> in order to testify to his death. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: Even if one heard from the children,</b> who were <b>saying: We are going to eulogize and bury so-and-so,</b> that is also sufficient. Furthermore, one may rely upon someone mentioning that a man died, regardless of <b>whether</b> the speaker <b>intends</b> to testify and thereby allow the man’s wife to remarry <b>or whether he does not intend</b> to offer formal testimony.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yehuda ben Bava says: With regard to a Jew</b> who offers this information, it may be relied upon <b>even if he intends</b> for his statement to be considered formal testimony. However, <b>with regard to a gentile, if he intended</b> to testify, <b>his testimony is not</b> considered valid <b>testimony.</b> His statement is relied upon only when he does not intend to state it as formal testimony.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to relying on what children said, that they are going to eulogize and bury so-and-so, the Gemara asks: <b>Perhaps they will not go;</b> perhaps they only assumed that the individual would die, but in the end he didn’t. The Gemara answers: <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> It is referring to a situation <b>where</b> the children <b>say: We are coming from eulogizing and burying so-and-so.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: Since they are children, <b>perhaps it was merely a grasshopper</b> with which they played <b>that died, and they brought iShe t out</b> as if to its funeral, calling it <b>by</b> the <b>name of</b> the individual suspected to be dead, and their statement should not be considered valid proof of his death. The Gemara answers: It is referring to a situation <b>where the children say: Such and such rabbis were there; such and such eulogizers were there,</b> so that it is clear that they were referring to an event that truly occurred.

### Part 13
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>With regard to a gentile, if he intended</b> to testify, his testimony is not considered valid testimony. <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: They taught</b> this <b>only</b> in a case <b>where he intended to permit</b> the woman to remarry through his testimony, <b>but</b> if <b>he</b> merely <b>intended to testify</b> about the man’s death, <b>his testimony is</b> considered <b>testimony.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>How do we know</b> the intention of the gentile? <b>Rav Yosef said:</b> If <b>he came to the court and said: So-and-so died, allow his wife to marry, this is</b> an instance of <b>intending to permit</b> her to remarry. If he said simply: <b>He died, this is</b> an instance of merely <b>intending to testify.</b>

### Part 14
This <b>was also stated</b> by other <i>amora’im</i>. <b>Reish Lakish said: They taught</b> this <b>only when one intended to permit</b> the woman to remarry, <b>but if he</b> merely <b>intended to testify</b> about the man’s death, <b>his testimony is</b> considered valid <b>testimony. Rabbi Yoḥanan said to him: Didn’t such an incident occur involving</b> Rabbi <b>Oshaya the Distinguished, who permitted</b> women to marry based upon the testimony of gentiles while he was <b>with eighty-five Elders? He said to</b> the Elders: <b>They taught</b> that one may not rely upon a gentile’s testimony <b>only when he intended to permit</b> the woman to remarry, <b>but if he</b> merely <b>intended to testify</b> about the man’s death, <b>his testimony is</b> considered valid <b>testimony. But the Rabbis did not concur with him</b> on this, and they maintained that one may not rely upon the testimony of a gentile at all.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But,</b> if that is so, what about <b>that</b> which <b>is taught</b> in <b>the mishna: With regard to a gentile, if he intended</b> to testify, <b>his testimony is not</b> considered valid <b>testimony,</b> which implies that if the gentile does not intend to testify, his statement may be relied upon? <b>How can you find</b> a case where one would rely on his statement? The Gemara answers: One may rely on a gentile’s statement <b>when he speaks offhandedly,</b> without any intention to testify. <b>Like that</b> gentile <b>who was going around saying: Who is</b> from <b>the house of Ḥivvai; who is</b> from <b>the house of Ḥivvai? Ḥivvai has died. And</b> based upon this report, <b>Rav Yosef allowed</b> Ḥivvai’s <b>wife to marry.</b> There was also <b>a certain</b> gentile <b>who was going around saying: Alas for the brave horseman who was in Pumbedita, for he is dead. And Rav Yosef, and some say Rava, allowed his wife to marry.</b>

### Part 16
§ There was also <b>a certain</b> gentile <b>who was going around saying: Who is</b> from <b>the house of Ḥasa? Ḥasa has drowned. Rav Naḥman said: By God! The fish have eaten Ḥasa.</b> The Gemara relates: <b>Due to Rav Naḥman’s statement,</b> although he did not issue a court ruling permitting it, <b>Ḥasa’s wife went and married, and no one said anything to her</b> to protest this action. <b>Rav Ashi said: Learn</b> the following <b>from this</b> incident: <b>That which the Sages said,</b> that if a man fell into <b>an endless body of water, his wife is prohibited</b> from remarrying, <b>this applies</b> only <b><i>ab initio</i>, but if</b> someone <b>married</b> her, <b>we do not take her away from him.</b>

### Part 17
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman</b> actually issued a ruling and <b>allowed his wife to marry. He said: Ḥasa is a great man; if it was so that he emerged</b> from the water <b>the incident would have generated publicity.</b> Since nothing was heard from Ḥasa in a long while, it can be assumed that he died. The Gemara comments: <b>That is not so. It is not different</b> if he is <b>a great man</b> and it <b>is not different</b> if he is <b>not a great man.</b> If a woman remarried based on testimony that her husband drowned in an endless body of water, <b>after the fact, yes,</b> she may remain married, but she may <b>not</b> remarry <b><i>ab initio</i>.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara relates that <b>a certain gentile said to a Jew: Harvest the fodder and give it to my animals on Shabbat, and if not, I will kill you like I killed so-and-so the Jew, for I said to him: Cook me a pot</b> of food <b>on Shabbat, and he didn’t cook</b> it <b>for me, so I killed him. The wife</b> of the missing Jew <b>heard</b> the gentile say that he killed her husband, <b>and</b> she <b>came before Abaye</b> to ask if she was permitted to remarry. <b>He deferred</b> the ruling in <b>her</b> case

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC