
### Part 1
<b>from</b> one that is <b>not possible.</b> Mankind was initially created with a male and female because otherwise reproduction would not have been possible. However, this fact cannot serve as a source that the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply is fulfilled only once one has a son and a daughter. The Gemara asks: <b>And Beit Hillel, let them also learn from Moses.</b> Beit Hillel could <b>say to you: Moses acted</b> based <b>on his own perception</b> when he separated from his wife, but this does not mean that a man is permitted to neglect the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply after fathering two males, <b>as it is taught in</b> a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Moses did three things</b> based <b>on his own perception, and his perception agreed with the perception of the Omnipresent: He separated from</b> his <b>wife, he broke the tablets, and he added one day</b> to the days of separation before the revelation at Sinai.

### Part 2
The Gemara clarifies: When Moses <b>separated from</b> his <b>wife</b> after the revelation at Sinai, <b>what did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? <b>He said: If</b> in the case of <b>Israel, with whom the Divine Presence spoke only temporarily and for whom</b> God <b>set</b> a specific <b>time for</b> revelation, <b>the Torah stated: “Do not approach a woman”</b> (Exodus 19:15), <b>I,</b> Moses, <b>who am set aside for</b> divine <b>speech all the time and for whom</b> God <b>did not set</b> a specific <b>time, all the more so</b> I must separate from my wife. <b>And his perception agreed with the perception of the Omnipresent, as it is stated</b> after the revelation at Sinai: <b>“Go say to them: Return to your tents; and you, stand here with Me”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:26–27). This indicates that whereas others could return to their homes and normal married life after the revelation at Sinai, Moses was to stay with God and not return to his wife.

### Part 3
Moses <b>broke the tablets</b> following the sin of the Golden Calf. <b>What did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? Moses <b>said: If</b> in the case of the <b>Paschal lamb, which is</b> only <b>one of 613 mitzvot, the Torah states: “No alien shall eat of it”</b> (Exodus 12:43), excluding not only gentiles but apostate Jews as well, then here, in the case of the Golden Calf, where the tablets represent <b>the entire Torah and</b> where <b>the Jewish people</b> are <b>apostates,</b> as they are worshipping the calf, <b>all the more so</b> must they be excluded from receiving them.

### Part 4
<b>And his perception agreed with the perception of the Omnipresent, as it is written:</b> “The first tablets <b>that you broke [<i>asher shibbarta</i>]”</b> (Exodus 34:1), <b>and Reish Lakish said:</b> The word <i>asher</i> is an allusion to the fact that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Moses: May your strength be true [<i>yishar koḥakha</i>] that you broke</b> the tablets.

### Part 5
When Moses <b>added one day</b> to the days of separation before the revelation at Sinai based <b>on his</b> own <b>perception, what did he interpret</b> that led him to do so? He reasoned <b>that</b> since <b>it is written: “And sanctify them today and tomorrow”</b> (Exodus 19:10), the juxtaposition of the words “today” and “tomorrow” teaches that <b>today</b> is <b>like tomorrow: Just as tomorrow</b> the men and women will separate for that day <b>and</b> the <b>night</b> preceding <b>it, so too, today</b> requires separation for the day <b>and</b> the <b>night</b> preceding <b>it.</b> Since God spoke to him in the morning, <b>and the night of that day</b> already <b>passed,</b> Moses said: <b>Conclude from</b> this that separation must be in effect for <b>two days aside from now,</b> i.e., not including the day of the command. Therefore, he extended the mitzva of separation by one day. <b>And his perception agreed with the perception of the Omnipresent, as</b> the <b>Divine Presence did not rest</b> upon Mount Sinai <b>until Shabbat</b> morning, as Moses had determined.

### Part 6
§ <b>It is taught in</b> a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> The mitzva to be fruitful and multiply is fulfilled with <b>two males and two females. And Beit Hillel say: A male and a female.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Huna said: What is the reason of Rabbi Natan, in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “And again she bore his brother [<i>et aḥiv</i>] Abel [<i>et Hevel</i>]”</b> (Genesis 4:2). The use of the superfluous word “et” indicates that she gave birth to <b>Abel and his sister,</b> in addition to <b>Cain and his sister. And it states: “For God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel; for Cain slew him”</b> (Genesis 4:25). This indicates that one must have at least four children. <b>And the Rabbis,</b> how do they understand this verse? In their opinion, Eve <b>was thanking God</b> for granting her another child, but one is not obligated to have four children.

### Part 8
<b>It is taught in another</b> <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Natan says</b> that <b>Beit Shammai say:</b> The mitzva to be fruitful and multiply is fulfilled with <b>a male and a female. And Beit Hillel say: Either a male or a female. Rava said: What is the reason of Rabbi Natan in accordance with the opinion of Beit Hillel?</b> It is <b>as it is stated: “He did not create it a waste; He formed it to be inhabited”</b> (Isaiah 45:18), <b>and one has made</b> the earth <b>inhabited</b> to a greater degree by adding even one child to the world.

### Part 9
§ <b>It was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> disagreed over the following issue: If a man <b>had children when he</b> was <b>a gentile and he</b> subsequently <b>converted, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He has</b> already <b>fulfilled</b> the mitzva to <b>be fruitful and multiply, and Reish Lakish said:</b> He has <b>not fulfilled</b> the mitzva to <b>be fruitful and multiply. Rabbi Yoḥanan said he has fulfilled</b> the mitzva <b>to be fruitful and multiply, as he</b> already <b>had</b> children. <b>And Reish Lakish said he has not fulfilled</b> the mitzva to <b>be fruitful and multiply,</b> as the legal status of <b>a convert who</b> just <b>converted is like</b> that of <b>a child</b> just <b>born,</b> and it is considered as though he did not have children.

### Part 10
The Gemara comments: <b>And they follow their</b> regular line of reasoning, <b>as it was stated:</b> If <b>one had children</b> when <b>he</b> was <b>a gentile and he</b> subsequently <b>converted, Rabbi Yoḥanan said: He does not have a firstborn with regard to inheritance,</b> i.e., the first son born to him after his conversion does not inherit a double portion, <b>as</b> this man already <b>had “the first of his strength”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:17), the Torah’s description of the firstborn in this context, before he converted. <b>And Reish Lakish said: He does have a firstborn with regard to inheritance,</b> as the legal status of <b>a convert who</b> just <b>converted is like</b> that of <b>a child</b> just <b>born.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state their opinions in both cases. <b>As, had it</b> only been <b>taught</b> to <b>us with regard to that first</b> case of the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply, one might have said that <b>it is</b> only <b>in that</b> case that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> his opinion, <b>because from the outset,</b> gentiles <b>are also subject to</b> the mitzva to be <b>fruitful and multiply. However, with regard to inheritance,</b> since <b>they are not subject</b> to the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>inheritance,</b> one might <b>say</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>concedes to Reish Lakish.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And</b> conversely, <b>if</b> their dispute <b>was stated</b> only <b>with regard to this</b> issue of inheritance, I would have said that <b>it is</b> only <b>in this</b> case that <b>Reish Lakish said</b> his opinion, as the <i>halakhot</i> of inheritance do not apply to gentiles. <b>But with regard to that</b> case, the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply, one might <b>say</b> that <b>he concedes to Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> Consequently, it is <b>necessary</b> for both disputes to be recorded.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan raises an objection to Reish Lakish</b> based upon the verse: <b>“At that time Berodach-baladan, son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent</b> a letter” (II Kings 20:12), which indicates that gentiles are considered to be the children of their parents. Therefore, when they convert, they should already have fulfilled the mitzva to be fruitful and multiply. Reish Lakish <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan: <b>When they are gentiles they do have</b> family <b>lineage,</b> but when <b>they convert they do not have lineage,</b> as they now belong to the family of the Jewish people and their previous lineage is disregarded.

### Part 14
<b>Rav said: Everyone agrees with regard to</b> a Canaanite <b>slave, that he does not have lineage, as it is written</b> that Abraham said to his slaves: <b>“Remain here with the donkey”</b> (Genesis 22:5). This verse is interpreted to mean that they are <b>a nation comparable to a donkey,</b> which has no lineage. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> based upon a verse pertaining to Jonathan’s Canaanite slave: <b>“And Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants”</b> (II Samuel 9:10), which indicates that a slave’s sons are in fact considered his sons. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> This is <b>like</b> the expression: <b>A bullock, son of a bull.</b> The word son in this context merely denotes progeny, not lineage.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, here too,</b> with regard to gentiles, there is no proof from the verse about Berodach-baladan that they have family lineage. The Gemara answers: <b>There it is different, as</b> the Bible <b>identified him by his name and by his father’s name,</b> thereby emphasizing the family connection. <b>But here,</b> it does <b>not specify</b> the names of Ziba’s children. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the Bible <b>identified</b> gentiles <b>elsewhere by their father and their father’s father, as it is written: “And King Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, son of Tabrimmon, son of Hezion, king of Aram, who dwelled in Damascus, saying”</b> (I Kings 15:18). This indicates that there is lineage for gentiles.

### Part 16
§ <b>It was stated</b> that <i>amora’im</i> disagreed over the following issue: If a man <b>had children and they died, Rav Huna said:</b> He has <b>fulfilled</b> the mitzva to be <b>fruitful and multiply</b> through these children. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> He has <b>not fulfilled</b> the mitzva.

### Part 17
The Gemara clarifies the reasons for their opinions: <b>Rav Huna said</b> he has <b>fulfilled</b> the mitzva <b>due to</b> a statement <b>of Rav Asi, as Rav Asi said</b> that the reason for this mitzva is that the Messiah, <b>son of David, will not come until all the souls of the body have been finished,</b> i.e., until all souls that are destined to inhabit physical bodies will do so, <b>as it is stated: “For the spirit that enwraps itself is from Me,</b> and the souls that I have made” (Isaiah 57:16). Consequently, once a child has been born and his soul has entered a body the mitzva has been fulfilled, even if the child subsequently dies. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> he has <b>not fulfilled</b> the mitzva, as <b>we require “He formed it to be inhabited”</b> (Isaiah 45:18), <b>and</b> this <b>is not</b> fulfilled when the children have passed away and no longer inhabit the earth.

### Part 18
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> with regard to the opinion of Rav Huna based upon the following <i>baraita</i>:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC