
### Part 1
<b>The first, is not mistaken,</b> as <b>what is</b> the meaning of <b>first?</b> It means <b>the first to fall</b> before her <i>yavam</i> for levirate marriage. <b>And he who taught</b> referring to her as <b>the second is not mistaken</b> either, as <b>what is</b> the meaning of <b>second?</b> It means <b>the second to enter marriage.</b> Since the second deceased brother was already married to one woman, this <i>yevama</i> whom he took in levirate marriage was his second wife. The Gemara wonders: Is this the necessary order of events? <b>Are we not</b> also <b>dealing with</b> a scenario <b>in which</b> the second brother <b>took</b> the wife of the first brother <b>in levirate marriage and then later took</b> another wife? Would such a situation not merit the same ruling? <b>Rather, what is</b> the meaning of calling the wife of the first brother <b>the second?</b> It means <b>she who had been married for a second time.</b> She had already been married twice, whereas the wife of the second brother had been married only once.

### Part 2
§ The Gemara turns from a review of the language used in the mishna to a discussion of the <i>halakhot</i> of a wife of a brother with whom one did not coexist. <b>Where is it written</b> that the mitzva of levirate marriage does not apply in the case of <b>the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: The verse states “If brothers dwell together</b> and one of them dies” (Deuteronomy 25:5), meaning <b>that they had a common dwelling</b> together <b>in the world.</b> This <b>excludes the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist.</b> Furthermore, it is derived: <b>“Together”</b> means that they were <b>united</b> together <b>in an inheritance;</b> i.e., they are united in that they inherit together. In other words, since property is inherited by sons from their father, it can be inferred that the verse is speaking specifically of brothers from the same father. This <b>excludes his maternal</b> half <b>brother,</b> with whom he is not united by inheritance, since only brothers who share the same father inherit from each other.

### Part 3
<b>Rabba said: One learns</b> the ruling that levirate marriage applies only to <b>brothers from the</b> same <b>father</b> by the verbal analogy between the term <b>brotherhood</b> used in the context of levirate marriage and the term <b>brotherhood from the children of Jacob. Just as there,</b> with regard to the children of Jacob, they are all brothers <b>from the father and not from the mother,</b> since they were from four different mothers, <b>so too, here,</b> in the case of levirate marriage, it is referring specifically to brothers <b>from the father and not from the mother.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara raises an objection: Why should we learn from the children of Jacob? <b>Let it derive</b> the meaning of the term <b>brotherhood</b> by verbal analogy to the term <b>brotherhood from</b> the verses discussing <b>those with whom relations are forbidden.</b> In the <i>halakhot</i> of forbidden relations, both paternal and maternal half brothers are considered brothers, and are thereby subject to such prohibitions as those against relations with a brother’s wife. The Gemara answers: The first analogy is preferable, as <b>we infer “brothers” from “brothers.”</b> The word “brothers” is stated both with regard to the children of Jacob and with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of levirate marriage, <b>whereas</b> with regard to forbidden relations it says “your brother,” and <b>one cannot make an inference to “brothers” from “your brother.”</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara objects: <b>What difference does it make</b> if there is a minor difference between the words being compared? <b>As the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> a verbal analogy with regard to leprosy of houses between the verse <b>“and the priest shall return [<i>veshav</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 14:39) and the verse <b>“and the priest shall come [<i>uva</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 14:44), from which it is derived that <b>this is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>returning,</b> i.e., it is after seven days, and <b>this is</b> the same <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>coming,</b> that it is after seven days. Consequently, a less pronounced difference of one letter between the Hebrew words for “brothers” and “your brother” should certainly not prevent the teaching of a verbal analogy. The Gemara responds: <b>This applies when nothing</b> else <b>was</b> more <b>similar, but where there is something similar we infer from that which is more similar.</b> In such situations, it is preferable to learn from the word that bears greater similarity.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects on another count: <b>Let</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>derive</b> the meaning of the term <b>brotherhood</b> from the term <b>brotherhood from Lot, as it is written</b> that Abraham said to Lot: <b>“For we are brothers”</b> (Genesis 13:8). From here one could conclude that the word brothers means relatives and not necessarily brothers. The Gemara rejects this: <b>It is</b> more <b>reasonable to derive from the children of Jacob, due to</b> the fact that the word “brothers” <b>is free</b> in its context and is therefore available to be used in a verbal analogy: <b>Since it could have written: We your servants are twelve children of our father,</b> but instead it <b>writes:</b> “Twelve <b>brothers,</b> the children of one man” (Genesis 42:13), <b>learn from here</b> that this comes <b>to render</b> the word “brothers” <b>free</b> so that it may be allocated to another matter, i.e., the definition of brothers.

### Part 7
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> although Rav Yehuda and Rabba learned the same ruling from two different passages, according to both <b>it was necessary to write “brothers” and it was necessary to write “together”</b> in the verses discussing levirate marriage, <b>as, if the Merciful One had written</b> only <b>“brothers,” I would say that one should infer</b> the meaning of the term <b>“brothers”</b> from the term <b>“brothers” from Lot. And if you would say it is not free</b> there in the same way that the word “brothers” is free in the passage concerning the children of Jacob, this is <b>not so;</b> in fact, <b>it is free.</b> With regard to Lot <b>it could have written: Friends,</b> as they were not actual brothers but relatives, <b>and</b> yet <b>“brothers” is written.</b> One might <b>learn from</b> here <b>that this is free</b> to be allocated elsewhere and teach that such relatives are called brothers even for levirate marriage. Therefore, <b>the Torah wrote “together”</b> to teach that this applies specifically to <b>those</b> brothers who are <b>united in an inheritance.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And if the Merciful One had written “together”</b> alone and not added “brothers,” <b>I would say that</b> they must <b>have</b> both <b>the same father and mother together,</b> and that otherwise the mitzva of levirate marriage would not apply. Therefore, “brothers” is written to compare this to the children of Jacob, who were brothers from the same father but not the same mother. It is for this reason, then, that <b>it</b> is <b>necessary</b> to write both.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks about the last supposition: <b>But from where would it be derived</b> that perhaps levirate marriage would apply only if they are full brothers, sharing both a father and mother? Why should one assume that maternal brotherhood is also of import here? Doesn’t <b>the Merciful One make levirate marriage dependent upon inheritance?</b> The Torah states that the <i>yavam</i> who performs the levirate marriage will establish the name of his deceased brother, meaning that he inherits from him, <b>and inheritance</b> comes <b>from the father and not from the mother.</b> Nevertheless, this <b>was necessary,</b> as <b>it could enter your mind to say that since this</b> <i>halakha</i> of levirate marriage <b>is a novelty</b> in <b>that</b> a woman who was a <b>forbidden relation to him</b> as a brother’s wife <b>is</b> now <b>rendered permitted, say</b> that this permissibility will be limited <b>only to</b> cases of brothers <b>with the same father and same mother together.</b> It is due to this possibility that the verbal analogy to the brothers who were the children of Jacob is <b>necessary.</b>

### Part 10
§ <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Rav said:</b> In the case of <b>a widow</b> whose husband had died childless and who is <b>waiting for her <i>yavam</i></b> to perform levirate marriage or set her free with <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>who</b> then <b>died</b> before her <i>yavam</i> could take her in levirate marriage, the <i>yavam</i> <b>is permitted to</b> marry <b>her mother.</b> The levirate obligation does not create a familial relation between them. <b>Apparently,</b> Rav Huna says that Rav <b>holds</b> that <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond [<i>zikka</i>] is not substantial.</b> In other words, the bond formed between the <i>yevama</i> and her <i>yavam</i> requiring levirate marriage does not create a halakhic connection between the two. The Gemara asks: <b>Then let him say</b> explicitly: The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the statement of he who says</b> that <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial,</b> as this issue is in fact a matter of dispute between <i>tanna’im</i>. Why did he not simply conclude that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of the <i>tanna</i> who held that the levirate bond is not substantial?

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: <b>If he had said that, I would say: This</b> statement that the levirate bond is not substantial <b>applies</b> only in reference <b>to two</b> brothers, each of whom has the possibility to take her in levirate marriage. In such cases the levirate bond between either one of the brothers and the <i>yevama</i> is not absolute, as it is always possible for the other brother to marry her instead. <b>But in</b> cases of <b>one</b> brother, then since the obligation to the <i>yevama</i> is exclusively his, I would say that <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond is substantial.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Then let him say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the statement of the one who says</b> that <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial, even in</b> the case of <b>one</b> brother. The Gemara answers: <b>If he had said that, I would say: Even</b> if his <i>yevama</i> were <b>alive</b> and required levirate marriage with him, he would be allowed to take her mother in marriage. Therefore, <b>this comes to teach us</b> that <b>after death, yes, he is</b> permitted to marry her mother; but <b>while</b> she is <b>alive,</b> he is <b>not.</b> Why not? This is <b>because it is prohibited to nullify the mitzva of levirate marriage.</b> Were he to marry her mother, he would no longer be able to take the daughter in levirate marriage because his wife’s daughter is forbidden to him. As a result of his marriage, he would cancel the mitzva of levirate marriage so that it could no longer apply to him.

### Part 13
The Gemara raises an objection to the statement of Rav Huna: <b>We learned</b> in a mishna (49a): If <b>his <i>yevama</i> dies, he is permitted to</b> marry <b>her sister.</b> A precise reading of this phrase leads to the implication that with regard to <b>her sister, yes,</b> it is permitted, as even if it had been his wife who had died he would be permitted to marry her sister. But with regard to <b>her mother, no,</b> it is not permitted.

### Part 14
The Gemara rejects this: No evidence can be derived from here, as it is possible to say that <b>the same is true even for her mother,</b> that she too is permitted. <b>But since it taught in the first clause</b> of this mishna: If <b>his wife dies he is permitted to take her sister,</b> and there the language is precise and implies: <b>Her sister, yes, but her mother, no, as she is forbidden by Torah</b> law because it is prohibited for a man to marry both a woman and her daughter even after one of them dies, therefore he used the same language when <b>he taught the latter clause</b> of the same mishna that <b>he is permitted to</b> take <b>her sister.</b> However, in the latter clause it is not an exact reading, and in actuality one is allowed to marry any of her relatives. This completes the Gemara’s explanation of Rav Huna’s opinion.

### Part 15
<b>And Rav Yehuda said:</b> In the case of <b>a widow who dies</b> while <b>waiting for her brother-in-law</b> to perform <i>ḥalitza</i> or levirate marriage, <b>he is prohibited from</b> marrying <b>her mother.</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently</b> Rav Yehuda <b>holds</b> that <b>the levirate bond is substantial;</b> this would mean that the attachment between the <i>yevama</i> and the <i>yavam</i> is like that of marriage and that the <i>yavam</i> is therefore prohibited from marrying her relatives. <b>But</b> it must be asked: Why does Rav Yehuda say it in such a way? <b>Let</b> him <b>say:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the statement of the one who says that the</b> levirate <b>bond is substantial.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara responds: <b>If he would have said that, I would say that</b> with regard to the levirate bond, <b>this applies in</b> the case of <b>one</b> brother, <b>but</b> if there were <b>two</b> brothers then <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial.</b> The Gemara objects: <b>But when</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree,</b> they <b>disagree in</b> a case of <b>two</b> brothers, so how could one think that Rav Yehuda is speaking only in the case of a single brother? <b>Rather,</b> one must say: <b>If he were to say that</b> the conclusive halakhic ruling is that the bond is substantial,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC