
### Part 1
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a convert is accepted <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael; <b>from where</b> do I derive that also <b>outside</b> of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael he is to be accepted? <b>The verse states “with you,”</b> which indicates that <b>in any place that he is with you,</b> you should accept him. <b>If so, what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: In the land?</b> This indicates that <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>he needs to bring evidence</b> that he is a convert, <b>but outside</b> of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>he does not need to bring evidence</b> that he is a convert; rather, his claim is accepted. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. And the Rabbis say: Whether</b> he is <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>or whether</b> he is <b>outside</b> of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>he needs to bring evidence.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: In the case when <b>he came and</b> brought <b>witnesses</b> to his conversion <b>with him, why do I</b> need <b>a verse</b> to teach that he is accepted? In all cases, the testimony of witnesses is fully relied upon. <b>Rav Sheshet said:</b> The case is <b>where they say: We heard that he converted in</b> the <b>court</b> of <b>so-and-so,</b> but they did not witness the actual conversion. And it is necessary to teach this because it could <b>enter your mind to say</b> that <b>they should not be relied upon;</b> therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that they are relied upon.

### Part 3
As cited above, the latter clause of the <i>baraita</i> states: “With you <b>in</b> your <b>land”</b> (Leviticus 19:33). <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a convert is accepted <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael; <b>from where</b> do I derive that also <b>outside</b> of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael he is to be accepted? <b>The verse states: “With you,”</b> which indicates that <b>in any place that he is with you,</b> you should accept him. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t you</b> already <b>expound that</b> phrase in the first clause of the <i>baraita</i> to teach that one doesn’t accept the claims of an individual that he is a valid convert? The Gemara explains: <b>One</b> of these <i>halakhot</i> is derived from the phrase <b>“with you”</b> in the verse cited, <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> is derived from the phrase <b>“with you”</b> in a subsequent verse (Leviticus 25:35).

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> states: <b>And the Rabbis say: Whether</b> he is <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>or whether</b> he is <b>outside</b> of <b>Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>he needs to bring evidence.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t “in</b> your <b>land” written</b> in the verse? How can the Rabbis deny any distinction between the <i>halakha</i> inside and outside of Eretz Yisrael?

### Part 5
The Gemara explains: <b>That</b> phrase <b>is necessary</b> to teach <b>that even in Eretz</b> Yisrael, the Jewish people should <b>accept converts, as it could enter your mind to say</b> that it is only <b>for the sake of</b> benefiting from <b>the goodness of Eretz Yisrael,</b> and not for the sake of Heaven, that <b>they are converting,</b> and therefore they should not be accepted. <b>And</b> it could also enter your mind to say that even <b>nowadays, when</b> God’s blessing has ceased and <b>there is no</b> longer <b>the</b> original <b>goodness</b> from which to benefit, one should still suspect their purity of motives because <b>there are</b> the <b>gleanings,</b> the <b>forgotten sheaves, and</b> the <b>corners</b> of fields, <b>and the poor man’s tithe</b> from which they would benefit by converting. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that they are accepted even in Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>whether</b> a convert is <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>or whether</b> he is <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>he needs to bring evidence.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Isn’t</b> this <b>obvious;</b> in all disputes between <b>an individual</b> Sage <b>and many</b> Sages the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of the <b>many</b> Sages. The Gemara explains: It is necessary to state this <b>lest you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda’s reason</b> is more <b>logical, being that the verse supports him</b> when it states: “In your land.” Therefore, it is necessary for Rabbi Yoḥanan to <b>teach us</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with his opinion.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states that Moses charged the judges of a court: <b>“And judge righteously between a man and his brother, and the convert with him”</b> (Deuteronomy 1:16). <b>From here,</b> based on the mention of a convert in the context of judgment in a court, <b>Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> A potential <b>convert who converts in a court is a</b> valid <b>convert.</b> However, if he converts <b>in private, he is not a convert.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: There was <b>an incident involving one</b> who was presumed to be Jewish <b>who came before Rabbi Yehuda and said to him: I converted in private,</b> and therefore I am not actually Jewish. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said to him:</b> Do <b>you have witnesses</b> to support your claim? <b>He said to him: No.</b> Rabbi Yehuda asked: Do <b>you have children? He said to him: Yes.</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to him: You are deemed credible</b> in order <b>to render yourself unfit</b> to marry a Jewish woman by claiming that you are a gentile, <b>but you are not deemed credible</b> in order <b>to render your children unfit.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But did Rabbi Yehuda</b> actually <b>say</b> that <b>with regard to</b> his <b>children he is not deemed credible? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“He shall acknowledge [<i>yakir</i>]</b> the firstborn, the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of all that he has” (Deuteronomy 21:17). The phrase “he shall acknowledge” is apparently superfluous. It is therefore expounded to teach that the father is deemed credible so that <b>he can identify him [<i>yakirenu</i>] to others. From here Rabbi Yehuda said: A man is deemed credible to say: This is my firstborn son, and just as he is deemed credible to say: This is my firstborn son, so</b> too, a priest <b>is deemed credible to say: This son of mine is a son of a divorced woman</b> and myself, <b>or</b> to say: He is <b>a son of a <i>ḥalutza</i></b> and myself, and therefore he is disqualified due to flawed lineage [<i>ḥalal</i>]. <b>And the Rabbis say: He is not deemed credible.</b> If Rabbi Yehuda holds that a father is deemed credible to render his children unfit, why did he rule otherwise in the case of the convert?

### Part 10
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that <b>this is what</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to him: According to your statement you are a gentile, and there is no testimony for a gentile,</b> as a gentile is a disqualified witness. Consequently, you cannot testify about the status of your children and render them unfit. <b>Ravina said</b> that <b>this is what</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to him:</b> Do <b>you have children? He said: Yes. He said to him:</b> Do <b>you have grandchildren?</b> He said: <b>Yes. He said to him: You are deemed credible</b> in order <b>to render your children unfit,</b> based on the phrase “he shall acknowledge,” <b>but you are not deemed credible</b> in order <b>to render your grandchildren unfit,</b> as the verse affords a father credibility only with respect to his children.

### Part 11
<b>This</b> opinion of Ravina <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says: A man is deemed credible to say about his minor son</b> that he is unfit, <b>but he is not deemed credible to say about his adult son</b> that he is unfit. <b>And</b> in explanation of the <i>baraita</i>, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> The reference to <b>a minor</b> son does <b>not</b> mean one who is <b>literally a minor,</b> who has not yet reached majority, <b>and</b> the reference to <b>an adult</b> son does <b>not</b> mean one who is <b>literally an adult,</b> who has reached majority; <b>rather, a minor who has children, this is</b> what the <i>baraita</i> is referring to as <b>an adult,</b> and <b>an adult who does not have children, this is</b> what the <i>baraita</i> is referring to as <b>a minor.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Ravina?</b> If there is a <i>baraita</i> that supports his opinion, the <i>halakha</i> should be in accordance with his opinion. The Gemara explains: <b>That</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>was stated concerning the matter of “he shall acknowledge,”</b> that a father is deemed credible to render his son unfit; however, if one claims he is a gentile, he is not deemed credible to say the same about his son.

### Part 13
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to a potential <b>convert who comes to</b> a court in order to <b>convert, at the present time,</b> when the Jews are in exile, the judges of the court <b>say to him: What did you see that</b> motivated <b>you</b> to <b>come to convert? Don’t you know that the Jewish people at the present time are anguished, suppressed, despised, and harassed, and hardships are</b> frequently <b>visited upon them? If he says: I know, and</b> although <b>I am unworthy</b> of joining the Jewish people and sharing in their sorrow, I nevertheless desire to do so, then the court <b>accepts him immediately</b> to begin the conversion process.

### Part 14
<b>And</b> the judges of the court <b>inform him</b> of <b>some of the lenient mitzvot and some of the stringent mitzvot, and they inform him</b> of <b>the sin</b> of neglecting the mitzva to allow the poor to take <b>gleanings, forgotten sheaves, and</b> produce in the <b>corner</b> of one’s field, <b>and</b> about the <b>poor man’s tithe. And they inform him</b> of <b>the punishment for</b> transgressing <b>the mitzvot,</b> as follows: <b>They say to him: Be aware that before you came to this status</b> and converted, <b>had you eaten forbidden fat, you would not be punished by <i>karet</i>,</b> and <b>had you profaned Shabbat, you would not be punished by stoning,</b> since these prohibitions do not apply to gentiles. <b>But now,</b> once converted, if <b>you have eaten forbidden fat you are punished by <i>karet</i>,</b> and if <b>you have profaned Shabbat, you are punished by stoning.</b>

### Part 15
<b>And just as they inform him</b> about the <b>punishment for</b> transgressing the <b>mitzvot, so</b> too, <b>they inform him</b> about the <b>reward granted for</b> fulfilling <b>them. They say to him: Be aware that the World-to-Come is made only for the righteous,</b> and if you observe the mitzvot you will merit it, <b>and</b> be aware that <b>the Jewish people, at the present time, are unable to receive</b> their full reward in this world;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC