
### Part 1
<b><i>Teruma</i> is for a priest and</b> the <b>first tithe is for a Levite;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya permits it,</b> i.e., the first tithe, <b>to a priest,</b> as he too is from the tribe of Levi. The Gemara is puzzled by this last statement: It says: <b>Permits it.</b> Does this prove <b>by inference that there is one</b> <i>tanna</i> <b>that prohibits</b> a priest from partaking of tithes? But a priest is also a Levite and cannot be considered a foreigner. <b>Rather, say</b> that Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya meant that <b>one may give it even to a priest.</b> The tithe does not have to be handed to a Levite; one may choose to give it to a priest instead.

### Part 2
The Gemara inquires: <b>What is the reason</b> for <b>Rabbi Meir’s</b> opinion? <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rabba, said in the name of tradition</b> that the verse states: <b>“For the tithe of the children of Israel that they set apart as a <i>teruma</i> to the Lord,</b> I have given to the Levites for an inheritance” (Numbers 18:24). From the fact that this verse calls the tithe “<i>teruma</i>,” we learn: <b>Just as <i>teruma</i> is forbidden to foreigners, so too</b> is the <b>first tithe forbidden to foreigners,</b> i.e., non-Levites. The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> so, is it true that <b>just as</b> with <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> a foreigner who eats it <b>is liable</b> to receive the punishment of <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven <b>and</b> to pay the additional <b>fifth for it, so too,</b> with regard to <b>tithes,</b> a foreigner who eats it should be <b>liable for it</b> to receive the punishment of <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven <b>and</b> to pay the additional <b>fifth?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers that <b>the verse states: “They will die through it if they profane it” (</b>Leviticus 22:9), and a different verse states: <b>“Then he shall add the fifth part thereof unto it”</b> (Leviticus 22:14). A close reading of these verses shows that the Torah is emphasizing that the death penalty comes <b>through it,</b> <i>teruma</i>, <b>and not through tithes,</b> and that a fifth must be added <b>to it, but not to tithes.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And the Rabbis,</b> who disagree with Rabbi Meir, how do they account for the comparison in the above verse? The Gemara answers: They would say it teaches that <b>just as</b> the requirement to separate <b><i>teruma</i> produces</b> the status of forbidden <b>untithed produce, so too</b> the requirement to separate the <b>first tithe also produces</b> the status of forbidden <b>untithed produce.</b>

### Part 4
<b>And</b> this is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought a person <b>should be liable only for untithed produce from which no</b> <i>terumot</i> or tithes <b>have been separated at all,</b> but if the <b>great <i>teruma</i> has been separated from it and the first tithe has not been separated from it;</b> or if the <b>first tithe</b> has been separated from it <b>and</b> the <b>second tithe has not; or even</b> if the <b>poor man’s tithe,</b> which is merely given to the poor and has no sanctity, has not been separated, <b>from where</b> is it derived that such produce also has the status of untithed produce?

### Part 5
<b>The verse states: “You may not eat within your gates</b> the tithe of your grain” (Deuteronomy 12:17), <b>and below,</b> with regard to the poor man’s tithe, <b>it states: “That they may eat within your gates and be satisfied”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:12). <b>Just as “your gates” stated below</b> is referring to <b>the poor man’s tithe, so too “your gates” stated here</b> is referring to <b>the poor man’s tithe, and the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah <b>“you may not</b> eat,” implying that it may be eaten only after separation.

### Part 6
<b>And if</b> we had learned it only <b>from there, I would say</b> that it merely teaches <b>a prohibition</b> against partaking of untithed produce of this type, <b>but</b> the <b>death</b> penalty is <b>not</b> warranted. The comparison to <i>teruma</i> consequently <b>teaches us</b> that eating this type of untithed produce is also punishable by death at the hand of Heaven.

### Part 7
<b>A different version</b> of this discussion presents it in the form of a question: Isn’t it the case that the <i>halakha</i> that failure to separate the <b>first tithe creates</b> the status of <b>untithed produce is derived from</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> taught? If so, there is no need for the exposition of the verse referring to tithes as <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>If</b> the proof was <b>from that</b> source alone, <b>I would say</b> that it is only prohibited <b>by a prohibition but</b> the <b>death</b> penalty is <b>not</b> warranted. He therefore <b>teaches us</b> that all the stringencies of untithed produce are in force.

### Part 8
§ The Gemara asks: <b>In what</b> manner <b>did you establish</b> the mishna? <b>In accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir.</b> But if so, <b>say the latter clause:</b> The <b>daughter of a Levite betrothed to a priest and</b> the <b>daughter of a priest</b> betrothed <b>to a Levite may eat neither <i>teruma</i> nor tithe. Here, what foreignness is there</b> that prohibits her from partaking of the tithe? Even according to the opinion that prohibits the first tithe to foreigners, this woman is a Levite on both sides. <b>Rav Sheshet said: What is</b> the meaning of: <b>She may not eat, that</b> the mishna <b>teaches?</b> It means that <b>she may not give permission</b> to others <b>to separate</b> the <i>teruma</i> from the tithe. As long as she is merely betrothed to a Levite, she may not appoint a messenger to set aside the <i>teruma</i> from the tithe on behalf of the Levite, as she is not yet his wife.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: Is it to be concluded <b>by inference that a married</b> woman <b>may give permission</b> to separate <i>teruma</i> from the tithe? The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, and isn’t it taught: “And you may eat it in any place, you and your households”</b> (Numbers 18:31)? This <b>teaches that an Israelite woman married</b> to a Levite <b>may give permission</b> to another <b>to separate</b> <i>teruma</i> from the Levite’s tithe.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues to discuss this <i>halakha</i>: Do <b>you say</b> she may give <b>permission to separate</b> <i>teruma</i> from the tithe, <b>or</b> perhaps <b>it is only</b> referring <b>to eating? Say</b> in response: If an Israelite woman married to a priest <b>may partake of <i>teruma</i>,</b> which is <b>stringent,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> true for <b>tithe,</b> which is <b>lenient?</b> Consequently, there is no need to teach us this <i>halakha</i>. <b>Rather,</b> the verse <b>teaches that an Israelite woman married</b> to a Levite <b>may give permission</b> to another <b>to separate</b> <i>teruma</i> from the tithe.

### Part 11
<b>Mar, son of Rabbana, said:</b> The mishna is not teaching that the daughter of a Levite who was betrothed to a priest may not partake of tithe, but rather it is coming <b>to say that we do not distribute tithe to her in the granary.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that the reason for the decree against distributing <i>teruma</i> to a woman in the granary is <b>due to</b> the prohibition (<i>Yevamot</i> 100a) against a woman <b>being alone</b> with a strange man in the granary, which is a secluded place, as this concern applies equally to the case here. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that the Sages prohibited this practice <b>due to</b> concern that the woman might be <b>a divorcée,</b> who is no longer entitled to <i>teruma</i>, this concern should not apply to the <b>daughter of a Levite. Does she not partake of tithe</b> on her own account, even after she is divorced?

### Part 12
The Gemara refutes this argument: <b>And according to your reasoning</b> that rejects the explanation of Mar, son of Rabbana, with regard to the daughter of a Levite, <b>does a divorcée</b> who is the <b>daughter of a priest not partake of <i>teruma</i>?</b> Why should the daughter of a priest married to a priest not receive <i>teruma</i> in a granary? <b>Rather,</b> this is a rabbinic <b>decree</b> that was enacted primarily <b>due to</b> a priest’s <b>divorcée</b> who is the <b>daughter of a non-priest,</b> as she may no longer partake of <i>teruma</i> after her divorce. They also applied this decree to the daughter of a priest divorced from a priest. For this reason, they also decreed against a Levite woman receiving a portion in the granary.

### Part 13
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If so, why specifically</b> one who was <b>betrothed; the same would hold true even</b> for <b>a married</b> woman <b>as well.</b> The Gemara answers: There is no difference between them in this regard, but <b>since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in the <b>first clause</b> of the mishna: <b>Betrothed, he also taught</b> in <b>the latter clause: Betrothed,</b> although the <i>halakha</i> in the latter clause does not apply exclusively to a betrothed woman.

### Part 14
§ <b>The Sages taught: <i>Teruma</i> is</b> given <b>to a priest, and</b> the <b>first tithe is</b> given only <b>to a Levite;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC