
### Part 1
the <b>last one gave her a bill of divorce, he has not disqualified her from</b> marrying into <b>the priesthood,</b> as she is not considered a divorcée at all, this proves <b>by inference that she does not require a bill of divorce</b> from him. The reason is <b>that if she requires a bill of divorce,</b> even if it is only due to uncertainty, <b>why</b> has he <b>not disqualified her from</b> marrying into <b>the priesthood?</b> A bill of divorce of any validity would bar her from marrying a priest. <b>Rather,</b> a bill of divorce given by a man to a woman who is not his wife is clearly of no account, and the reason for the ruling in <b>the latter clause,</b> with regard to betrothal, is that people will <b>say</b> there was no need for a bill of divorce because <b>it was a mistaken betrothal.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: If so, in <b>the first clause too,</b> they will <b>say it was a mistaken marriage.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The Sages penalized her</b> by requiring her to receive a bill of divorce, lest people say she divorced this man and went back and married the first one. The Gemara counters: If so, in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna <b>let us also penalize her.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>The first clause</b> involves a situation <b>where she violated a prohibition</b> through her intercourse, and therefore the Sages <b>penalized her.</b> Conversely, in <b>the latter clause, when she did not violate a prohibition,</b> as she simply became betrothed, <b>the Sages did not penalize her.</b>

### Part 3
§ The mishna taught that this woman <b>does not have,</b> i.e., she is not entitled to, the payment of her <b>marriage contract.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>the Sages instituted a marriage contract</b> in general, <b>for</b> an ordinary woman? <b>So that she will not be demeaned in his eyes such that</b> he will easily <b>divorce her.</b> The necessity to find money for her marriage contract will prevent a hasty decision to divorce her. However, in the case of <b>this</b> woman, on the contrary, the Sages actually prefer that <b>she will be demeaned in his eyes such that</b> he will easily <b>divorce her,</b> as the marriage was forbidden and she may not remain with him. Consequently, they eliminated her marriage contract to encourage him to divorce her.

### Part 4
§ The mishna further states that <b>she does not have</b> claim to <b>profits, or sustenance, or worn clothes.</b> Why not? Because the <b>stipulations in the marriage contract,</b> i.e., all the rights of a wife stemming from the stipulations that are part of a marriage contract, <b>are considered like</b> the <b>marriage contract</b> itself. Since she has no marriage contract, she does not have the stipulations in a marriage contract either.

### Part 5
§ The mishna also teaches that if <b>she took</b> any of the above <b>from this</b> man <b>or from that</b> one she must return anything she took. The Gemara comments: This <b>is obvious.</b> Since she is not entitled to these articles, of course she must give them back. The Gemara explains: It is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>since she has</b> already <b>taken hold</b> of them <b>we do not remove</b> them <b>from her</b> possession, as this is merely a penalty and she obtained nothing that did not legally belong to her. The <i>tanna</i> therefore <b>teaches us</b> that the court requires her to return even these items.

### Part 6
§ The mishna taught that <b>the child</b> of either of the men is <b>a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> To clarify this issue, the Gemara cites a different discussion. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Terumot</i> 2:2): <b>One may not separate</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>from ritually impure</b> produce in order <b>to</b> exempt <b>ritually pure</b> food, <b>and if he separated</b> <i>teruma</i> from impure food <b>unwittingly, his <i>teruma</i> is</b> considered <b><i>teruma</i>.</b> If he acted <b>intentionally, he has done nothing,</b> that is, his action is of no effect. The Sages debated: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the expression: <b>He has done nothing? Rav Ḥisda said: He has done nothing at all,</b> meaning <b>that even that <i>griva</i></b> of produce he set aside as <i>teruma</i> <b>returns to</b> its former <b>untithed</b> state, as his entire act is completely disregarded.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Natan, son of Rabbi Oshaya, said: He has done nothing</b> with regard to <b>preparing the remaining</b> produce from which he separated <i>teruma</i>, <b>but</b> the fruit he separated <b>is</b> itself <b><i>teruma</i>.</b> Although the portion he set aside is sanctified as <i>teruma</i>, this does not exempt him from separating more <i>teruma</i> from ritually pure produce. The Gemara clarifies the two opinions: <b>Rav Ḥisda did not say</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Natan, son of Rabbi Oshaya, as, if you say it is <i>teruma</i>, on occasion</b> he <b>will be negligent and not separate</b> anything more, assuming that if the portion he set aside has the status of <i>teruma</i> he must certainly have done everything required.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: In <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Terumot</i> 3:1): With regard to <b>one who separates</b> <i>teruma</i> from <b>a serpent melon [<i>kishut</i>] and it was discovered</b> to be <b>bitter,</b> or from <b>a watermelon and it was discovered</b> to be <b>spoiled,</b> it is <b><i>teruma</i>, and</b> yet he must <b>go back and separate</b> <i>teruma</i> from another serpent melon or watermelon. No concern is expressed in this mishna that one might neglect to set aside <i>teruma</i> a second time. The Gemara answers: <b>Are you raising a contradiction</b> between the case of <b>an unwitting</b> sinner and that <b>of an intentional</b> sinner? There is a difference between them, as one who was <b>unwitting did not commit a transgression</b> and consequently does not deserve to be penalized, whereas one who was <b>an intentional</b> sinner <b>did commit a transgression.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> between this ruling involving <b>an unwitting</b> sinner and another <i>halakha</i> <b>of an unwitting</b> sinner: <b>Here, it is taught</b> that if the one who separated ritually impure produce instead of ritually pure produce was <b>unwitting, his <i>teruma</i> is <i>teruma</i>,</b> which indicates that he does not have to separate <i>teruma</i> again. However, <b>there,</b> with regard to rotten fruit, <b>it is taught</b> that it is <b><i>teruma</i> and</b> yet he must <b>separate</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>again.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara explains: <b>There,</b> his was <b>an unwitting</b> act that is <b>close to an intentional</b> one, <b>as he should have tasted it</b> first to ensure that he was separating quality fruit. His failure to do so renders him virtually a willful sinner, and therefore the Sages penalized him by obligating him to set aside <i>teruma</i> again. In the case of impure <i>teruma</i>, in contrast, he may not have been able to investigate the matter when he separated the portion.

### Part 11
<b>And</b> the Gemara also <b>raises a contradiction</b> between one case involving <b>an intentional</b> sinner and another case <b>of an intentional</b> sinner. <b>Here, it</b> is <b>taught</b> that in the case of <b>an intentional</b> sinner who separates <i>teruma</i>, <b>he has done nothing. There, we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 5:10), that with regard to <b>one who separates</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>from</b> produce growing in a vessel <b>that is not perforated, for</b> produce that grew in <b>a perforated</b> vessel, which is considered connected to the ground, it is <b><i>teruma</i>, but he must go back and separate</b> <i>teruma</i> a second time. This ruling is based on the principle that anything that grew in a pot without a hole does not require separation of <i>teruma</i> by Torah law. In this case, the fact that he must again set aside <i>teruma</i> does not mean that the portion he separated is not consecrated at all.

### Part 12
The Gemara answers: <b>In</b> a case involving <b>two vessels he will listen.</b> Since the difference between the two vessels is clear to the eye, if the owner is told he must separate <i>teruma</i> again, it can be assumed that he will comply. In contrast, <b>in</b> the case of <b>one vessel he will not listen,</b> as ritually impure and pure produce look the same to him. Consequently, if he is informed that he must set aside <i>teruma</i> a second time despite the fact that the produce he already set aside has the status of <i>teruma</i>, he will take no notice.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks another question: <b>And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Natan, son of Rabbi Oshaya, who said</b> that <b>he has done nothing</b> with regard to <b>preparing the remaining</b> produce <b>but it is</b> nevertheless <b><i>teruma</i>,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC