
### Part 1
<b>Apparently his master does not acquire his</b> body and thereby effect a change in his personal status; rather, he remains a Jew in every sense. <b>Here too,</b> then, with regard to the Paschal lamb, <b>his master does not acquire his</b> body as a slave, and so he is obviously obligated in the mitzva of the Paschal lamb. <b>Rather,</b> the phrase is superfluous and was written only <b>to be available</b> to teach a different matter.

### Part 2
The Gemara poses a question: <b>And</b> yet there is <b>still</b> a difficulty: The verbal analogy <b>is available from</b> only <b>one side,</b> as only the phrase with regard to the Paschal lamb is superfluous in its context, <b>and we heard Rabbi Elazar, who said</b> with regard to a verbal analogy <b>available from</b> only <b>one side</b> that <b>one</b> can <b>derive</b> from it, <b>and one</b> can also <b>refute</b> it logically if there is reason to distinguish between the two cases. Since there are grounds here for differentiating between the two <i>halakhot</i> in this case, why is the verbal analogy upheld?

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>Since</b> the phrase “a sojourner and a hired servant” is <b>not needed for its own</b> matter, there are two superfluous terms, and one may <b>cast one</b> superfluous term <b>on</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to which <b>it is learned</b> that <i>teruma</i> may not be eaten by one who is uncircumcised, <b>and</b> one may <b>cast</b> the other <b>one on</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the Paschal lamb that <b>teaches</b> this, <b>and</b> in this manner <b>it is</b> like <b>a verbal analogy</b> that is <b>available from both sides,</b> which cannot be refuted.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a question: There is a principle that there cannot be half a verbal analogy. Consequently, <b>if</b> this verbal analogy is accepted, the following <i>halakha</i> that can be derived by way of the same analogy should be accepted as well: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>the Paschal lamb,</b> one who is <b>an acute mourner,</b> i.e., whose relative died that same day and has not yet been buried, <b>is prohibited</b> from eating <b>it, so too,</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i>, an acute mourner</b> should be <b>prohibited</b> from eating <b>it,</b> but in fact this is not the case.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: The verse states: “No foreigner</b> may eat of the holy thing” (Leviticus 22:10), which indicates: A disqualification stemming from <b>foreignness I told you</b> prevents one from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>but not</b> a disqualification based on <b>acute mourning.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Say</b> that the verse comes to teach that a disqualification stemming from foreignness prevents one from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>but not</b> a disqualification based on a priest’s <b>lack of circumcision,</b> and so it should be permitted for an uncircumcised priest to partake of <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>Isn’t it written</b> with regard to both <i>teruma</i> and the Paschal lamb: <b>“A sojourner and a hired servant”?</b> From this it is derived by way of a verbal analogy that it is prohibited for an uncircumcised priest to eat <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> that led you to include an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i> and exclude an acute mourner? Perhaps just the opposite is true. The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>lack of circumcision should be included</b> and should prevent a priest from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> the <i>halakhot</i> governing an uncircumcised man are stringent in several respects, as alluded to by the following mnemonic of key words: <b>Acts; <i>karetim</i>; the</b> divine <b>word; the slave.</b> The Gemara spells out these stringencies: An uncircumcised man <b>lacks</b> the <b>act</b> of circumcision, <b>and</b> this <b>act</b> is performed <b>on his body;</b> the failure to perform circumcision is <b>punishable by <i>karet</i>;</b> circumcision <b>existed before the</b> divine <b>word</b> was spoken at Mount Sinai, as the mitzva of circumcision had already been given to Abraham; <b>and the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves precludes</b> one’s eating the Paschal lamb, as is explicitly stated in the Torah (Exodus 12:48).

### Part 7
The Gemara counters: <b>On the contrary, acute mourning should be included</b> and should prevent a priest from eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> acute mourning is also subject to several stringencies: <b>It is</b> relevant <b>at any time</b> after the death of a close relative, unlike circumcision, which is performed only once in a lifetime; <b>it applies to</b> both <b>men and women,</b> unlike circumcision, which is restricted to men; <b>and it is not in</b> the mourner’s <b>power to render himself fit</b> until after the deceased is buried, unlike an uncircumcised man, who can render himself fit at any time by undergoing circumcision. The Gemara responds: Even so, <b>these</b> arguments for including an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition <b>are</b> more <b>numerous.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rava said:</b> Even <b>without</b> the rationale that <b>these</b> arguments <b>are</b> more <b>numerous, you still could not say</b> that the verbal analogy renders it prohibited for an acute mourner to eat <i>teruma</i>. As, is it possible to say that <b>we</b> should <b>leave out the lack of circumcision</b> from the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i> even though <b>it is written</b> explicitly <b>with regard to the Paschal lamb itself, and learn</b> the <i>halakha</i> that <b>acute mourning</b> is included in the prohibition by way of a verbal analogy <b>from the Paschal lamb</b> when this <i>halakha</i> that an acute mourner is barred from bringing the Paschal lamb is never stated explicitly? <b>As</b> the prohibition against acute mourning with respect to <b>the Paschal lamb itself we learn</b> only <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> governing <b>tithes.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara raises another question: <b>If</b> the verbal analogy is valid, then the following <i>halakha</i> that can be derived by way of the same analogy should be accepted as well: <b>Just as</b> with regard to the <b>Paschal lamb, the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves prevents</b> one from eating of the offering until he ensures that all of the male members of his household have been circumcised, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, <b>the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves</b> should <b>prevent</b> one from partaking of <i>teruma</i>. However, in reality this is not the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara rejects this argument: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to the Paschal lamb: <b>“When you have circumcised him, then he shall eat from it”</b> (Exodus 12:44). The words “from it” teach that <b>the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves prevents one from eating the Paschal lamb,</b> but <b>the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves does not prevent one from</b> eating <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> if he himself is eligible to eat it.

### Part 11
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If so,</b> that the words “from it” come to exclude any other case, <b>say</b> a similar exposition with regard to the uncircumcised. As it is stated with regard to the Paschal lamb: <b>“No uncircumcised person shall eat from it”</b> (Exodus 12:48), indicating that <b>“from it,”</b> the Paschal lamb, an uncircumcised man <b>may not eat, but he may eat from <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Isn’t it written</b> with regard to both <i>teruma</i> and the Paschal lamb: <b>“A sojourner and a hired servant”?</b> From this it is derived by way of a verbal analogy that an uncircumcised priest may not partake of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>And what did you see</b> that led you to include an uncircumcised priest in the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i>, and not one whose male children and slaves have not been circumcised? The Gemara answers: <b>It stands to reason</b> that <b>one’s own lack of circumcision should be included</b> and should preclude his eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as</b> an uncircumcised man lacks an <b>act</b> that is performed <b>on his</b> own <b>body, and</b> the failure to perform circumcision <b>is punishable by <i>karet</i>.</b> The Gemara counters: <b>On the contrary, the</b> lack of <b>circumcision of one’s male</b> children <b>and slaves should be included</b> and should preclude a priest’s eating <i>teruma</i>, <b>as it is</b> relevant <b>at any time,</b> since whenever one has a male child or slave under his authority he is commanded to circumcise him.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>These</b> arguments for including one’s own circumcision in the prohibition <b>are</b> more <b>numerous. And if you wish, say:</b> Even <b>without</b> the rationale that <b>these</b> arguments <b>are</b> more <b>numerous, you still could not say</b> that the verbal analogy comes to include in the prohibition against eating <i>teruma</i> one whose male children or slaves have not been circumcised. As, <b>is there anything that his own lack of circumcision does not preclude him</b> from doing but <b>the lack of circumcision of others does preclude him</b> from doing? Rather, it must be that the verbal analogy comes to teach that the priest’s own lack of circumcision precludes his eating <i>teruma</i>, while that of his male children and slaves does not.

### Part 14
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Now that you have said</b> that the phrase <b>“from it”</b> used in this context <b>comes for an exposition</b> and serves to exclude other cases, with regard to the phrase “from it” in the verse <b>“No stranger shall eat from it”</b> (Exodus 12:43), <b>why do I</b> need it? The Gemara answers: This, too, teaches that it is only <b>from it,</b> eating the Paschal lamb,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC