### Part 1
<b>Forbidden crossbred livestock, an animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months</b> [<b><i>tereifa</i></b>], an animal <b>delivered through the abdominal wall,</b> and an animal that is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite do not become sacred and do not render</b> another animal <b>sacred</b> in their place.

### Part 2
<b>And Shmuel said: They do not become sacred by way of substitution,</b> i.e., if one had an animal that had been designated as an offering, and he wished to substitute one of these animals for it, the substituted animal does not become sacred. <b>And they</b> themselves <b>do not render</b> another animal <b>sacred when it is made a substitute</b> for them. If one designated one of these animals as an offering and he wished to substitute another animal for it, it does not become sacred. The Gemara concludes: <b>Learn from this</b> that Rabbi Eliezer does not consider a hermaphrodite to be a proper male.

### Part 3
It is taught in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If one had intercourse with <b>a hermaphrodite,</b> one <b>is liable to</b> be punished with <b>stoning on his account as if</b> one had relations with <b>a male. It is taught</b> on this matter in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: When I went to learn Torah from Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua, his students joined</b> together <b>against me like the roosters of Beit Bukya,</b> highly aggressive animals that do not allow other creatures to remain among them, <b>and they did not let me learn</b> there. Therefore, I managed to learn <b>only one thing in our mishna,</b> which is that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If one had intercourse with <b>a hermaphrodite,</b> one <b>is liable to</b> be punished with <b>stoning on his account as if</b> one had relations with <b>a male.</b>

### Part 4
end of chapter

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>There are</b> women <b>who are permitted to their husbands and forbidden to their <i>yevamin</i>,</b> while others <b>are permitted to their <i>yevamin</i> and forbidden to their husbands.</b> Certain women <b>are permitted</b> both <b>to these and to those, and</b> others <b>are forbidden to</b> both <b>these and to those.</b>

### Part 6
The mishna elaborates: <b>And these are</b> cases of women who are <b>permitted to their husbands and forbidden to their <i>yevamin</i>:</b> In the case of <b>a common priest who married a widow, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is</b> the <b>High Priest,</b> the widow, who was permitted to her husband, is forbidden to her <i>yavam</i>, as it is prohibited for the High Priest to marry a widow. The same is true in the case of <b>a priest disqualified due to flawed lineage</b> [<b><i>ḥalal</i></b>], e.g., the son of a priest and a divorcée, <b>who married</b> a woman <b>fit</b> to marry a priest, <b>and he has a brother</b> who <b>is</b> a priest <b>fit</b> for service. That woman was permitted to marry the <i>ḥalal</i> but is forbidden to his brother. Having engaged in intercourse with the <i>ḥalal</i>, she is rendered a <i>ḥalala</i>, a woman disqualified from marrying a priest.

### Part 7
Another example is the case of <b>an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage <b>who married an Israelite woman</b> of similar lineage, <b>and he has a brother</b> who is <b>a son born from an incestuous or adulterous relationship [<i>mamzer</i>];</b> or <b>a <i>mamzer</i> who married a daughter born from an incestuous or adulterous relationship [<i>mamzeret</i>], and he has a brother</b> who <b>is an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage. A <i>mamzer</i> is permitted to marry a <i>mamzeret</i>, but neither is permitted to a Jew of unflawed lineage. In each of these cases, these women <b>are permitted to their husbands and forbidden to their <i>yevamin</i>.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And these</b> are cases of women who <b>are permitted to their <i>yevamin</i> and forbidden to their husbands:</b> For example, there is the case of <b>a High Priest who betrothed a widow, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is a common priest,</b> whom she is permitted to marry. This is true only if the High Priest merely betrothed her. However, if he consummated the marriage, he rendered her a <i>ḥalala</i> forbidden to all priests, including her <i>yavam</i>. The additional cases are a priest <b>fit</b> for service <b>who married a <i>ḥalala</i> and he has a brother</b> who <b>is a <i>ḥalal</i>; an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage <b>who married a <i>mamzeret</i>, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>;</b> and <b>a <i>mamzer</i> who married an Israelite woman</b> of unflawed lineage, <b>and he has a brother</b> who <b>is,</b> similarly, <b>an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage. All of these women <b>are permitted to their <i>yevamin</i> and forbidden to their husbands.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And these</b> are cases where women <b>are forbidden</b> both <b>to these and to those: A High Priest who married a widow, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is a High Priest or a common priest;</b> a priest <b>fit</b> for service <b>who married a <i>ḥalala</i>, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is</b> a priest <b>fit</b> for service; <b>an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage <b>who married a <i>mamzeret</i>, and he has a brother</b> who <b>is</b> similarly an ordinary <b>Israelite,</b> or <b>a <i>mamzer</i> who married an Israelite woman</b> of unflawed lineage, <b>and he has a brother</b> who <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> All of these women <b>are forbidden</b> both <b>to these and to those. And all other women are permitted to their husbands and to their <i>yevamin</i>.</b>

### Part 10
With regard to <b>secondary relatives,</b> who are forbidden <b>by rabbinic law,</b> if the woman is <b>a secondary relative to the husband but not a secondary relative to the <i>yavam</i>,</b> she <b>is forbidden to the husband and permitted to the <i>yavam</i>.</b> Conversely, if she is <b>a secondary relative to the <i>yavam</i> but not a secondary relative to the husband,</b> she <b>is forbidden to the <i>yavam</i> and permitted to the husband.</b> If she is <b>a secondary relative</b> both <b>to this</b> man <b>and to that</b> man, she <b>is forbidden to this</b> one <b>and to that</b> one.

### Part 11
Furthermore, if a man marries a woman forbidden to him as a secondary relative, <b>she does not have</b> the right to receive payment for her <b>marriage contract</b> if divorced or widowed, <b>nor</b> is she entitled to payment from her husband for the <b>produce</b> of her property that he used, <b>nor</b> is she entitled to provisions for her <b>sustenance</b> from his estate, <b>nor</b> does she get back her <b>worn clothes</b> or other objects she brought with her to her marriage. <b>And</b> the lineage of <b>the offspring is unflawed, and</b> the court <b>forces him to divorce</b> her.

### Part 12
In contrast, <b>a widow</b> married <b>to a High Priest, a divorcée or a <i>yevama</i> who performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>]</b> married <b>to a common priest, a <i>mamzeret</i> or a Gibeonite woman</b> married <b>to an Israelite</b> of unflawed lineage, and <b>an Israelite woman</b> of unflawed lineage married <b>to a Gibeonite or to a <i>mamzer</i></b> all <b>have</b> the right to receive payment for their <b>marriage contract,</b> although it was prohibited for them to marry.

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> As an example of a woman who is permitted to her husband and forbidden to her <i>yavam</i>, the mishna cites the case of a widow married to a common priest whose brother was a High Priest. The Gemara asks: <b>Why does</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically teach</b> a case where the priest <b>married</b> the widow? <b>Let him teach</b> that he <b>betrothed</b> her, as even if she is widowed after betrothal she requires levirate marriage or <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 14
<b>And if you would say:</b> The <b>reason</b> that the <i>tanna</i> cited the case where they <b>were married</b> is that in this case <b>there is a positive mitzva</b> that the High Priest marry a virgin <b>and</b> also <b>a prohibition</b> to marry a widow, and therefore she is forbidden to him. <b>However,</b> if <b>he betrothed</b> her, the <b>positive mitzva</b> of levirate marriage <b>comes and overrides</b> the <b>prohibition</b> against marrying a widow. To counter this argument, the <i>tanna</i> states: <b>But</b> that cannot be the case, as <b>the entire chapter</b> discusses cases involving the <b>positive mitzva</b> of levirate marriage <b>and prohibitions,</b> and in all those cases, the <b>positive mitzva does not come and override the prohibition,</b> even in the absence of an additional positive mitzva.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: The mishna could have cited a case where the priest betrothed the widow. Instead, the mishna cites a case where the priest married a widow, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>wants to teach</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna the case of <b>a High Priest who married a widow</b> who has a brother who is a common priest. That case is <b>specifically</b> if he <b>married</b> her, <b>because he</b> thereby <b>rendered her a <i>ḥalala</i>. However,</b> if he only <b>betrothed</b> her, <b>she is permitted</b> to his brother who is a common priest, as it is permitted for him to marry a widow. Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>also taught</b> in the <b>first clause</b> the case where the priest <b>married</b> her.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>But rather than teaching</b> a case where she was married in the first clause <b>due to the latter clause</b> of the mishna, <b>let him teach</b> a case where she was betrothed in the first clause <b>due to the middle clause,</b> which speaks of <b>a High Priest who betrothed a widow, and he has a brother</b> who is <b>a common priest.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>Rather,</b> the reason the <i>tanna</i> taught the case where the priest married the widow is <b>due to</b> the <i>halakha</i> that is its <b>neighbor [<i>bat bukta</i>],</b> i.e., due to the fact <b>that</b> in the adjacent case <b>he wants to teach</b> the case of <b>a <i>ḥalal</i> who married</b> a woman <b>fit</b> to marry a priest. There, the <b>reason</b> that the woman is forbidden to his brother is specifically that the <i>ḥalal</i> <b>married</b> her, <b>as he rendered her a <i>ḥalala</i></b> by consummating the marriage. <b>However,</b> if the <i>ḥalal</i> merely <b>betrothed her, she is permitted to him. Due to that</b> reason, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the case where the priest <b>married</b> the widow.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: <b>And why does</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>specifically teach</b> the case of a common priest who married <b>a widow? Let him teach</b> that the priest married <b>a virgin.</b> Since in any case she becomes a widow upon his death, what difference is there whether she was previously a widow?