
### Part 1
<b>from truncated [<i>mimula’ei</i>] people,</b> as Rav Beivai’s family traced their lineage to the house of Eli, all of whose descendants were destined to be short-lived (see I Samuel 2:31), <b>you speak truncated [<i>mulayata</i>]</b> and unsound <b>matters.</b> When the semen passes through <b>its</b> proper <b>place, it fertilizes;</b> but if it does <b>not</b> pass through <b>its</b> proper <b>place, it does not fertilize.</b> Since he cannot father children, he is like one whose testicles have been crushed, and therefore he may not enter into the congregation.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> If a man’s member <b>had been punctured and it</b> later healed and the hole <b>closed</b> up with flesh, in <b>any</b> case <b>where,</b> if <b>he would emit semen, it would tear</b> open again, he is <b>unfit</b> to enter into the congregation; <b>but if not,</b> he is <b>fit. Rava discussed</b> this ruling and raised a question: <b>Where</b> is this perforation? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>below the corona,</b> at the end of the man’s member, why should this perforation render him unfit? <b>Even if</b> the member <b>was</b> entirely <b>severed,</b> he would <b>also</b> be fit. <b>Rather,</b> the hole is <b>in the corona itself,</b> that is, at the point where the corona meets the rest of the member. <b>It was also stated</b> explicitly that this is the case, as <b>Rav Mari bar Mar said</b> that <b>Mar Ukva said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> If a man’s member <b>had been punctured in the corona itself, and it</b> later healed and the hole <b>closed</b> up with flesh, in <b>any</b> case <b>where</b> if <b>he would emit semen it would tear</b> open again, he is <b>unfit; but if not,</b> he is <b>fit.</b>

### Part 3
With regard to this issue, <b>Rava, son of Rabba, sent</b> the following question <b>to Rav Yosef: Let our teacher teach us, what</b> should <b>we do</b> to verify whether or not the perforation was adequately closed? Rav Yosef <b>said to him: We bring warm barley bread and place it upon his anus [<i>bei pukrei</i>], and</b> owing to the heat <b>he emits semen, and we observe</b> what happens and see whether or not the perforation remains closed.

### Part 4
<b>Abaye said: Is that to say</b> that <b>everyone is</b> like <b>our Patriarch Jacob, with regard to whom it is written:</b> “Reuben, you are my firstborn, <b>my might and the first fruits of my strength”</b> (Genesis 49:3), implying <b>that</b> Jacob <b>never experienced an emission of semen in all his days,</b> so that his eldest son Reuben was conceived from his first drop of seed, i.e., “the first fruits of my strength.” The implication is that there is certainly no need for such measures in order to bring a man to ejaculate.

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Abaye said</b> that a different method is used: <b>We pass before him colorful garments</b> of a woman, and thereby bring him to arousal, so that he will experience an emission. <b>Rava said: Is that to say</b> that <b>everyone is</b> like <b>Barzilai the Gileadite,</b> traditionally known for his licentious character? Not all men are brought to excitement when they merely see such clothes. <b>Rather,</b> the Gemara rejects this proposal and states that <b>it is clear as we initially answered,</b> that we follow the former procedure even though not all men require it.

### Part 6
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a man’s member <b>was punctured,</b> he is <b>unfit</b> to enter into the congregation of Israel <b>because</b> his semen <b>is discharged gently</b> and does not fertilize; if the perforation later <b>closed</b> up with flesh, he is <b>fit, because</b> now <b>he can father</b> children. <b>And this is</b> an instance of one who is <b>unfit who returns to his</b> previous state of <b>fitness.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the word <b>this</b> come <b>to exclude?</b> The Gemara explains that it comes <b>to exclude</b> a case involving an entirely different matter, that of <b>a membrane that formed on the lung</b> of an animal <b>in the wake of a wound, which is not</b> considered <b>a</b> proper <b>membrane,</b> as it is likely to rupture. If a puncture in the lung became covered with such a membrane the animal does not regain its former kosher status.

### Part 7
With regard to this issue, <b>Rav Idi bar Avin sent</b> the following question <b>to Abaye: What</b> should <b>we do</b> to expedite the healing of such a perforation? Abaye answered: <b>We bring</b> a sharp-edged grain of <b>barley and lacerate</b> the area around the hole with it. <b>We</b> then <b>bring fat and rub it</b> on the spot, <b>and</b> afterward <b>we bring a large ant [<i>shumshena</i>] and let it bite</b> inside the hole. This leads to bleeding and the formation of a scab, which eventually heals as new flesh grows there. <b>We</b> also <b>cut off</b> the ant’s <b>head</b> so that it should remain in place until the wound is fully healed. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this procedure must be done <b>specifically</b> with a grain of <b>barley, but</b> an <b>iron</b> tool would <b>cause inflammation [<i>zareif</i> ].</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And this applies only</b> to <b>a small</b> perforation, <b>but a large one will</b> eventually <b>peel</b> off and reopen.

### Part 8
<b>Rabba bar Rav Huna said: One who passes water from two places,</b> so that he appears to have a hole or some other blemish in his member, is <b>unfit</b> to enter into the congregation of Israel, as is a man with crushed testicles. <b>Rava said:</b> With regard to these matters, the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance neither with</b> the opinion of <b>the son nor with</b> that of <b>the father. The son,</b> this refers to <b>that</b> opinion of Rabba bar Rav Huna, <b>which we</b> just <b>stated.</b> As for the ruling of <b>the father,</b> this is referring to that which <b>Rav Huna said: Women who rub against one another</b> motivated by sexual desire <b>are unfit to</b> marry into <b>the priesthood,</b> as such conduct renders a woman a <i>zona</i>, whom a priest is prohibited from marrying. It was about this that Rava said that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with Rav Huna’s opinion.

### Part 9
<b>And even according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, who said that an unmarried man who has intercourse with an unmarried woman not for the sake of marriage renders her a <i>zona</i>,</b> a woman who has had sexual relations with a man forbidden to her by the Torah, <b>this applies only to</b> intercourse with <b>a man, but</b> lewd behavior with another <b>woman is mere licentiousness</b> that does not render her a <i>zona</i>, and therefore she is still permitted to marry into the priesthood.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A man with crushed testicles</b> or with other wounds to his genitals <b>and one whose penis has been severed are permitted</b> to marry a female <b>convert or an emancipated</b> maidservant, <b>and they are prohibited only from entering into the congregation</b> and marrying a woman who was born Jewish, <b>as it is stated: “A man wounded with crushed testicles or a severed penis shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:2).

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>They raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> governing <b>a priest with crushed testicles with respect to</b> a female <b>convert or an emancipated</b> maidservant? The Gemara clarifies the two sides of this dilemma: Does <b>he retain his</b> state of <b>sanctity</b> like any other priest <b>and is</b> therefore <b>prohibited</b> from marrying either one of these women, <b>or perhaps he does not retain his</b> state of <b>sanctity and</b> therefore <b>is permitted</b> to marry a convert, like an ordinary Israelite with crushed testicles?

### Part 12
<b>Rav Sheshet said to them: You</b> already <b>learned</b> the answer to <b>this</b> question in the following <i>baraita</i>: <b>It is permitted for an</b> ordinary <b>Israelite with crushed testicles</b> to marry <b>a Gibeonite woman. Now, if it enters your mind</b> that he <b>retains his sanctity</b> as a Jew, one should <b>apply here</b> the prohibition stated with regard to Canaanites: <b>“You shall not marry them”</b> (Deuteronomy 7:3). Apparently, then, one whose testicles have been crushed loses his former sanctity, and the same should apply to a priest.

### Part 13
<b>Rava said:</b> This is no proof, as <b>is that to say</b> that the prohibition <b>there</b> against marrying Canaanites <b>is due to sanctity or lack of sanctity?</b> Rather, the reason for the prohibition is that <b>perhaps one will father a child</b> from his Canaanite wife <b>and</b> that child <b>will</b> later <b>go</b> off and engage in <b>idolatrous worship. Now, this</b> concern <b>applies only when</b> they are still <b>gentiles,</b> but <b>when</b> they <b>convert,</b> as did the Gibeonites, they are <b>permitted to Jews. And it is the Sages who decreed</b> that Gibeonites are forbidden like <i>mamzerim</i> even after their conversion. <b>And when the Sages decreed</b> that one may not marry them, the decree was limited <b>to those who are capable of having children, but</b> with regard to <b>this one,</b> a man with crushed testicles <b>who is incapable of having children, the Sages did not issue a decree.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara raises an objection against Rava: <b>However, if that is so,</b> then with regard to <b>a <i>mamzer</i>, who is capable of having children, so too</b> one would say <b>that he is prohibited</b> from marrying a Gibeonite. <b>But didn’t we learn</b> otherwise in a mishna (<i>Kiddushin</i> 69a): <b><i>Mamzerim</i> and Gibeonites are permitted to marry one another. Rather,</b> retract this explanation and replace it with the following: <b>When the Sages decreed</b> that one may not marry a Gibeonite, they limited their decree <b>to</b> those who are <b>fit,</b> so as to prevent them from mingling with Gibeonites; but <b>with regard to</b> those who are <b>unfit</b> to enter into the congregation, <b>the Sages did not issue a decree.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rava then</b> reconsidered and <b>said</b> that what he had previously argued, that the prohibition against marrying them applies only when they are gentiles, <b>is not correct.</b> The prohibition cannot be referring to gentiles, as <b>when they are gentiles there can be no</b> valid <b>marriage with them</b> at all. It is only after <b>they have converted</b> that <b>there can be</b> valid <b>marriage with them,</b> and therefore the prohibition against entering into marriage with them applies. Nevertheless, it is permitted for a man with crushed testicles to marry a Gibeonite woman.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Yosef raised an objection</b> from the verse that states: <b>“And Solomon married the daughter of Pharaoh, king of Egypt”</b> (I Kings 3:1), which indicates that there can, in fact, be valid marriage even with gentiles. The Gemara answers: Before Solomon took Pharaoh’s daughter as his wife, <b>he converted her.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t</b> it so that <b>they did not accept converts, neither in the days of David nor in the days of Solomon?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>But isn’t the reason</b> that they did not accept converts during those periods <b>only</b> due <b>to</b> concern that the converts were not acting for the sake of Heaven but in fact desired the power of <b>the table of kings,</b> David and Solomon?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC