### Part 1
<b>this is Ḥadyab. The river of Gozan; this is Ginzak. And the cities of the Medes; this is Ḥamadan and its surroundings. And some say: This is Nihar and its surroundings.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Which are its surroundings? Shmuel said: Kerakh, Mushkhei, Ḥidkei, and Domakya</b> are the surroundings of Ḥamadan. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And all of them are for disqualification.</b> In other words, if someone from one of these places wishes to convert, there is concern that he might be a descendant of a Jew and therefore a <i>mamzer</i>. Consequently, they all are disqualified.

### Part 2
Rav Yehuda continued his recounting: <b>When I said this</b> <i>halakha</i>, that there is a concern about the betrothal of gentiles nowadays, <b>before Shmuel, he said to me:</b> One need not worry about this, as <b>your son from a Jewish woman is called your son,</b> i.e., he inherits his lineage from you, <b>and your son from a gentile woman is not called your son,</b> but <b>rather her son.</b> Consequently, all children born to Jews from gentile women are not considered Jews, as their lineage is determined by their gentile mothers.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>Aren’t there</b> Jewish <b>girls</b> who were captured by gentiles, whose children are considered to be Jews? <b>And Ravina said: Learn from this</b> that <b>the son of your daughter from a gentile is called your son.</b> If so, the descendants of Jewish women captured by gentiles would indeed be Jews. The Gemara answers: This is no concern, as it <b>is learned</b> as a tradition <b>that the girls</b> from the ten tribes <b>of that generation became barren</b> and did not give birth to any offspring, whereas some of the exiled men of the ten tribes married gentile women. Consequently, all of the children born there were gentiles.

### Part 4
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that Rav Yehuda actually related the following: <b>When I said this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>before Shmuel, he said to me: They did not move from there,</b> the place where they deliberated on this matter, <b>until they rendered</b> all of <b>them,</b> including those who intermingled with the ten tribes in different locations, <b>full-fledged gentiles.</b> Consequently, there is no concern that their betrothals might be of any effect, <b>as it is stated: “They have dealt treacherously against the Lord, for they have begotten strange children”</b> (Hosea 5:7).

### Part 5
§ The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Yosef sat behind Rav Kahana, and Rav Kahana sat before Rav Yehuda, and he sat and he said</b> this tradition: <b>In the future, the Jews will establish a Festival day when Tarmod is destroyed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But it has</b> already <b>been destroyed.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> place that was destroyed <b>was Tamud,</b> not Tarmod. <b>Rav Ashi said: Tarmod is</b> the same as <b>Tamud.</b> However, the city <b>is doubled.</b> In other words, when it <b>is destroyed from this side it is settled on that side, and</b> when it <b>is destroyed from that side it is settled on this side.</b> Consequently, it has not yet been entirely destroyed.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Hamnuna sat before Ulla and was engaged in</b> the study of <b><i>halakha</i>.</b> Ulla <b>said</b> about him: <b>What a man; what a man.</b> In other words: What a great man this Rav Hamnuna is. <b>If only Harpanya were not his city,</b> as the inhabitants of that place are all of flawed lineage, which indicates that the lineage of Rav Hamnuna is likewise impaired. Rav Hamnuna <b>was ashamed.</b> Ulla <b>said to him: Where do you give the money for</b> payment of the <b>poll</b> tax? <b>He said to him:</b> I pay it <b>to</b> the city of <b>Pum Nahara,</b> as my city is subject to taxation by that city. <b>He said to him: If so, you are from Pum Nahara,</b> not Harpanya, and your lineage is evidently not flawed.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of the name <b>Harpanya? Rabbi Zeira said:</b> It means <b>the mountain to which all turn [<i>har shehakol ponin bo</i>].</b> In other words, it is the destination for all those who could not find wives anywhere else, as most of its population is of flawed lineage. <b>It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: All those who do not know their family or tribe turn there. Rava said: This</b> type of flaw is appalling and <b>is deeper than the netherworld, as is stated: “Shall I ransom them from the power of the netherworld? Shall I redeem them from death?”</b> (Hosea 13:14). This verse indicates that it is possible to be ransomed and released from the netherworld, <b>whereas their disqualification cannot be rectified.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: <b>Those</b> who are <b>disqualified from Harpanya</b> are unfit <b>due to the disqualification</b> of the inhabitants <b>of</b> nearby <b>Meishon,</b> who were unfit and intermarried with the residents of Harpanya. <b>Those disqualified from Meishon</b> are unfit <b>due to those disqualified from Tarmod, and those disqualified from Tarmod</b> are disqualified <b>due to the servants of Solomon.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara comments: <b>And this</b> explains the folk saying <b>that people say</b> in this regard: <b>A large ephah and a small ephah,</b> which are both inaccurate utensils that may not be used for measuring, <b>roll onward to the netherworld, and from the netherworld to Tarmod, and from Tarmod to Meishon, and from Meishon to Harpanya.</b> The same idea expressed by the Sages with regard to the disqualification of lineage was also incorporated into a well-known adage among commoners.

### Part 10
end of chapter

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Each of the women enumerated in the first chapter causes exemption from levirate marriage and <i>ḥalitza</i> for her rival wives. This is due to the close family relationship she has with her brother-in-law, making her forbidden to him. The single exception is the case explained in this mishna. <b>What</b> is the case of <b>the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist?</b> For example: If there were <b>two brothers, and one of them died</b> childless, <b>and</b> subsequently <b>a brother of theirs was born, after which the second brother,</b> the elder, <b>took his</b> deceased <b>brother’s wife in levirate marriage, and</b> then <b>died</b> as well. Consequently, two women require levirate marriage: The widow of the first brother who had been taken in levirate marriage by the second brother, and the widow of the second brother, the first widow’s rival wife. <b>The first</b> widow, who had been the wife of the first brother to die, <b>goes out</b> without any obligation to be taken in levirate marriage by the youngest brother who was born later, <b>since</b> she is <b>the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist.</b> The first deceased brother never lived at the same time as the newly born brother. <b>The second</b> widow, who had been married to the second brother, is exempt <b>due to her rival wife.</b>

### Part 12
The mishna discusses an additional situation: If the second brother had <b>performed</b> only <b>levirate betrothal with her,</b> meaning that he had not yet consummated the marriage, <b>and</b> then <b>died,</b> both the wife betrothed by a levirate betrothal to the second brother and the wife of the second brother fall before the youngest brother born after the death of the first brother. In that case, the first wife certainly goes out and is exempt from both <i>ḥalitza</i> and levirate marriage, since she is to him the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist. <b>The second,</b> however, was never effectively the rival wife of the first brother’s wife, as the first brother’s wife had only been betrothed by levirate betrothal and was not fully married to the second brother. Therefore, <b>she performs <i>ḥalitza</i> and may not enter into levirate marriage.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Naḥman said: He who taught</b> the version of the mishna which reads: <b>The first</b> widow goes out, <b>is not mistaken</b> in his version, and <b>he who taught</b> a variant version of the mishna which reads: <b>The second</b> widow goes out, <b>is not mistaken</b> either, since it is possible to understand the mishna both ways. Both versions of the text can refer to the same woman, i.e., the wife of the first brother, by different titles. The Gemara explains that <b>he who taught:</b>