
### Part 1
<b>From this</b> point <b>forward,</b> insertion of anything less than the corona <b>is only</b> considered <b>a kiss, for which he is exempt. And</b> this statement <b>disagrees with</b> that of <b>Shmuel,</b> who maintains that one is liable to receive punishment for external contact of the sexual organs.

### Part 2
§ It was taught in the mishna that <b>both one who</b> merely <b>engages in the initial stage of intercourse and one who completes</b> the act of intercourse <b>have</b> thereby <b>acquired</b> the <i>yevama</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does it mean that he has <b>acquired</b> his <i>yevama</i>? <b>Rav said:</b> He has <b>acquired</b> her <b>for everything.</b> In other words, she is considered his wife in all regards. Therefore, if he is a priest, she may partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And Shmuel said he has only acquired her with regard to the matters stated in the chapter</b> of levirate marriage, i.e., <b>to inherit his brother’s property and to exempt her from levirate marriage</b> if he then dies and leaves behind children from another wife.

### Part 3
The Gemara adds: If she was a <i>yevama</i> <b>from marriage, everyone agrees</b> that she may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> after the initial stage of intercourse, <b>as she was</b> already <b>partaking at the outset,</b> when she was married to the deceased brother. Therefore, even a minimal act of intercourse is enough to allow her to continue to partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>When they disagree</b> it <b>is</b> with regard to a <i>yevama</i> <b>from betrothal. Rav said:</b> She <b>may partake, as the Merciful One includes unwitting intercourse</b> and the other forms of intercourse listed in the mishna, and considers them <b>like intentional</b> intercourse.

### Part 4
<b>And Shmuel said: When the Merciful One includes</b> these forms of intercourse, He does so only <b>to establish</b> the <i>yavam</i> <b>in place of</b> the <b>husband,</b> but <b>to strengthen</b> him more <b>than</b> the <b>husband, no.</b> Since she was merely betrothed to the deceased brother, she was not permitted to partake of <i>teruma</i>, and therefore she may not partake of <i>teruma</i> at this point either.

### Part 5
The Gemara comments: <b>And Shmuel follows his</b> regular line of <b>reasoning,</b> as <b>Rav Naḥman said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> In <b>any</b> case <b>where the</b> woman’s marriage to her original <b>husband entitles</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, intercourse with the <b><i>yavam</i></b> in any of the manners described in the mishna also <b>entitles</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>and any</b> case <b>where</b> her relationship with her original <b>husband does not entitle</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, i.e., if she had been betrothed but not married, intercourse with the <b><i>yavam</i></b> in the manners described in the mishna also <b>does not entitle</b> her <b>to partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a</b> mentally <b>competent daughter of an Israelite who was betrothed to a competent priest, and he did not have a chance to marry her before he became a deaf-mute</b> and was no longer mentally competent, <b>she may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, as marriage to a deaf-mute does not enable a woman to partake of <i>teruma</i>. If the deaf-mute husband subsequently <b>died and</b> the <i>yevama</i> <b>happened before a deaf-mute <i>yavam</i></b> for levirate marriage, <b>she</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And in this</b> regard <b>the strength of the <i>yavam</i> is greater than the strength of the husband.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Granted, according Rav,</b> this <b>works out well,</b> as intercourse with the deaf-mute <i>yavam</i>, which is comparable to the unwitting intercourse mentioned in the mishna because the deaf-mute is not mentally competent, effects the levirate marriage and allows her to partake of <i>teruma</i> despite the fact that she could not do so during the lifetime of her first husband. <b>However, according to Shmuel,</b> this is <b>difficult,</b> as he maintains that a <i>yavam</i> cannot have more rights than the deceased husband due to intercourse undertaken without intent to perform levirate marriage.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: <b>Shmuel</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> Amend the <i>baraita</i> and <b>say as follows:</b> If <b>he did not have a chance to marry her before he became a deaf-mute, she may not partake of <i>teruma</i>.</b> If <b>he married her and afterward became a deaf-mute, she</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. If he then <b>died, and</b> she <b>happened before a deaf-mute <i>yavam</i></b> for levirate marriage, <b>she</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 9
<b>And what</b> is the meaning of the phrase: <b>In this</b> regard the strength of the <i>yavam</i> is greater than the strength of the husband? It means to say <b>that if</b> the original <b>husband</b> was a <b>deaf-mute from the outset,</b> i.e., before consummating the marriage, <b>she would not</b> have been allowed to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>whereas if the <i>yavam</i></b> was a <b>deaf-mute from the outset</b> she may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> once they perform levirate marriage, because she had been fully married to the deceased brother.

### Part 10
<b>And some say</b> a different version of the dispute between Rav and Shmuel: If she was a <i>yevama</i> <b>from betrothal,</b> i.e., her marriage with the deceased brother had never been completed, and she and the brother-in-law engaged in an inferior form of intercourse as described in the mishna, <b>everyone agrees</b> that she may <b>not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>as she did not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>in her husband’s lifetime.</b>

### Part 11
<b>When they disagree,</b> it is with regard to a <i>yevama</i> <b>from marriage. Rav says: She</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>as she was</b> permitted to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>initially,</b> while married to the deceased brother. <b>And Shmuel says</b> she <b>may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, because <b>when the Merciful One includes unwitting intercourse</b> and considers it <b>like intentional</b> intercourse, it was only with regard to <b>the matters stated in the chapter</b> of levirate marriage, <b>but for every</b> other <b>issue, no.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Didn’t Rav Naḥman say</b> that <b>Shmuel</b> himself <b>said:</b> In <b>any</b> case <b>where the</b> woman’s marriage to her original <b>husband entitles</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, intercourse with the <b><i>yavam</i></b> in one of the manners listed in the mishna also <b>entitles</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>? The Gemara answers: Emend the wording and <b>say</b> as follows: With regard to <b>any</b> act of <b>intercourse through which the husband entitles</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>a <i>yavam</i></b> also <b>entitles</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>; <b>and</b> with regard to <b>any</b> act of <b>intercourse through which the husband does not entitle</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>a <i>yavam</i></b> also <b>does not entitle</b> her to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. Just as betrothal cannot be performed via an unwitting act of intercourse, this act does not entitle a <i>yevama</i> to partake of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 13
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from the following <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a</b> mentally <b>competent daughter of an Israelite who was betrothed to a competent priest, and he did not have a chance to marry her before he became a deaf-mute</b> and was no longer mentally competent, <b>she may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. If the deaf-mute husband subsequently <b>died, and</b> the <i>yevama</i> <b>happened before a deaf-mute <i>yavam</i></b> for levirate marriage, <b>she</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. <b>And in this</b> regard <b>the strength of the <i>yavam</i> is greater than the strength of the husband. Granted, according to Rav, he</b> can <b>answer as</b> Shmuel <b>answered initially,</b> i.e., according to the first version of the dispute between Rav and Shmuel. <b>However, according to Shmuel,</b> it is <b>difficult.</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, it is <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 14
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> In the case of <b>a</b> mentally <b>competent daughter of an Israelite who was betrothed to a</b> mentally <b>competent priest, and he did not have a chance to marry her before he became a deaf-mute</b> and was no longer mentally competent, <b>she may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>. <b>If a son was born to her</b> from this priest, <b>she</b> may <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i> on account of her son. If <b>the son died, Rabbi Natan says she may</b> continue to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>and the Rabbis say she may not</b> continue to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of Rabbi Natan? Rabba said: Since she has</b> already <b>partaken of</b> <i>teruma</i> in a permitted manner, she may continue. <b>Abaye said to him: However, if</b> that is <b>so,</b> in the case of the <b>daughter of an Israelite who was married to a priest, and he died</b> childless, she <b>should</b> be allowed to <b>partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>as she has</b> already <b>partaken of</b> it in the past. <b>Rather,</b> it must be that <b>since he has passed away, his</b> priestly <b>sanctity has left her,</b> and she is considered a regular Israelite in all regards. <b>Here too, since</b> the son <b>has passed away, his</b> priestly <b>sanctity has left her,</b> and therefore she should not be entitled to partake of <i>teruma</i>. Rabba’s explanation should consequently be rejected.

### Part 16
<b>Rather, Rav Yosef said: Rabbi Natan holds</b> that <b>the marriage of a deaf-mute</b> who was competent when he betrothed his wife <b>entitles her to partake of <i>teruma</i>, and we do not</b> issue a <b>decree</b> against the wife partaking of <i>teruma</i> through <b>marriage</b> to <b>a deaf-mute due to</b> the case of <b>betrothal</b> to <b>a deaf-mute.</b> Although the betrothal of a deaf-mute does not take effect, his consummation of a marriage does take effect and entitles his wife to partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>Abaye said to him: If so, why do I</b> need the <i>baraita</i> to specify that <b>a son was born to her?</b> She should be entitled to eat <i>teruma</i> even if she did not have a son. Rav Yosef responded: That case is mentioned <b>due to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who hold that she is entitled to partake of <i>teruma</i> only if she has a child.

### Part 17
Abaye asks further: <b>And let Rabbi Natan disagree with them in the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> as well. Rav Yosef responds: Rabbi Natan <b>left the Rabbis until they finished their statement, and then disagreed with them</b> with regard to their entire statement. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, let</b> the <i>baraita</i> first <b>teach</b> that if <b>the son died</b> she <b>may not partake</b> of <i>teruma</i>, and subsequently state: <b>Rabbi Natan said</b> she <b>may eat.</b> Why is Rabbi Natan’s opinion mentioned before the Rabbis finished stating their opinion? The Gemara concludes: Indeed, this <b>is difficult</b> according to Rav Yosef.

### Part 18
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>And so too, one who had intercourse with any one of those with whom relations are forbidden</b> by <b>the Torah</b> in any form is liable to receive punishment. <b>Rav Amram said: This matter was said</b> to us by <b>Rav Sheshet,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC