
### Part 1
The above principles apply <b>both</b> in cases of <b>one <i>yevama</i> to one <i>yavam</i>, as well as</b> in cases of <b>two <i>yevamot</i> to one <i>yavam</i>. How so?</b> If <b>he performed levirate betrothal with this</b> <i>yevama</i> <b>and levirate betrothal with that</b> one, i.e., her rival wife, <b>they require two bills of divorce,</b> each for her own levirate betrothal, <b>and <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one of them, to release them both from the levirate bond. If he performed <b>levirate betrothal with this</b> one <b>and</b> gave <b>a bill of divorce to that</b> one, the first woman <b>requires a bill of divorce</b> to cancel the levirate betrothal, <b>and</b> one of them must receive <b><i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> If he performed <b>levirate betrothal with this</b> one <b>and engaged in intercourse with that</b> one, <b>they require two bills of divorce and</b> he must perform <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one of them. If the <i>yavam</i> performed <b>levirate betrothal with this</b> one <b>and performed <i>ḥalitza</i> with that</b> one, <b>the first</b> woman <b>requires a bill of divorce.</b>

### Part 2
If the <i>yavam</i> gave <b>a bill of divorce to this</b> <i>yevama</i> <b>and a bill of divorce to that</b> one, <b>they require <i>ḥalitza</i> from him.</b> If he gave <b>a bill of divorce to this</b> one <b>and engaged in intercourse with that</b> one, the latter <b>requires a bill of divorce and <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> If he gave <b>a bill of divorce to this</b> one <b>and</b> performed <b>levirate betrothal with that</b> one, the latter <b>requires a bill of divorce and</b> he must perform <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one of them. If the <i>yavam</i> gave <b>a bill of divorce to this</b> woman <b>and performed <i>ḥalitza</i> with that</b> one, <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> and he cannot betroth the rival wife.

### Part 3
If <b>he performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one <i>yevama</i> <b>and</b> then <b>performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with a second <i>yevama</i>, <b>or he performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one <i>yevama</i> <b>and</b> then proceeded to either <b>perform levirate betrothal, give a bill of divorce, or engage in intercourse</b> with a second; <b>alternatively, he engaged in intercourse</b> with one <i>yevama</i> and <b>engaged in intercourse</b> with the second <i>yevama</i>, <b>or he engaged in intercourse</b> with one <i>yevama</i> <b>and</b> proceeded to either <b>perform levirate betrothal, give a bill of divorce, or perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with the second, <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i></b> or intercourse. These <i>halakhot</i> apply <b>both</b> in cases of <b>one <i>yavam</i> to two <i>yevamot</i>, as well as two <i>yevamin</i> to one <i>yevama</i>.</b>

### Part 4
If <b>he performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one <i>yevama</i> <b>and</b> then proceeded to either <b>perform levirate betrothal, give a bill of divorce, or engage in intercourse</b> with a second <i>yevama</i>; <b>alternatively, he engaged in intercourse</b> with one <i>yevama</i> <b>and</b> then proceeded to <b>perform levirate betrothal, or give a bill of divorce, or perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with a second <i>yevama</i>, <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i>, whether</b> the <i>ḥalitza</i> took place <b>at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end.</b> All of these <i>halakhot</i> accord with the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, who maintains betrothal does not take effect on a woman who is forbidden due to the prohibition against betrothing a <i>yevama</i> after <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 5
<b>But</b> with regard to <b>intercourse, when it is at the beginning,</b> i.e., the first act the <i>yavam</i> performed with his <i>yevama</i>, <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after it</b> and any subsequent action is void. However, if it was performed <b>in the middle, and</b> similarly if it was performed <b>at the end,</b> i.e., after some other action that impairs the validity of his intercourse, <b>something is</b> effective <b>after it. Rabbi Neḥemya says: Both</b> with regard to <b>intercourse and <i>ḥalitza</i>, whether</b> performed <b>at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end, nothing is</b> effective <b>after it.</b> If the <i>yavam</i> performed a valid action according to Torah law, any subsequent action is of no consequence according to <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Rabban Gamliel and the Rabbis <b>disagree only with regard to</b> the efficacy of <b>a bill of divorce</b> performed <b>after a bill of divorce and levirate betrothal</b> performed <b>after levirate betrothal, but one bill of divorce</b> given <b>to a</b> single <b><i>yevama</i>, or one levirate betrothal</b> performed <b>with a</b> single <b><i>yevama</i>, is effective.</b> The bill of divorce prevents him from performing levirate marriage, and the levirate betrothal requires a bill of divorce to cancel it, in addition to <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 7
The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the reason that the Sages said</b> that <b>a bill of divorce is effective for a <i>yevama</i>,</b> despite the fact that she is not his wife? This is <b>because it is effective in general</b> in cases of married women. <b>For if you say</b> that <b>it is not effective</b> in the case of a <i>yevama</i>, there are some who might mistakenly <b>say</b> the following: <b>A bill of divorce</b> is given to a woman in order <b>to remove her</b> from her husband, <b>and <i>ḥalitza</i></b> likewise serves <b>to remove her</b> from the <i>yavam</i>; <b>since a bill of divorce is ineffective</b> for this <i>yevama</i>, <b><i>ḥalitza</i> is also ineffective</b> and does not sever their relationship completely. <b>And</b> perhaps the <i>yavam</i> <b>will come to engage in intercourse after <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> which is forbidden by the Torah prohibition derived from the verse: “So shall it be done to the man who does not build his brother’s house” (Deuteronomy 25:9).

### Part 8
<b>And what is the reason the Sages said</b> that <b>levirate betrothal is effective for a <i>yevama</i>? Because it is effective in general,</b> as levirate betrothal is essentially an act of betrothal. <b>For if you say</b> that <b>it is not effective,</b> there are some who might mistakenly <b>say: Levirate betrothal serves to acquire</b> a woman <b>and intercourse</b> serves <b>to acquire</b> a woman in general, as women can be betrothed by intercourse; <b>since levirate betrothal is ineffective</b> in the case of a <i>yevama</i>, <b>intercourse is also ineffective,</b> i.e., it does not acquire a <i>yevama</i> completely. <b>And</b> he will therefore <b>come to engage in intercourse</b> with a rival wife <b>after intercourse</b> with the first <i>yevama</i>.

### Part 9
<b>And what is the reason the Sages</b> who disagree with Rabbi Neḥemya <b>said</b> that <b>invalid intercourse,</b> i.e., intercourse that follows any disqualifying action with the rival wife of a <i>yevama</i>, does not fully acquire the <i>yevama</i>, such that <b>something is</b> effective <b>after it?</b> In this case the invalid intercourse does not cancel the levirate bond, and therefore further action with the <i>yevama</i> is effective.

### Part 10
The Sages <b>say: If this is intercourse</b> performed <b>after a bill of divorce,</b> then it is considered invalid due to <b>a</b> rabbinic <b>decree</b> with regard to <b>intercourse after a bill of divorce because</b> of its potential confusion with a case of <b>intercourse after <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The Sages established that invalid intercourse of this kind should not cancel the levirate bond completely, for if it did, then people might come to engage in intercourse after <i>ḥalitza</i>, which would violate a Torah prohibition. <b>And if this is intercourse</b> performed <b>after levirate betrothal,</b> then it is considered invalid due to <b>a</b> rabbinic <b>decree</b> with regard to <b>intercourse after levirate betrothal because</b> of its potential confusion with a case of <b>intercourse</b> with the second <i>yevama</i> <b>after intercourse</b> with the first. If intercourse after levirate betrothal is effective, people might come to engage in intercourse with a second <i>yevama</i> after intercourse with a first, and this is forbidden as the woman is considered his brother’s wife who is not eligible for levirate marriage.

### Part 11
<b>And what is the reason the Sages said</b> with regard to <b>this invalid <i>ḥalitza</i></b> that <b>nothing is</b> effective <b>after it?</b> For they <b>say: What</b> is the reason that <b>we should we issue a decree</b> in that case? <b>Should we issue a decree</b> with regard to <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> performed <b>after a bill of divorce due to</b> a concern for <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> performed <b>after <i>ḥalitza</i>?</b> In this case there is no concern, as there is no prohibition involved in repeating <i>ḥalitza</i>. In <b>any</b> situation <b>like these, let her continue performing <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> for no harm is done if <i>ḥalitza</i> is performed unnecessarily.

### Part 12
Alternatively, <b>should we issue a decree</b> stating that other actions are effective after <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> is performed <b>after levirate betrothal due to</b> the concern for confusion with the case of <b><i>ḥalitza</i></b> performed <b>after intercourse?</b> In this case there is a concern that people will assume that no bill of divorce is required after intercourse so long as the <i>yavam</i> performed <i>ḥalitza</i>. The Gemara challenges this concern: <b>Is that to say</b> that in the case of <b><i>ḥalitza</i> after levirate betrothal she does not require a bill of divorce for his levirate betrothal,</b> such that one would conclude the same for <i>ḥalitza</i> after intercourse? In the case of <i>ḥalitza</i> after levirate betrothal, the woman requires a bill of divorce, and similarly in the case of <b><i>ḥalitza</i> after intercourse she likewise requires a bill of divorce for his intercourse.</b> Thus, the same action performed following <i>ḥalitza</i> after levirate betrothal is also performed following <i>ḥalitza</i> after intercourse, and therefore there is no need to issue a further decree.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC