
### Part 1
<b>I would say</b> that the levirate bond applies as long as the <i>yevama</i> requiring levirate marriage <b>is alive but</b> that <b>after</b> her <b>death the bond was terminated.</b> In other words, after the <i>yevama</i> died any relationship between the two dissolved. <b>This comes to teach us that the bond is not terminated without cause</b> but instead requires an actual act, such as <i>ḥalitza</i> or levirate marriage. Until one of these acts is performed, the bond remains in place. <b>Let us say that it supports</b> Rav Yehuda’s opinion from that which was taught: If <b>his <i>yevama</i> dies, he is permitted to</b> marry <b>her sister.</b> From here the Gemara deduces: <b>Her sister, yes; her mother, no,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rav Yehuda.

### Part 2
The Gemara rejects this: <b>The same is true, that even her mother</b> is permitted. <b>And</b> this language was used only <b>since he taught in the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: If <b>his wife dies he is permitted to take her sister; specifically her sister but not her mother, as she is forbidden by Torah</b> law. Therefore, <b>he also taught in the latter clause</b> that <b>he is permitted to</b> marry <b>her sister.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Huna bar Ḥiyya raised an objection</b> to this from the mishna: If <b>he performed levirate betrothal with her and</b> then <b>died, the second</b> woman <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i> and may not enter into levirate marriage.</b> This implies that <b>the reason is</b> specifically <b>that he performed levirate betrothal with her. Had</b> the brother <b>not performed levirate betrothal with her, the second</b> woman <b>would also</b> be permitted to <b>enter into levirate marriage. And if you say that the</b> levirate <b>bond is substantial,</b> then she would be considered <b>a rival wife of the wife of a brother with whom</b> the third brother <b>did not coexist by that bond.</b> Since the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist is prohibited from entering into levirate marriage, her rival wife would likewise be forbidden from doing so.

### Part 4
<b>Rabba said:</b> This should not be read precisely, as <b>the same is true even if</b> the second brother <b>did not perform levirate betrothal; the second</b> woman <b>must perform <i>ḥalitza</i> but may not enter into levirate marriage,</b> as the levirate bond renders her a rival wife of the wife of a brother with whom the third brother did not coexist.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> the reason <b>that</b> it <b>teaches</b> the case of <b>levirate betrothal</b> specifically was <b>in order to exclude</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai, who said:</b> The legal status of <b>levirate betrothal</b> with a <i>yevama</i> eligible for levirate marriage <b>is</b> that of <b>a full-fledged acquisition,</b> and it is legally binding to the same degree as an actual betrothal. Therefore, even <i>ḥalitza</i> would be unnecessary, similar to the case of a rival wife of a forbidden relation. This is what <b>it comes to teach us:</b> Even if he performed levirate betrothal she is not truly considered the rival wife of a forbidden relation; the prohibition concerning her is by rabbinic law, and she is therefore required to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 6
<b>Abaye raised an objection to</b> this from that which was taught: In the case of <b>two brothers who coexisted, and one died childless and the second arose to perform levirate betrothal with his <i>yevama</i> but did not manage to perform levirate betrothal before</b> a third <b>brother was born, and</b> then the second brother, who also had a wife, <b>died,</b> whereby both women would fall before the newly born brother for levirate marriage, then <b>the first goes out</b> and is not obligated in levirate marriage <b>because</b> she is <b>the wife of his brother with whom he did not coexist, and the second</b> woman, who was the wife of the second brother, <b>either performs <i>ḥalitza</i> or enters into levirate marriage. But if you say that the</b> levirate <b>bond is substantial,</b> then the wife of the second brother <b>would be rendered a rival wife of the wife of a brother with whom he did not coexist</b> by that <b>bond.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects that: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this? It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who said: The</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Does Rabbi Meir hold that the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial?</b> After all, unattributed <i>mishnayot</i> are in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir, and <b>didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (26a): In the case of <b>four brothers, two of whom are married to two sisters,</b> if <b>those married to the sisters died,</b> whereby both sisters fall before the surviving brothers for levirate marriage, <b>then those</b> two sisters <b>must perform <i>ḥalitza</i> and may not enter into levirate marriage.</b> It would seem that the reason for this is that each of the sisters has a levirate bond to both remaining brothers.

### Part 8
<b>And if it enters your mind to say</b> that <b>Rabbi Meir held that the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial,</b> didn’t <b>these</b> two sisters <b>come from two</b> different <b>houses,</b> as each was married to a different brother? If so, <b>one</b> brother <b>should take one in levirate marriage and the other should take one in levirate marriage.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> in Rabbi Meir’s opinion <b>the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial.</b> The mishna states that they perform <i>ḥalitza</i> and do not enter into levirate marriage <b>because he held that it is prohibited to nullify the mitzva of levirate marriage.</b> That is to say, it is prohibited to act in such a way that the mitzva of levirate marriage becomes obviated. Under these circumstances there is concern that <b>perhaps as one</b> brother <b>performs levirate marriage</b> to one of the sisters <b>the other</b> brother <b>dies</b> before he manages to perform levirate marriage to the other. If that were to happen, <b>you</b> would thereby <b>nullify the mitzva of levirate marriage</b> since the sister that would now fall before the remaining brother would be his wife’s sister and therefore prohibited from entering into levirate marriage with him.

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>But if the</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial,</b> then <b>let</b> the mitzva of levirate marriage <b>be nullified.</b> That is, if the levirate bond does not carry any real obligation, then the mitzva itself never truly came into effect. <b>As Rabban Gamliel said: The</b> levirate <b>bond is not substantial, and it is permitted to nullify the mitzva of levirate marriage.</b>

### Part 11
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (109a): That mishna discusses a case of two brothers who were married to two sisters. One sister is an adult and therefore her marriage was fully effectual, and one sister is still a minor, and she was orphaned from her father, and her marriage was valid only by rabbinic ordinance. If the brother who was married to the elder sister died, then that sister falls for levirate marriage before the brother married to the minor. Under these circumstances, the Sages suggested directing the minor to refuse her marriage to her husband so that he would be able to take his brother’s wife in levirate marriage. If the minor does not do so, he would be unable to take her sister in marriage, as she would be the sister of his minor wife and thereby fully exempt from the levirate obligation. <b>Rabban Gamliel said: If</b> the minor <b>refused</b> in the meantime of her own accord, <b>then she refused, but if she did not refuse, let her wait until she reaches</b> the age of <b>maturity, and</b> then <b>that other</b> adult sister <b>will be exempt</b> from performing <i>ḥalitza</i> or levirate marriage <b>due to</b> the fact that she is his <b>wife’s sister.</b> Here it is apparent that Rabban Gamliel is not concerned about nullifying the mitzva of levirate marriage from one of them.

### Part 12
Rabba <b>said to</b> Abaye: Do you wish to <b>raise a contradiction between</b> the words of <b>Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Meir?</b> This would imply that the contradiction needs to be resolved, but statements from two different <i>tanna’im</i> do not need to agree or to be resolved. Abaye responded: <b>No,</b> in fact <b>this is what we meant to say:</b> How could one possibly say that <b>Rabbi Meir is concerned</b> lest there be nullification of the mitzva of levirate marriage <b>even when it is uncertain</b> because perhaps the first brother will not die, whereas <b>Rabban Gamliel is not concerned</b> that the mitzva be nullified <b>even when it is certain?</b> It is surprising that there should be such a great difference between the tannaitic opinions. Rabba answered: <b>Perhaps the one who is not concerned</b> about nullification of the mitzva of levirate marriage <b>is not concerned even if</b> nullification is <b>certain, and the one who is concerned is concerned even if</b> nullification <b>is uncertain.</b>

### Part 13
With regard to the actual dispute between Rav Huna and Rav Yehuda, <b>Abaye said to Rav Yosef: This</b> <i>halakha</i> stated <b>by Rav Yehuda,</b> that even if a woman waiting for levirate marriage dies her mother is still forbidden to the <i>yavam</i>, <b>is</b> from his teacher <b>Shmuel</b> and not from Rav, who was also one of his teachers. Evidence for this can be found in <b>that</b> which <b>we learned</b> in a mishna (41a):

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC