
### Part 1
If <b>one</b> of these women <b>was fit</b> to marry into the priesthood <b>and one was unfit,</b> then <b>if he performs <i>ḥalitza</i>, he should perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with the unfit</b> woman rather than with the one who is fit for the priesthood, since doing so with the woman who is fit would needlessly disqualify her from marrying into the priesthood. <b>But if he consummates the levirate marriage, he may consummate the levirate marriage with</b> the one who is <b>fit.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The simple reading of the mishna’s first clause implies that all four brothers died. The Gemara questions this: Can it <b>enter your mind</b> to say that all <b>four brothers</b> died? If they all died, then who remains to consummate the levirate marriage? <b>Rather,</b> emend the mishna and <b>say</b> instead: <b>Four</b> married men <b>of</b> a set of more than four <b>brothers</b> died.

### Part 3
The mishna continues: If the eldest of them wished to consummate the levirate marriage with all of his <i>yevamot</i>, <b>he has permission</b> to do so. The Gemara asks: <b>Do they</b> actually <b>leave him</b> to do so? <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And the Elders of his city shall call him”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:8), which indicates that <b>they,</b> the Elders, <b>and not their agent,</b> should call him. The verse continues: <b>“And they speak to him”;</b> this phrase <b>teaches that they offer him advice that is appropriate for him.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> explains: Appropriate advice means <b>that if he was a young man and she an elderly woman</b> or if <b>he was an elderly man and she a young woman, they say to him: What do you</b> want <b>with a young woman</b> when you are elderly? Or: <b>What do you</b> want <b>with an elderly woman</b> when you are young? <b>Go after your own kind,</b> i.e., a woman of a similar age, <b>and do not place discord in your household</b> that could be caused by marrying a woman of a significantly different age. From the <i>baraita</i> it is apparent that if consummating the levirate marriage will ultimately lead to contention between the couple, it is preferable to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>. Similarly, in the case of the mishna, marrying four women will likely lead to contention since it is difficult to support so many people, and poverty will lead to strife. Therefore, the <i>yavam</i> should not be allowed to consummate levirate marriages with all of them.

### Part 5
The Gemara qualifies the mishna’s case: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to teach that he has permission to consummate the levirate marriage with all of his <i>yevamot</i> in the case <b>where it is possible for him</b> to provide for all four women. The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then the same should be true <b>even</b> if there are <b>many</b> more women <b>as well;</b> why does the mishna specifically discuss a case of four women? The Gemara explains: The mishna <b>teaches us good advice;</b> in a case of up to <b>four</b> women, <b>yes,</b> if he can provide for them then it is acceptable to marry all of them. But if there are any <b>more</b> than that, <b>no,</b> he should not, <b>in order that he will</b> be able to <b>meet the conjugal rights</b> of each woman at least once <b>in</b> each <b>month.</b> A Torah scholar is expected to provide conjugal relations once a week. If he marries no more than four women, then that will ensure that each of his wives will receive their conjugal rights at least once a month.

### Part 6
§ The mishna states: In the case of <b>one who was married</b> to two women and died childless, the intercourse or <i>ḥalitza</i> of either one of them with the <i>yavam</i> releases her rival wife from the levirate bond. The Gemara questions why the mishna considers only the possibility that he would do so with only one of the women: <b>But let him</b> instead <b>consummate levirate marriages with both of them. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: The verse states</b> that a <i>yavam</i> who performs <i>ḥalitza</i> is referred to as: “The man <b>who does not build his brother’s house”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:9). The fact that the word “house” appears in the singular indicates that even had he instead chosen to consummate a levirate marriage, only <b>one house may he build,</b> by consummating a levirate marriage with one of his brother’s wives, <b>but he may not build two houses.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests: <b>But let him perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with both of them;</b> why does the mishna state that he does so with only one woman? <b>Mar Zutra bar Toviya said: The verse states</b> that following the <i>ḥalitza</i> the man is called: <b>“The house of him who had his shoe removed”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:10). The fact that the word “house” appears in the singular indicates that <b>he performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with</b> only <b>one house,</b> i.e., only one of his brother’s wives, <b>and he does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with two houses.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>But let him consummate the levirate marriage with one and perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with the other.</b> The Gemara explains that <b>the verse states: “If</b> the man <b>does not wish</b> to take his <i>yevama</i>” (Deuteronomy 25:7), which implies that with regard to anyone who performs <i>ḥalitza</i>, <b>were he to wish</b> to, <b>he could consummate the levirate marriage.</b> This teaches the principle that only <b>one who is eligible for levirate marriage is eligible for <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> but <b>one who is ineligible for levirate marriage is ineligible for <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> And since, in the case of the mishna, if the <i>yavam</i> consummated the levirate marriage with one of his brother’s wives he may not do so with the second, consequently he may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with her either.

### Part 9
<b>And furthermore,</b> an additional reason that one may not do so is so <b>that</b> people <b>should not say</b> that the brother’s <b>house was partially built</b> through levirate marriage <b>and partially released through <i>ḥalitza</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> even if <b>they will say</b> that, what of it? The Gemara explains: <b>If he</b> first <b>consummated the levirate marriage</b> with one wife <b>and subsequently performed <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with the other, <b>indeed,</b> there is no reason not to do this. <b>However, perhaps he</b> might first <b>perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with one wife <b>and subsequently consummate levirate marriage</b> with the other, <b>and</b> by doing so <b>he is liable for</b> a violation of the prohibition <b>of: “He does not build</b> his brother’s house” (Deuteronomy 25:9). The verse indicates that one who performs <i>ḥalitza</i> has not built his brother’s house and is therefore subsequently prohibited from attempting to do so by consummating a levirate marriage with either the <i>ḥalutza</i> or any of her rival wives.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks. <b>But</b> since the Torah’s description of levirate marriage mentions only a case in which the deceased brother had only one wife, <b>say: When there is only one</b> wife, <b>the mitzva of levirate marriage exists,</b> but <b>when there are two</b> wives, <b>the mitzva of levirate marriage does not exist.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara suggests a proof: <b>If</b> that were <b>so, why do I</b> need the <i>halakha</i> concerning <b>a rival wife of a forbidden relation, which is forbidden by the Merciful One</b> in the Torah? <b>Now</b> that even in the case of <b>two</b> women in <b>general,</b> where neither woman is a forbidden relation, <b>you say</b> that <b>they are not eligible for <i>ḥalitza</i> and levirate marriage, is it necessary</b> to say <b>a rival wife of a forbidden relation</b> is also forbidden? The fact that the Torah does prohibit a rival wife of a forbidden relation indicates that the mitzva of levirate marriage does exist in a general case of two wives in which neither are a forbidden relation.

### Part 12
The Gemara objects: <b>Why not?</b> Even if one assumes that there is no mitzva of levirate marriage when the deceased brother had two wives, <b>it is</b> still <b>necessary</b> to teach the <i>halakha</i> concerning a rival wife of a forbidden relation because it could <b>enter your mind to say</b> that since there is no possibility of consummating the levirate marriage with her, <b>the forbidden relation stands outside</b> the calculation such that her presence is disregarded, <b>and her rival wife should enter into levirate marriage</b> as though she were the only wife. Therefore, the verse needs to <b>teach us that</b> the rival wife <b>is forbidden.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> the repeated use of the phrase <b>“his <i>yevama</i>,” “his <i>yevama</i>”</b> in the verses concerning levirate marriage <b>amplifies</b> the mitzva of levirate marriage so that it applies even when the deceased brother had more than one wife.

### Part 14
§ The mishna states: If <b>one</b> of these wives of the deceased brother <b>was fit</b> for the priesthood and one was unfit, <i>ḥalitza</i> should not be performed with the fit woman since doing so would needlessly disqualify her from the priesthood. <b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>here,</b> through this mishna, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught</b> the principle that one should not perform an action that will needlessly disadvantage others, and so <b>a person should not spill out water</b> collected in <b>his pit</b> that he does not need <b>when others are in need of it.</b>

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who remarries his divorcée</b> after she had been married to another man from whom she was then widowed or divorced, <b>or one who marries the woman with whom he performed <i>ḥalitza</i> [<i>ḥalutza</i>], or one who marries a relative of his <i>ḥalutza</i>,</b> since all such marriages are forbidden he <b>must divorce</b> her, <b>and the offspring</b> born from such unions <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva.</b> He holds that even the offspring from relations forbidden by a prohibition punishable by lashes is a <i>mamzer</i>.

### Part 16
<b>The Rabbis say: The offspring</b> in those cases <b>is not a <i>mamzer</i>, but they concede with regard to one who marries a relative of his divorcée,</b> a union forbidden by a prohibition entailing <i>karet</i>, <b>that the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> They hold that only the offspring from relations forbidden by a prohibition entailing <i>karet</i> is a <i>mamzer</i>.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>But does Rabbi Akiva</b> actually <b>hold</b> that with regard to <b>one who marries a relative of his <i>ḥalutza</i>, the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>? Didn’t Reish Lakish say</b> that through the mishna <b>here, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught</b> that <b>a sister of</b> one’s <b>divorcée</b> is forbidden <b>by Torah law</b> whereas <b>a sister of</b> one’s <b><i>ḥalutza</i></b> is forbidden <b>by rabbinic law?</b> If a relative of one’s <i>ḥalutza</i> is forbidden by rabbinic law, how can the offspring of that union be a <i>mamzer</i>? The Gemara concedes: Emend the mishna and <b>teach</b> instead: <b>A relative of his divorcée.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara notes: <b>So, too, it is reasonable</b> that this is the correct version of the mishna, as <b>the latter clause teaches: But they concede</b> in the case of <b>one who marries a relative of his divorcée that the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>. Granted, if you say</b> that Rabbi Akiva <b>was talking about that</b> case, <b>this is</b> consistent with <b>that which</b> the mishna <b>teaches: They concede,</b> which implies that they agree to a case already mentioned. <b>However, if you say</b> that he <b>was not talking about that</b> case, <b>what</b> could the phrase: <b>They concede,</b> possibly be referring to?

### Part 19
The Gemara objects: <b>But perhaps this</b> phrase <b>teaches us that</b> the Rabbis concede <b>that</b> the offspring <b>from</b> forbidden relations for which one <b>is liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i> is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> The Gemara rejects this option: <b>This is already taught later on</b> in a mishna (49a): <b>Which</b> offspring of forbidden relations has the status of <b>a <i>mamzer</i>?</b> It is the offspring of a union with <b>any next of kin that is subject to</b> a Torah prohibition that one <b>should not engage in sexual relations</b> with them; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Shimon HaTimni says:</b> It is the offspring of a union with <b>any</b> forbidden relative <b>for which one is liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i> at the hand of Heaven. And</b> the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with his statement.</b> Since the mishna explicitly rules in accordance with Rabbi Shimon HaTimni, it would be unnecessary for the mishna here to teach that fact.

### Part 20
The Gemara persists: <b>But perhaps the <i>tanna</i> taught us as unattributed</b> a mishna that is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon HaTimni</b> to indicate that this is indeed the accepted <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara rejects this: <b>If so,</b> then <b>let him teach other</b> cases of forbidden relations <b>for which one is liable to</b> receive <b><i>karet</i>; why do I</b> need the mishna to specifically consider the case of <b>a relative of</b> one’s <b>divorcée? Rather, conclude from this</b> that Rabbi Akiva indeed <b>was talking about that</b> case.

### Part 21
The Gemara persists: <b>But perhaps he was not actually talking about that</b> case, <b>but since</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>taught</b> the cases of <b>one who remarries his divorcée, or one who marries his <i>ḥalutza</i> or a relative of his <i>ḥalutza</i>,</b> the mishna <b>also taught</b> in the name of the Rabbis the case of one who marries <b>a relative of his divorcée</b> because it is a similar case. The Gemara concedes that this would be an acceptable reading of the mishna.

### Part 22
<b>Rather,</b> the mishna should not be emended, and with regard to the Gemara’s original question as to how Rabbi Akiva could claim that the offspring from one’s union with a relative of his <i>ḥalutza</i> is a <i>mamzer</i> if that union is forbidden only by rabbinic law, one must conclude that <b>a relative of one’s <i>ḥalutza</i></b> is forbidden by Torah law <b>according to Rabbi Akiva</b> and therefore the offspring <b>is a <i>mamzer</i>. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that <b>this is Rabbi Akiva’s reasoning: As the verse states: “The house of he who had his shoe removed”</b> (Deuteronomy 25:10). <b>The verse called</b> his relationship with the <i>ḥalutza</i> <b>his house,</b> indicating that the <i>ḥalutza</i> is considered as though she had been married to the <i>yavam</i>, and therefore her relative is forbidden to him by Torah law.

### Part 23
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said: All agree in</b> the case of <b>one who remarries his divorcée</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC