
### Part 1
<b>for</b> all the <b>seed of Aaron,</b> both sons and daughters? <b>You must say it is <i>teruma</i>.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But say</b> that perhaps the verse is referring to <b>the breast and thigh</b> of a peace-offering, which also may be eaten by all the seed of Aaron, both male and female? The Gemara answers: The breast and thigh are not permitted to males and females in equal manner, as they <b>are not</b> permitted <b>to</b> the daughter of a priest <b>who returns</b> to the home of her father. If the daughter of a priest marries a non-priest, it is prohibited for her to partake of <i>teruma</i> or sacrificial food. If she is widowed or divorced and has no living descendants by her non-priest husband, it is once again permitted for her to eat <i>teruma</i>, but she may not partake of the breast and thigh of the offerings.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: If so, the same may be said about <b><i>teruma</i> as well,</b> as it is <b>not</b> permitted <b>to a <i>ḥalala</i>,</b> a woman who is disqualified from marrying a priest, even though she is the daughter of a priest. The Gemara answers: <b>A <i>ḥalala</i> is not</b> considered <b>the seed of Aaron.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara challenges the <i>halakha</i> recorded in the <i>baraita</i> that one who lacks atonement may eat <i>teruma</i>. <b>And from where</b> do you know <b>that this</b> verse: “Any man from the seed of Aaron who is a leper or a <i>zav</i> shall not eat of the holy things <b>until he be pure,”</b> means that he may not eat of the holy things <b>until sunset? Say</b> that perhaps it means that he may not eat of them <b>until he brings</b> his <b>atonement</b> offering and is entirely pure.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>This cannot enter your mind, as</b> a <i>tanna</i> of <b>the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that <b>the verse is speaking of a <i>zav</i> who</b> experienced only <b>two sightings</b> of an emission, <b>and of a quarantined leper,</b> i.e., a suspected leper who has not yet been declared conclusively ritually impure by a priest. Both of these individuals are ritually impure, but they need not bring an offering as part of the purification process. When understood in this way, the leper and <i>zav</i> are <b>similar to</b> one who touches any object that is <b>impure</b> with ritual impurity imparted by <b>a corpse,</b> mentioned later in the verse: <b>Just as</b> one who touches anything that is <b>impure</b> with ritual impurity imparted by <b>a corpse does not require an atonement</b> offering for his impurity, <b>these too,</b> the <i>zav</i> and leper referred to in this verse, <b>do not require an atonement</b> offering; rather, they achieve complete purification at sunset.

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a question: <b>But say</b> that <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> sunset alone suffices to permit the eating of <i>teruma</i> <b>applies only</b> to one <b>who does not require</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering but merely has to wait until sunset to achieve complete purification. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>one who does require</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering, perhaps he may not eat <i>teruma</i> <b>until he brings</b> his <b>atonement</b> offering.

### Part 6
<b>And furthermore,</b> the Gemara raises a question with regard to <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 14:3): When the period of ritual impurity of a <i>zav</i> or a leper has been completed and he <b>immersed</b> during the day <b>and emerged, he may</b> immediately <b>partake of</b> second <b>tithe;</b> once <b>the sun has set for him,</b> he may <b>partake of <i>teruma</i>;</b> once he has <b>brought his atonement</b> offering, he may <b>eat sacrificial food. From where do we</b> derive these different <i>halakhot</i>?

### Part 7
<b>Rava said</b> that <b>Rav Ḥisda said: Three verses are written</b> with regard to purity for eating sacred food. <b>It is written: “And he shall not eat of the holy things, unless he has bathed his flesh in water”</b> (Leviticus 22:6); <b>but</b> if <b>he has bathed,</b> i.e., immersed, he is immediately <b>pure</b> and may partake of sacred food. <b>And it is written: “And when the sun has set, he shall be pure, and afterward he may eat from the holy things”</b> (Leviticus 22:7), which indicates that he must wait until sunset. <b>And it is</b> further <b>written: “And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be pure”</b> (Leviticus 12:8), which indicates that following childbirth a woman is not completely pure until she has brought her offering. <b>How so?</b> How can the apparent discrepancy between these three verses be resolved? <b>Here,</b> in the first verse, it is referring <b>to</b> second <b>tithe; there,</b> in the second verse, it is referring <b>to <i>teruma</i>;</b> and <b>here,</b> in the third verse, it is referring <b>to sacrificial food.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But I can reverse</b> this construct and apply the more stringent condition to tithe. The Gemara answers: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that <b><i>teruma</i> is</b> subject to the <b>more stringent</b> condition, <b>as it is</b> already subject to many stringent elements represented by the acronym <b><i>mem</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>peh</i>, <i>zayin</i>,</b> which is a mnemonic for the following: One who is prohibited from eating <i>teruma</i> but ate it intentionally is liable to the punishment of death [<i>mita</i>] at the hand of Heaven; a non-priest who unwittingly ate <i>teruma</i> is obligated to pay its value to the priest plus one-fifth [<i>ḥomesh</i>] of the sum; <i>teruma</i> does not have the possibility of redemption [<i>pidyon</i>]; and it is prohibited to non-priests [<i>zarim</i>]. These stringencies do not apply to second tithe.

### Part 9
The Gemara counters: <b>On the contrary,</b> second <b>tithe</b> should be governed by the <b>more stringent</b> condition, <b>as it has</b> the stringencies represented by the acronym <b><i>heh</i>, <i>dalet</i>, <i>samekh</i>, <i>tet</i>, <i>beit</i>,</b> which is a mnemonic for the following: Second tithe must be brought [<i>hava’a</i>] to Jerusalem; it requires that a declaration [<i>viddui</i>] be made on the last day of Passover in the fourth and seventh year of the Sabbatical cycle, stating that one’s agricultural obligations with regard to tithes have been properly fulfilled; it is prohibited [<i>asur</i>] to be eaten by one in acute mourning; it may not be burned in a state of impurity [<i>tuma</i>]; and it must be removed [<i>biur</i>] from one’s house before Passover in the fourth and seventh years of the Sabbatical cycle, if one failed to do so beforehand.

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: <b>Even so,</b> the punishment of <b>death is a greater</b> stringency, and therefore it is appropriate that <i>teruma</i> should be subject to the additional stringency of waiting until sunset.

### Part 11
<b>Rava said:</b> Even <b>without</b> the rationale that the punishment of <b>death is a greater</b> stringency, <b>you still could not say</b> that the first verse that speaks only of immersion is referring to <i>teruma</i>. As <b>the verse states</b> in the continuation: “The <b>soul</b> that touches it” (Leviticus 22:6). Now, <b>what matter is the same for every soul? You must say it is tithe,</b> as <i>teruma</i> may be eaten only by priests.

### Part 12
The Gemara raises a difficulty with the mishna: <b>But still,</b> say that <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>that</b> sunset alone is enough for the eating of <i>teruma</i> <b>applies only</b> to one <b>who does not require</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering but merely has to wait until sunset when he is completely purified. <b>However,</b> with regard to <b>one who does require</b> an <b>atonement</b> offering, such as a confirmed leper, perhaps he may not eat <i>teruma</i> <b>until he brings</b> his <b>atonement</b> offering.

### Part 13
<b>Abaye said: Two verses are written with regard to a woman after childbirth: It is written:</b> “She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the Sanctuary, <b>until the days of her purification are completed”</b> (Leviticus 12:4), which suggests that <b>once her days are completed</b> and the sun has set on the last day, <b>she is</b> completely <b>pure</b> and requires nothing more. <b>And</b> elsewhere <b>it is written: “And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be pure”</b> (Leviticus 12:8), which indicates that following childbirth a woman is not completely pure until she has brought her offerings. <b>How so? Here,</b> in the first verse, it is referring <b>to <i>teruma</i>; there,</b> in the second verse, it is referring <b>to sacrificial food.</b> A woman following childbirth falls into the category of one who lacks atonement, but nevertheless the verse teaches that if she has immersed, she may eat <i>teruma</i> after sunset. The same is true of a confirmed leper and all others who lack atonement.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But I can reverse</b> this construct and apply the more stringent condition to <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>It is reasonable</b> to say that <b>sacrificial food is</b> subject to the <b>more stringent</b> condition, as it is already subject to many stringent elements represented by the acronym, <b><i>peh</i>, <i>nun</i>, <i>kuf</i>, <i>ayin</i>, <i>kaf</i>, <i>samekh</i>,</b> which is a mnemonic for the following stringencies that apply to sacrificial food and not to <i>teruma</i>: An offering is disqualified by improper intention during one of the rites involved in its sacrifice with regard to the time it will be eaten [<i>piggul</i>]; meat of an offering that remained beyond its allotted time [<i>notar</i>] may not be eaten and must be burned; it is an offering [<i>korban</i>] to God; one who unwittingly derives benefit from sacrificial food is required to bring a guilt-offering for misuse of consecrated items [<i>me’ila</i>]; the punishment of one who eats sacrificial food while ritually impure is excision [<i>karet</i>]; sacrificial food is prohibited [<i>asur</i>] to an acute mourner.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges this argument: <b>On the contrary, <i>teruma</i></b> should be subject to the <b>more stringent</b> condition, <b>as,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, there are many stringent elements represented by the acronym <b><i>mem</i>, <i>ḥet</i>, <i>peh</i>, <i>zayin</i>.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Those</b> stringencies that apply to sacrificial food <b>are</b> more <b>numerous</b> than those that apply to <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 16
<b>Rava said:</b> Even <b>without</b> the rationale that <b>those</b> stringencies that apply to sacrificial food <b>are</b> more <b>numerous, you still could not say</b> that the verse that renders a woman pure at sunset refers to sacrificial food, as <b>the verse states: “And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be pure,”</b> which indicates <b>by inference that she</b> remains <b>ritually impure</b> to some degree until she has sacrificed her offerings. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that she may eat <b>sacrificial food</b> immediately after sunset, you should <b>apply here</b> what is stated in a different verse: <b>“And the flesh that touches anything impure shall not be eaten”</b> (Leviticus 7:19), which indicates that one who is impure with any type of ritual impurity is prohibited from eating sacrificial food. <b>Rather, learn from this</b> that the verse is referring to <b><i>teruma</i>.</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, strongly objects to this</b> argument: <b>And how can you say</b> that a <i>halakha</i> governing <b><i>teruma</i> is written here,</b> in the verse: “Until the days of her purification are completed” (Leviticus 12:4)? <b>Isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The section dealing with a woman following childbirth opens with the verse: <b>“Speak to the children of Israel,</b> saying: If a woman delivers and bears a male, then she shall be unclean seven days; as in the days of the impurity of her menstrual affliction shall she be unclean” (Leviticus 12:2). From this verse <b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that <b>the children of Israel</b> are included in this <i>halakha</i>; <b>from where</b> do I derive that <b>a convert and an emancipated maidservant</b> are also included? Therefore, <b>the verse states: “A woman,”</b> which includes other women. <b>And if it enters your mind</b> that the verse is speaking <b>of <i>teruma</i>, are a convert and a maidservant eligible to eat <i>teruma</i>?</b> It is prohibited for them to marry priests, so there can be no possibility of their eating <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 18
<b>Rava said: And</b> is the verse <b>not</b> referring to <i>teruma</i> as well?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC