
### Part 1
The <i>tanna</i> <b>concluded and taught:</b> All stains from <b>among the gentiles</b> are pure, from which it may be inferred: <b>And even from Tarmod.</b> This indicates that in all places inhabited by gentiles there is no need to be concerned about stains. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan said: That is to say, one accept converts from Tarmod</b> without concern that they might be Jewish, albeit <i>mamzerim</i>. This contradicts the previous opinion attributed to Rabbi Yoḥanan that converts from the Tarmodim are not accepted.

### Part 2
<b>And if you would say</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan specifically emphasized: <b>That</b> is to say, i.e., he meant that this conclusion may be logically inferred from the mishna, <b>and</b> yet <b>he</b> himself <b>does not hold</b> by <b>this</b> opinion, <b>but didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan state</b> a principle that the <b><i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the ruling of <b>an unattributed mishna,</b> as is the case here? The Gemara answers: <b>They are <i>amora’im</i>, and</b> they disagree <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> Some Sages said in Rabbi Yoḥanan’s name that the Tarmodim are unfit, while others maintain that they are fit.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And what is the reason</b> that the Sages do <b>not</b> accept converts <b>from Tarmod? Rabbi Yoḥanan and the Elders disagree</b> about <b>this</b> matter. Although they concur that converts from Tarmod are not accepted, they disagree with regard to the reason. <b>One</b> of them <b>said</b> that it is <b>due to the servants of</b> King <b>Solomon.</b> Solomon built a city in Tarmod (see I Kings 9:18), and his gentile servants, taking advantage of their status and power, married Jewish women unlawfully. Therefore, it is possible that the inhabitants of Tarmod and their descendants are <i>mamzerim</i>. <b>And</b> the other <b>one said</b> that it is <b>due to the daughters of Jerusalem,</b> who were taken captive and raped and gave birth to children among the gentiles.

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted, according to the one who said</b> that it is <b>due to the servants of Solomon,</b> this is logical, as <b>he holds</b> that in the case of <b>a gentile or a slave who had intercourse with a Jewish woman, the offspring is a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> Accordingly, as the servants of Solomon were slaves and they engaged in intercourse with Jewish women, their children are considered <i>mamzerim</i>. <b>However, according to the one who said</b> that it is <b>due to the daughters of Jerusalem, what is</b> the reason that the concern applied specifically to Tarmod and no other cities? <b>Rav Yosef and the Rabbis disagree</b> with regard to <b>this</b> question, <b>and both</b> stated their opinions <b>in the name of Rabba bar bar Ḥana.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara elaborates: <b>One</b> of them <b>said</b> that <b>twelve thousand men and six thousand archers</b> came from Tarmod, <b>and</b> the other <b>one said</b> that there were <b>twelve thousand men, of whom six thousand</b> were <b>archers. When the gentiles entered the Sanctuary</b> during the conquest of Jerusalem, they <b>all turned to</b> plunder the <b>silver and the gold</b> they saw there, <b>but</b> the warriors of Tarmod <b>turned to the daughters of Jerusalem, as it is stated: “They have ravished the women in Zion, the maidens in the cities of Judah”</b> (Lamentations 5:11). According to the opinion that children born of relations between gentiles and Jewish women are <i>mamzerim</i>, all the children born to these women are <i>mamzerim</i>.

### Part 6
§ In relation to a verse cited earlier, <b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: This verse was stated by the ministering angel</b> appointed over <b>the world: “I have been young, and now am old;</b> yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread” (Psalms 37:25). <b>Who said this? If we say</b> that it was <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, is there old age before Him?</b> Could God possibly say: “I have been young, and now am old”? <b>And rather,</b> one could say that <b>David</b> himself <b>said it,</b> from his own experience; but <b>was he indeed so old?</b> After all, David died at the age of seventy. <b>Rather, conclude from this</b> that <b>the ministering angel</b> appointed over <b>the world said it,</b> as he can speak both of youth and old age, and it is he who reported his observations from around the world.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani</b> further <b>said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her treasures;</b> for she has seen that the heathens have entered into her Temple, concerning which You commanded that they should not enter into Your congregation” (Lamentations 1:10)? <b>This</b> is referring to <b>Ammon and Moab.</b> How so? <b>When the gentiles entered the Sanctuary, all turned to</b> plunder <b>the silver and the gold, and</b> the soldiers from Ammon and Moab <b>turned to the scrolls of Torah</b> to destroy them. <b>They said:</b> Is <b>this</b> the scroll <b>in which it is written: “An Ammonite and a Moabite shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:4)? <b>Let it be burnt by fire.</b>

### Part 8
With regard to the Ammonites, the Gemara cites another verse: <b>“The Lord has commanded against Jacob that they who are round about him should be his adversaries”</b> (Lamentations 1:17). <b>Rav said: For an example</b> of this, there is the city <b>Homanya</b> in relation <b>to</b> the city <b>Pum Nahara,</b> as the descendants of the Ammonites live in Homanya, and they harass the Jews of Pum Nahara.

### Part 9
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav Asi said:</b> With regard to <b>a gentile who betrothed</b> a Jewish woman <b>nowadays, we are concerned that the betrothal</b> might be valid, despite the fact that a betrothal of a gentile is meaningless, <b>lest he be from the ten tribes</b> of Israel who intermingled with the gentiles. The Gemara raises an objection: <b>But</b> there is an important principle in <i>halakha</i> that <b>any</b> item <b>separated,</b> i.e., not fixed in its place, is presumed to have been <b>separated from the majority.</b> In this case, it can be assumed that any individual singled out from the gentiles belongs to the majority of gentiles and has no Jewish roots at all.

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: Rav Yehuda means that there is a concern only with regard to those who came from <b>the permanent</b> dwelling <b>places</b> of the ten tribes. <b>As Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said</b> that the verse states about those exiled from Samaria: <b>“And he put them in Halah, and in Habor, on the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes”</b> (I Kings 18:11). Rabbi Abba bar Kahana proceeded to identify these places. <b>Halah; this is</b> the place called <b>Ḥalzon. And Habor;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC