
### Part 1
However, this is difficult, as <b>didn’t Rav Kahana say</b> that <b>they taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> that if one is not particular about the substance it is not considered an interposition <b>only</b> when the substance covers just <b>a majority</b> of <b>his</b> body; <b>but</b> if it covers <b>all of it, it is</b> considered <b>an interposition</b> by Torah law, even if he is not particular about it. The Gemara answers: <b>A fetus is different, as this is its</b> natural manner of <b>growth.</b> Its mother’s womb cannot be considered an interposition, as it is the fetus’ natural place of development, and therefore the fetus itself is regarded as having undergone immersion.

### Part 2
<b>When Ravina came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With respect to lineage, <b>among the</b> other <b>nations</b> of the world, i.e., while they are still gentiles, <b>follow the male,</b> but if they married after <b>they converted, follow the</b> more <b>flawed</b> in lineage <b>of the two.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>Among the nations, follow the male, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> if <b>one from the</b> other <b>nations had relations with a Canaanite</b> woman <b>and had a son</b> from her, <b>you are permitted to purchase him as a slave,</b> and he is not considered a Canaanite who may not be allowed to remain in Eretz Yisrael? <b>As it is stated: “And also from the children of the strangers that dwell among you, of them may you buy,</b> and of their families that are with you, which they have begotten in your land; and they may be your possession” (Leviticus 25:45).

### Part 3
One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>even</b> if <b>one from the Canaanite</b> nations <b>had relations with</b> a woman <b>from</b> one of <b>the</b> other <b>nations and had a son</b> from her, <b>you are permitted to purchase him as a slave.</b> Therefore, <b>the</b> same <b>verse states: “Which they have begotten in your land,”</b> which indicates that slaves may be bought only <b>from those begotten in your land,</b> i.e., from those whose father was a non-Canaanite and whose mother was a Canaanite. It is the way of women to remain in their own land, and so a child born in Eretz Yisrael was certainly born to a Canaanite mother. <b>But</b> slaves may <b>not</b> be bought <b>from those dwelling in your land.</b> If a child is born to a Canaanite man and a non-Canaanite woman outside of Eretz Yisrael, and that offspring later returns to dwell in Eretz Yisrael, the offspring may not be acquired as a slave, because his lineage follows his father. He is regarded as a Canaanite, who may not be allowed to remain in Eretz Yisrael.

### Part 4
It was taught above in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan that if they married after <b>they converted, follow the more flawed</b> in lineage <b>of the two.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>To what</b> circumstances is this referring? <b>If we say</b> it is referring to <b>a male Egyptian</b> convert <b>who married a female Ammonite</b> convert, <b>what</b> is the meaning of: More <b>flawed</b> in lineage <b>of the two,</b> in <b>this</b> case? The <i>halakha</i> is that <b>an Ammonite</b> man is barred from entering into the congregation, <b>but not an Ammonite woman,</b> and so she is not flawed at all. <b>Rather,</b> it must be referring <b>to a male Ammonite</b> convert <b>who married a female Egyptian</b> convert. <b>If</b> the child <b>is male, assign him to</b> his <b>Ammonite</b> father, so that he is permanently barred from entering the congregation. <b>If</b> it is <b>a female, assign her to</b> her <b>Egyptian</b> mother, so that she is treated like a second-generation Egyptian convert.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b><i>Mamzerim</i> and</b> the <b>Gibeonites</b> who converted to Judaism in the days of Joshua <b>are prohibited</b> from entering into the congregation and marrying a woman who was born Jewish. <b>Their prohibition is eternal,</b> for all generations, and it applies to <b>both males and females.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Reish Lakish said: A <i>mamzeret</i>,</b> a female <i>mamzer</i>, <b>is permitted after ten generations.</b> Why? He <b>derived</b> this <i>halakha</i> by way of a verbal analogy between the word <b>“tenth”</b> stated in relation <b>to an Ammonite and a Moabite</b> in the verse “An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to the tenth generation shall none of them enter into the congregation of the Lord forever” (Deuteronomy 23:4), and the word <b>“tenth”</b> stated in relation to a <i>mamzer</i> in the verse “A <i>mamzer</i> shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord; even to the tenth generation shall none of his enter into the congregation of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:3) He explained the analogy as follows: <b>Just as below,</b> with regard to an Ammonite and a Moabite, <b>females are permitted, so too here,</b> with regard to a <i>mamzer</i>, <b>females are permitted.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>Or</b> perhaps one should say that <b>just as below,</b> with regard to an Ammonite and a Moabite, their females are permitted <b>immediately, so too here,</b> a <i>mamzeret</i> is permitted <b>immediately.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The verbal analogy is effective</b> only <b>from</b> the <b>tenth</b> generation <b>and onward.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises another difficulty: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that <b><i>mamzerim</i> and Gibeonites are prohibited, and their prohibition is eternal</b> for all generations, and it applies to <b>both males and females?</b> The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult</b> for Reish Lakish, as he understands that there is a dispute in this regard: <b>This</b> opinion, that of Reish Lakish, is <b>in accordance with</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>who said</b> that the application of a verbal analogy is extended by way of the principle: <b>Infer from it, and</b> again <b>from it.</b> In other words, after deducing case B from case A, all of the characteristics of case A are applied to case B. In the case discussed here, although the verbal analogy comes primarily to render a <i>mamzer</i> permanently forbidden, it is extended and understood to mean that a <i>mamzeret</i> is permitted after ten generations.

### Part 9
<b>That</b> other opinion, i.e., the mishna, is <b>in accordance with</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>who said</b> that the application of a verbal analogy is limited, according to the principle: <b>Infer from it, and</b> then <b>leave it in its place.</b> That is to say, after the main provision of case A is applied to case B, case B is recognized as having its own character and specific rules that apply to it. Accordingly, in the case discussed here, the verbal analogy teaches one specific <i>halakha</i> that a <i>mamzer</i> is prohibited permanently, but nothing else.

### Part 10
The Gemara relates that the students <b>asked Rabbi Eliezer:</b> With regard to <b>a <i>mamzeret</i> after ten generations, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>He said to them: Who will give me a third-generation</b> <i>mamzer</i> so that <b>I will declare him pure?</b> The Gemara comments: <b>Apparently he maintains</b> that <b>a <i>mamzer</i> does not survive.</b> <i>Mamzerim</i> perish at the hand of Heaven, and therefore this question is not a practical one. <b>And similarly, Rav Huna said</b> that <b>a <i>mamzer</i> does not survive.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna that <b><i>mamzerim</i> are prohibited</b> from entering into the congregation, <b>and their prohibition is eternal</b> for all generations? How is this possible if they do not even live long enough to produce three generations? <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> This matter <b>was explained to me by Rav Yehuda</b> himself: One <b>who is known</b> to be a <i>mamzer</i> will <b>survive,</b> as there is no concern that there will be any mingling of his seed. On the other hand, one <b>who is not known</b> as a <i>mamzer</i> will <b>not survive,</b> as he will die at the hand of Heaven so that there will be no mingling of his seed. As for one <b>who is known and not known,</b> i.e., one who is under suspicion, but it is unclear whether or not he is actually a <i>mamzer</i>, his descendants will <b>survive for three generations,</b> but <b>more</b> than this they will <b>not survive.</b>

### Part 12
It is related that <b>a certain person</b> lived <b>in Rabbi Ami’s neighborhood,</b> and following an investigation Rabbi Ami <b>declared him to be a <i>mamzer</i>.</b> The man <b>went about weeping</b> until Rabbi Ami <b>said to him:</b> You should not be upset, as now <b>I have given you life.</b> As explained above, once one is publicly known as a <i>mamzer</i>, he and his descendants may survive.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rav Ḥana bar Adda said:</b> As for the <b>Gibeonites,</b> it was King <b>David</b> who <b>decreed that they</b> may not enter into the congregation, <b>as it is stated: “And the king called the Gibeonites and said to them. Now the Gibeonites are not of the children of Israel,</b> but of the remnant of the Amorites” (II Samuel 21:2). This verse indicates that it was David who ruled that they are not part of the Jewish people and that they are barred from the congregation even though they converted.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that David <b>decreed</b> that they may not enter into the congregation? In order to answer this question, the Gemara recounts all the relevant background events. <b>As it is written: “And there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year”</b> (II Samuel 21:1). In the <b>first year</b> David <b>said to</b> the Jewish people: <b>Perhaps there are idol worshippers among you,</b> this being a sin that can lead to drought, <b>as it is written:</b> “Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived, and you turn aside, <b>and serve other gods, and worship them;</b> and the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, <b>and He shut up the heaven, so that there shall be no rain,</b> and the ground shall not yield her fruit” (Deuteronomy 11:16–17). <b>They examined</b> the matter <b>but did not find</b> sinners of this kind.

### Part 15
In the <b>second</b> year of the drought David <b>said to them: Perhaps there are transgressors</b> in sexual matters <b>among you,</b> as this too can lead to drought, <b>as it is written: “Therefore the showers have been withheld, and there has been no latter rain; yet you had a harlot’s forehead,</b> you refused to be ashamed” (Jeremiah 3:3), which indicates that licentious behavior can lead to a cessation of rainfall. Again <b>they examined</b> the matter, <b>but did not find</b> sinners of this kind either.

### Part 16
In the <b>third</b> year <b>he said to them: Perhaps there are among you those who pledge</b> money <b>to charity in public, but do not</b> actually <b>give</b> any charity. <b>As it is written: “As vapors and wind without rain, so is he that boasts himself of a false gift”</b> (Proverbs 25:14), teaching that one who falsely boasts of making a gift prevents the rain from falling. Once again <b>they examined</b> the matter, <b>but could not find</b> such sinners.

### Part 17
Having unsuccessfully searched the Jewish people for sins that cause drought, David <b>said: The matter depends on nothing other</b> than <b>myself. Immediately</b> it is stated: <b>“And David sought the presence of the Lord”</b> (II Samuel 21:1). The Gemara asks: <b>What is this?</b> How did David seek God? <b>Reish Lakish said: He inquired through the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>,</b> the stones embedded in the High Priest’s breastplate, which served as a means of communicating with God.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> may it <b>be inferred</b> that David’s seeking was by way of the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>? <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> This is <b>derived</b> by way of a verbal analogy between the word <b>“presence” used</b> here and the word <b>“presence”</b> used elsewhere. <b>It is written here: “And David sought the presence of the Lord,” and it is written there:</b> “And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, <b>who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the <i>Urim</i> in the presence of the Lord”</b> (Numbers 27:21). Consequently, the “presence of the Lord” sought by David must have involved the <i>Urim VeTummim</i>.

### Part 19
The verse continues: <b>“And the Lord said: It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he put to death the Gibeonites”</b> (II Samuel 21:1). The Gemara explains: <b>“For Saul”</b> means that the Jewish people were punished <b>because he was not eulogized properly. “And for his bloody house”</b> is <b>“because he put to death the Gibeonites.”</b> The Gemara is puzzled by this explanation: <b>Now, where do we find that Saul put to death the Gibeonites?</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>Rather, because he killed</b> the people of <b>Nob, the city of priests, who would provide</b> the Gibeonites <b>with water and food</b> in exchange for their services, <b>the verse ascribes to him as if he</b> himself had <b>killed them.</b>

### Part 20
The Gemara questions this understanding: On one hand, God <b>demands</b> retribution <b>because Saul was not eulogized properly, while</b> on the other hand, <b>He demands</b> retribution <b>because</b> Saul himself <b>put to death the Gibeonites.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> this is how it should be. <b>As Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Seek the Lord, all the humble of the earth, that have executed [<i>pa’alu</i>] His justice”</b> (Zephaniah 2:3)? <b>Where</b> mention is made of the <b>justice</b> to be carried out against a person, <b>his</b> good <b>deeds</b> [<b><i>pa’alo</i></b>] should be mentioned <b>there</b> as well.

### Part 21
<b>David said:</b> With regard to the eulogy for <b>Saul, there have</b> already <b>passed</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC