
### Part 1
<b>That</b> one, Abaye, who said that one counts from the time that the animal is born, is speaking <b>about a blemished</b> animal. Since it was already fit to be slaughtered from the day of its birth, if one does not give it to the priest within a year of that day he transgresses the prohibition against delaying.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Can an animal with a blemish</b> really <b>be eaten</b> immediately on the day that it is born? Isn’t there a requirement to wait eight days before slaughtering it, in order to ascertain that the animal is viable and was not born prematurely? The Gemara answers: This is referring to a case <b>where one is certain</b> of when the animal was conceived and <b>that its months</b> of gestation <b>have been completed,</b> so that it may be presumed to be viable.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> that expands upon what was taught in the mishna: <b>On the first of Nisan is the New Year for</b> counting <b>the months</b> of the year, <b>and for leap years, and for collection of</b> the <b>shekels</b> that had been collected in Adar and used to purchase animals for communal offerings and other needs of the Temple; <b>and some say</b> that it is <b>also</b> the New Year <b>for the renting of houses.</b>

### Part 4
<b>From where do we</b> derive that the first of Nisan is the New Year <b>for months? As it is written: “This month shall be to you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you. Speak to all the congregation of Israel, saying: On the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for a household…And you shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month:</b> And the whole assembly of the congregation <b>shall slaughter it</b> toward evening” (Exodus 12:2–6). <b>And</b> elsewhere <b>it is written: “Observe the month of ripening</b> and keep Passover to the Lord your God; for in the month of ripening the Lord your God brought you forth out of Egypt by night” (Deuteronomy 16:1). <b>Which is the month in which there is a ripening</b> of grain? <b>You must say</b> that <b>this is Nisan, and it is called the first</b> month of the year.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one could <b>say</b> that it is the month of <b>Iyyar.</b> The Gemara answers: A month of <b>ripening is required, and</b> in Iyyar <b>there is no</b> ripening, as the grain has already ripened. The Gemara asks further: <b>But</b> one could <b>say</b> that it is the month of <b>Adar,</b> the month in which some of the grain begins to ripen. The Gemara answers: The month in which <b>most of the ripening</b> takes place <b>is required, and this is not</b> the case in Adar, as most of the grain ripens during the next month, the month of Nisan. The Gemara asks: But <b>is most of the ripening written</b> in the verse? The verse merely speaks of the month of ripening, and since there is some ripening in Adar, it is possible that this is the first month.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, Rav Ḥisda said:</b> It is derived that Nisan is the first of the months <b>from here.</b> The verse states: <b>“Also on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have gathered in the fruit of the land”</b> (Leviticus 23:39). <b>Which is the month in which there is a gathering</b> of the grain of the field before the rains begin? <b>You must say</b> that <b>this is Tishrei, and it is called the seventh</b> month. Therefore, Nisan is the first month of the year.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> one could <b>say</b> that verse is referring to the month of <b>Marḥeshvan, and what is</b> meant by <b>seventh?</b> It is the <b>seventh</b> month <b>from</b> the month of <b>Iyyar.</b> The Gemara rejects this possibility: A month of <b>gathering is required, and</b> in Marḥeshvan <b>there is no</b> gathering, as the crops have already been gathered in, and the fields have already begun to be plowed to prepare them for the next year’s planting. The Gemara asks further: <b>But</b> one could <b>say</b> that it is the month of <b>Elul,</b> the month in which the gathering of the grain from the fields begins, <b>and what is</b> meant by <b>seventh?</b> It is the <b>seventh</b> month <b>from</b> the month of <b>Adar.</b> The Gemara answers: The month in which <b>most of the gathering</b> takes place <b>is required, and this is not</b> the case in Elul, as most of the gathering is done in Tishrei. The Gemara asks: But <b>is most of the gathering written</b> in the verse?

### Part 8
<b>Rather, Ravina said: This matter we did not learn from the Torah of Moses, our teacher;</b> rather, <b>we learned it from the texts of the tradition,</b> i.e., the Prophets and Writings: <b>“On the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month of Shevat”</b> (Zechariah 1:7). If Shevat is the eleventh month, Nisan must be the first month. <b>Rabba bar Ulla said:</b> It is derived <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“So Esther was taken to the king Ahasuerus into his royal house in the tenth month, which is the month of Tevet”</b> (Esther 2:16).

### Part 9
<b>Rav Kahana said:</b> It is derived <b>from here: “On the fourth day of the ninth month, in Kislev”</b> (Zechariah 7:1). <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> It is derived <b>from here,</b> as it is stated: <b>“And the scribes of the king were called at that time in the third month, that is the month of Sivan”</b> (Esther 8:9). <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> It is derived <b>from here: “He cast <i>pur</i>, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is, the month of Adar”</b> (Esther 3:7). <b>And if you wish, say</b> that it is derived <b>from here: “In the first month, that is, the month of Nisan”</b> (Esther 3:7).

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And all of</b> the others, <b>what is the reason</b> that <b>they did not say</b> that it is derived <b>from here,</b> the last verse mentioned, which is explicitly referring to Nisan as the first month? The Gemara answers: It is because one could <b>perhaps</b> have said: <b>What is</b> meant here by <b>first?</b> It means <b>the first</b> in relation <b>to its matter,</b> i.e., the months of the decree, and so it cannot be proven from here that Nisan is the first of the months of the year.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why didn’t <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna list the first of Nisan as the New Year for months, as did the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>He is dealing with</b> matters connected to <b>years,</b> but <b>he is not dealing with</b> matters connected to <b>months.</b>

### Part 12
§ It was taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> on the first of Nisan is the New Year <b>for leap years.</b> The Gemara asks: Do <b>we</b> really <b>count leap years from Nisan? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The court <b>may not declare a leap year before Rosh HaShana, and if</b> they did <b>declare</b> a leap year before Rosh HaShana, the declaration is not valid and <b>it is not</b> considered <b>a leap year. But due to pressing circumstances,</b> e.g., religious persecution, <b>it may be declared immediately after Rosh HaShana.</b> At that time, the Sages may declare that the coming year will be a leap year in accordance with their calculations. <b>Even so,</b> the additional month <b>added</b> to the <b>leap year can be only</b> a second <b>Adar.</b> In what sense, then, is Nisan the New Year for leap years?

### Part 13
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: What is</b> meant here by <b>leap years?</b> It means <b>the end of the leap year.</b> Once the month of Nisan has arrived, the previous year can no longer be declared a leap year, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>They,</b> Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Papeyyas, <b>testified that</b> the court <b>may declare a leap year all</b> through the month of <b>Adar, as there were</b> Sages <b>who said:</b> A year may be declared a leap year only <b>until Purim,</b> and if the decision to declare a leap year was not made before Purim, the year can no longer be declared a leap year.

### Part 14
The Gemara explains the dispute: <b>What is the rationale of the one who said</b> that a leap year can be declared only <b>until Purim?</b> It is <b>since the Master said: One asks</b> about <b>the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover thirty days before Passover.</b> Immediately following Purim, on the fifteenth of Adar, people already began to immerse themselves in the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover, which occurs on the fifteenth of Nisan. Were the court to declare a leap year after Purim, the festival of Passover would then be delayed for another month. In that case, there is concern that people <b>will come to demean</b> the prohibition against <b>leavened bread</b> and not observe Passover on its new date in the proper manner.

### Part 15
<b>And the other</b> Sages, Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Papeyyas, who are not concerned about this, what do they say? They say that people <b>know that a leap year is dependent on the calculation, and they</b> will <b>assume that the Sages did not complete the calculation until now,</b> after Purim. Since this is a matter of common knowledge, there is no concern that declaring a leap year at that late time will lead to a disregard of the <i>halakhot</i> of Passover.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> why didn’t <b>the <i>tanna</i></b> of <b>our</b> mishna include the first of Nisan as the New Year for leap years? The Gemara answers: <b>He is dealing with</b> years <b>that begin</b> on the first of Nisan, but <b>he is not dealing with</b> years <b>that end</b> on that date. With regard to leap years, the first of Nisan is the end not a beginning.

### Part 17
§ It was taught in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> the first of Nisan is the New Year <b>for collection of</b> the <b>shekels</b> that had been collected in Adar and were used to purchase animals for communal offerings and other needs of the Temple. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rabbi Yoshiya said</b> that <b>the verse states: “This is the burnt-offering of each month in its month throughout the months [<i>leḥodshei</i>] of the year”</b> (Numbers 28:14). The seemingly superfluous term: “Throughout the months [<i>leḥodshei</i>] of the year,” should be understood as follows: <b>The Torah is saying</b> here: <b>Renew [<i>ḥaddesh</i>]</b> the year <b>and bring an offering from the new collection</b> of the shekels. <b>And it is derived</b> by way of a verbal analogy between one instance of the word <b>“year”</b> and another instance of the word <b>“year”</b> that the year begins for this purpose <b>from Nisan, as it is written</b> with regard to Nisan: <b>“It shall be the first month of the year to you”</b> (Exodus 12:2).

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>But let us learn</b> by way of a verbal analogy between one instance of the word <b>“year”</b> and a different instance of the word <b>“year”</b> that the year begins for this purpose <b>from Tishrei, as it is written</b> with regard to Tishrei: <b>“From the beginning of the year”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:12). The Gemara answers: <b>One derives</b> the meaning of the word <b>“year”</b> together <b>with which “months”</b> are mentioned, as the verse states: “Throughout the months of the year,” <b>from</b> another instance of the word <b>“year”</b> together <b>with which months</b> are mentioned, as the verse states: “It shall be the first month of the year to you.” <b>And one does not derive</b> the meaning of the word <b>“year”</b> together <b>with which months</b> are mentioned <b>from</b> an instance of the word <b>“year”</b> together <b>with which “months”</b> are not mentioned, as the verse states: “From the beginning of the year.”

### Part 19
§ <b>Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Shmuel said:</b> With regard to <b>communal offerings that are brought on the first of Nisan,</b> there is <b>a mitzva to bring</b> them <b>from the new</b> contribution of shekels collected for that year. However, <b>if one brought</b> them <b>from the old</b> contribution, i.e., from last year’s shekels, <b>he has fulfilled</b> the obligation with regard to the offerings, <b>but he lacks the mitzva</b> of bringing them from the new shekels.

### Part 20
The Gemara comments: <b>This</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>communal offerings that are brought on the first of Nisan,</b> there is <b>a mitzva to bring</b> them <b>from the new</b> contribution of shekels. However, <b>if one brought</b> them <b>from the old</b> contribution, <b>he has fulfilled</b> the obligation with regard to the sacrifices, <b>but he lacks the mitzva</b> of bringing them from the new shekels. <b>If</b> a private <b>individual volunteered</b> to bring the communal offerings <b>from his own</b> property, <b>they are fit</b> for the altar, <b>provided that he transfers them over to the community.</b>

### Part 21
The Gemara asks: It is <b>obvious</b> that one may donate of his own property to the community, provided that he transfers it to the community in the proper manner. The Gemara answers: <b>Lest you say</b> that <b>we should be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC