
### Part 1
<b>and his teacher established it in his name.</b> Consequently, it is counted as one of Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai’s ordinances.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The order of the blessings</b> of the additional prayer on Rosh HaShana is as follows: <b>One recites</b> the blessing of <b>the Patriarchs,</b> the blessing of God’s <b>Mighty Deeds, and</b> the blessing of <b>the Sanctification of</b> God’s <b>Name,</b> all of which are recited all year long. <b>And one includes</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship,</b> containing many biblical verses on that theme, <b>with them,</b> i.e., in the blessing of the Sanctification of God’s Name, <b>and he does not sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it.

### Part 3
Next, one adds a special blessing for <b>the Sanctification of the Day, and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it; followed by the blessing of <b>Remembrances,</b> which contains many biblical verses addressing that theme, <b>and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it; and recites the blessing of <b><i>Shofarot</i>,</b> which includes verses that mention the <i>shofar</i>, <b>and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it. <b>And</b> he then returns to the regular <i>Amida</i> prayer and <b>recites</b> the blessing of God’s <b>Service and</b> the blessing of <b>Thanksgiving and the Priestly Blessing.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to him: If one does not sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>for</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship, why does he mention</b> it? <b>Rather,</b> the order of the blessings is as follows: One <b>recites</b> the blessing of <b>the Patriarchs and</b> that of God’s <b>Mighty Deeds and</b> that of <b>the Sanctification of</b> God’s <b>Name. He</b> subsequently <b>includes</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship in</b> the blessing of <b>the Sanctification of the Day, and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i>. Next he recites the blessing of <b>Remembrances, and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it, and the blessing of <b><i>Shofarot</i> and sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> after it. <b>He</b> then <b>recites</b> the blessing of God’s <b>Service and</b> the blessing of <b>Thanksgiving and the Priestly Blessing.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna taught that <b>Rabbi Akiva said to him: If one does not sound</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>for the</b> blessing of <b>Kingship, why does he mention</b> it? The Gemara expresses surprise at this question: <b>Why does he mention</b> it? <b>The Merciful One states</b> that one should <b>mention</b> it. It is a mitzva to recite the blessing of Kingship, regardless of the sounding of the <i>shofar</i>. <b>Rather,</b> this is what Rabbi Akiva meant: <b>Why</b> does one mention <b>ten</b> verses of Kingship, as in the other blessings? <b>Let him recite nine</b> verses or fewer. <b>Since</b> the blessing <b>is different</b> in that it is not followed by <i>shofar</i> blasts, <b>let it</b> also <b>be different</b> with regard to the number of verses it includes.

### Part 6
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that one recites</b> the blessing of the <b>Patriarchs? As it is stated: “Ascribe to the Lord, O you sons of the mighty”</b> (Psalms 29:1), which is interpreted to mean that one should mention before God the greatness of the mighty, i.e., the righteous Patriarchs. <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that one recites</b> the blessing of God’s <b>Mighty Deeds? As it is stated: “Ascribe to the Lord glory and strength”</b> (Psalms 29:1). <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that one recites</b> the blessing of the <b>Sanctification</b> of God’s Name? <b>As it is stated: “Ascribe to the Lord the glory due to His name; worship the Lord in the beauty of sanctity”</b> (Psalms 29:2).

### Part 7
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> on Rosh HaShana <b>one recites</b> the blessings of <b>Kingship, Remembrances, and <i>Shofarot</i>? Rabbi Eliezer says: As it is written:</b> “In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, you shall have <b>a solemn rest, a memorial of blasts, a sacred convocation”</b> (Leviticus 23:24). This verse is interpreted as follows: <b>“A solemn rest,” this</b> is referring to the blessing of <b>the Sanctification of the Day; “a memorial,” this is Remembrances; “blasts,” this is <i>Shofarot</i>; “a sacred convocation”</b> this means <b>sanctify it by</b> abstaining from <b>performing</b> prohibited <b>labor.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Akiva said to</b> Rabbi Eliezer: <b>For what</b> reason <b>isn’t it stated</b> instead that the phrase <b>“solemn rest”</b> teaches that one must <b>rest</b> by abstaining from prohibited labor, as this is the term <b>with which the verse opened first.</b> It stands to reason that the verse would begin with the main issue, i.e., that this day is a Festival on which performing labor is prohibited. <b>Rather,</b> the verse should be explained as follows: <b>“A solemn rest,” sanctify it by</b> abstaining from <b>performing</b> prohibited <b>labor; “a memorial,” this is Remembrances; “blasts,” this is <i>Shofarot</i>; “a sacred convocation,” this is the Sanctification of the Day.</b>

### Part 9
<b>From where</b> is it derived that <b>that one recites</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship? It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> One verse states: <b>“I am the Lord your God”</b> (Leviticus 23:22), which is referring to God’s Kingship over the world; <b>and</b> two verses later it states: <b>“In the seventh month”</b> (Leviticus 23:24). <b>This</b> teaches that God’s <b>Kingship</b> must be mentioned on Rosh HaShana.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Yosei bar Yehuda says:</b> This is <b>not necessary, as</b> the verse <b>states:</b> “Also in the day of your gladness, and in your appointed seasons, and in your New Moons, you shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace-offerings; <b>that they may be to you for a remembrance before your God:</b> I am the Lord your God” (Numbers 10:10). <b>As</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “I am the Lord your God,” and</b> therefore <b>what</b> is the meaning <b>when the verse states: “I am the Lord your God”? This is a paradigm</b> that <b>in all places where</b> verses of <b>Remembrances are stated,</b> verses of <b>Kingship should be</b> recited <b>with them.</b>

### Part 11
§ The Gemara returns to the issue discussed in the mishna: <b>And where does one recite the Sanctification of the Day? It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: One recites it with the</b> blessing of <b>Kingship,</b> in the fourth blessing. He explains: <b>Just as we find in all</b> other <b>places</b> that the Sanctification of the Day is mentioned <b>in the fourth</b> blessing of the <i>Amida</i> prayer, <b>so too here,</b> it is recited <b>in the fourth</b> blessing.

### Part 12
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: One recites it</b> together <b>with</b> the blessing of <b>Remembrances,</b> in the fifth blessing. He explains: <b>Just as we find in all</b> other <b>places</b> that the Sanctification of the Day is mentioned <b>in the middle</b> blessing of the <i>Amida</i> prayer, e.g., on Shabbat, when it is the fourth of seven blessings, <b>so too here,</b> it is recited <b>in the middle</b> blessing, which in the case of Rosh HaShana is the fifth blessing, as the Rosh HaShana <i>Amida</i> prayer is comprised of nine blessings.

### Part 13
§ <b>And</b> the <i>baraita</i> relates that <b>when the court sanctified the year in Usha, Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka descended</b> as the prayer leader <b>in the presence of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, and he acted in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Nuri</b> by including the blessing of Kingship in the blessing of the Sanctification of God’s Name. <b>Rabban Shimon said to him: They were not accustomed</b> to act in <b>this</b> manner <b>in Yavne. On the second day, Rabbi Ḥanina, son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, descended</b> as the prayer leader, <b>and he acted in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva</b> by including the blessing of Kingship in the blessing of the Sanctification of the Day. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: This is</b> how <b>they were accustomed</b> to act <b>in Yavne.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara asks a question concerning this <i>baraita</i>: <b>Is that to say that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva? But didn’t Rabbi Akiva say</b> that <b>one recites</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship with</b> the blessing of <b>the Sanctification of the Day, and Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says that one recites</b> the blessing of <b>the Sanctification of the Day with</b> the blessing of <b>Remembrances?</b> Why then did Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel indicate his agreement with Rabbi Akiva’s practice? <b>Rabbi Zeira said:</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel merely meant <b>to say</b> that he agrees <b>that one sounds</b> the <i>shofar</i> together <b>with</b> the blessing of <b>Kingship,</b> and that this was how they were accustomed to act in Yavne.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> taught that <b>on the second day Rabbi Ḥanina descended</b> as the prayer leader. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>The second</b> day? <b>If we say</b> that this is referring to <b>the second day of the Festival day</b> of Rosh HaShana, <b>is that to say that they rendered Elul a full</b> month, so that the thirtieth day of Elul was the first day of Rosh HaShana and the first day of Tishrei was the second day? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Ḥanina bar Kahana say: From the days of Ezra onward we have not found that</b> the month of <b>Elul was</b> ever <b>rendered full.</b> If so, it is difficult to believe that a case of this kind occurred in the time of the <i>tanna’im</i>. <b>Rav Ḥisda said: What is</b> the meaning of: <b>The second</b> day? It means <b>on the second day,</b> the next time it was Rosh HaShana, i.e., on Rosh HaShana <b>of the following year.</b>

### Part 16
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> One does <b>not</b> recite <b>fewer than ten</b> verses in theblessing of <b>Kingship,</b> or fewer <b>than ten</b> verses in the blessing of <b>Remembrances,</b> or fewer <b>than ten</b> verses in the blessing of <b><i>Shofarot</i>. Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says: If one recited three from each of them, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>These ten</b> verses of <b>Kingship, to what do they correspond? Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>said:</b> They <b>correspond to the ten praises that David said in the book of Psalms.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>There are many</b> more <b>praises</b> than that in the book of Psalms. The Gemara answers that he means <b>those</b> in <b>which it is written by them: “Praise Him with the blast of the <i>shofar</i>”</b> (Psalms 150:3). In that chapter the phrase “Praise Him” appears ten times.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Yosef said:</b> The ten verses <b>correspond to the Ten Commandments, which were said to Moses at Sinai. Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> They <b>correspond to the ten utterances through which the world was created.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Which are these</b> ten utterances? The Gemara explains: This is referring to the ten times that the phrase <b>“And He said”</b> appears in the story of Creation in the first two chapters of Genesis.

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: Does it refer to the repetition of the phrase: <b>“And He said” in Genesis? There are</b> only <b>nine</b> such phrases, not ten. The Gemara answers that the phrase <b>“In the beginning” is also</b> considered <b>an utterance, as it is written: “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made”</b> (Psalms 33:6), which indicates that all of creation came into existence through a single utterance, after which all matter was formed into separate and distinct entities by means of the other nine utterances.

### Part 20
§ The mishna taught that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri says: If one recited three from each of them, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: <b>What is</b> he <b>teaching</b> here? Does Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri mean that one must recite <b>three</b> verses <b>from the Torah, three from the Prophets, and three from the Writings, which are nine</b> in total, <b>and</b> if so <b>the</b> practical difference <b>between</b> the opinions of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri and the first <i>tanna</i> is only <b>one</b> verse? <b>Or perhaps</b> he means that one must recite <b>one</b> verse <b>from the Torah and one from the Prophets and one from the Writings, which are three</b> altogether, <b>and the</b> practical difference <b>between them is a large</b> number of verses, i.e., seven.

### Part 21
The Gemara clarifies this matter: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One does <b>not</b> recite <b>fewer than ten</b> verses of <b>Kingship,</b> or fewer <b>than ten</b> verses of <b>Remembrances,</b> or fewer <b>than ten</b> verses of <b><i>Shofarot</i>. And if one recited seven from each of them, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation, as they <b>correspond to the seven firmaments</b> in heaven.

### Part 22
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri said: One who</b> recites <b>fewer</b> than the requisite ten should <b>not</b> recite <b>fewer than seven, but if he recited three from each of them he has fulfilled</b> his obligation, as they <b>correspond to the Torah, the Prophets, and the Writings. And some say:</b> They <b>correspond to the priests, the Levites, and the Israelites.</b> This indicates that Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri means a total of three verses for each blessing. <b>Rav Huna said</b> that <b>Shmuel said: The <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Nuri.</b>

### Part 23
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One does not mention</b> verses of <b>Remembrance, Kingship, and <i>Shofar</i></b> that have a theme <b>of punishment.</b> When reciting the ten verses, <b>one begins with</b> verses from the <b>Torah and concludes with</b> verses from <b>the Prophets. Rabbi Yosei says: If he concluded with</b> a verse from <b>the Torah, he has fulfilled</b> his obligation.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC