
### Part 1
<b>Since</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “Of the seventh month,”</b> as it already states: “On the Day of Atonement,” <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “Of the seventh month”?</b> This serves to teach <b>that all</b> soundings of the <i>shofar</i> <b>of the seventh month must be similar to one another.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And from where</b> is it derived that there must be <b>three</b> sets <b>of three</b> blasts <b>each? The verse states: “Then you shall make proclamation with the blast of the <i>shofar</i></b> [<b><i>shofar terua</i></b>]”(Leviticus 25:9); and another verse states: <b>“A solemn rest, a memorial of blasts [<i>terua</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 23:24); and a third verse states: <b>“It is a day of sounding [<i>terua</i>] the</b> <i>shofar</i> <b>to you”</b> (Numbers 29:1). <i>Terua</i> is mentioned three times in these verses, and a <i>terua</i> is always preceded and followed by a <i>tekia</i>.

### Part 3
Since one of these verses deals with Yom Kippur of the Jubilee Year, while two of them deal with Rosh HaShana, the Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>to apply what is said about that</b> verse <b>to this</b> one, <b>and</b> what is said <b>about this</b> verse <b>to that</b> one? With regard to Rosh HaShana, <b>the verse states:</b> “Of the <b>seventh</b> month” (Leviticus 25:9), and with regard to Yom Kippur the verse likewise states: “In the <b>seventh</b> month” (Leviticus 23:24). It is derived <b>by verbal analogy</b> that any <i>shofar</i> blasts sounded on one of these days must also be sounded on the other. Consequently, on each day one must sound three sets of <i>tekia-terua-tekia</i>.

### Part 4
<b>How so?</b> How does one actually perform the sounding of the <i>shofar</i>? One sounds <b>three</b> sets of three blasts each, <b>which</b> altogether <b>are nine</b> separate blasts. <b>The length of a <i>tekia</i> is equal to</b> the length of <b>a <i>terua</i>,</b> and <b>the length of a <i>terua</i></b> is equal <b>to</b> the length of <b>three <i>shevarim</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>This <i>tanna</i> initially derives</b> his <i>halakha</i> <b>from juxtaposition,</b> based on the phrase: “Of the seventh month,” which teaches that every sounding of the <i>shofar</i> in the seventh month must be alike. <b>And now he derives</b> this <i>halakha</i> that one sounds three <i>tekia</i>-<i>terua</i>-<i>tekia</i> sets <b>by verbal analogy</b> from the recurrence of the term “seventh.” How can the <i>tanna</i> change his method of derivation in the very same <i>baraita</i>? The Gemara explains that <b>this is what</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: If</b> there were <b>no verbal analogy, I would have derived</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>by juxtaposition. Now that it is derived through a verbal analogy, the juxtaposition is not necessary.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> the following <b><i>tanna</i> derives this</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>by verbal analogy from</b> the sounding of the <i>shofar</i> in <b>the wilderness, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the verse: <b>“And you shall sound [<i>utekatem</i>] a <i>terua</i>”</b> (Numbers 10:5), indicates that <b>a <i>tekia</i> is its own</b> sound <b>and a <i>terua</i> is its own</b> sound. Do <b>you say</b> that <b>a <i>tekia</i> is its own</b> sound <b>and a <i>terua</i> is its own</b> sound? <b>Or</b> perhaps <b>is it only that a <i>tekia</i> and a <i>terua</i> are one</b> and the same, i.e., the two terms are synonymous? <b>When it says: “But when the assembly is to be gathered together, you shall sound a <i>tekia</i> [<i>titke’u</i>], but you shall not sound a <i>terua</i> [<i>tari’u</i>]”</b> (Numbers 10:7), <b>you must say</b> that <b>a <i>tekia</i> is its own</b> sound <b>and a <i>terua</i> is its own</b> sound.

### Part 7
<b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> a <i>terua</i> <b>is preceded by a straight blast,</b> i.e., a <i>tekia</i>? <b>The verse states: “And you shall sound [<i>utekatem</i>] a <i>terua</i>”</b> (Numbers 10:5), which indicates that one must first sound a <i>tekia</i> and then a <i>terua</i>. <b>And from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> a <i>terua</i> is <b>followed by a straight blast? The verse states: “A <i>terua</i> you shall sound [<i>titke’u</i>]”</b> (Numbers 10:6), i.e., first a <i>terua</i> and then a <i>tekia</i>.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yishmael, son of Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka, says:</b> This derivation <b>is not necessary,</b> as the verse <b>states: “And you shall sound [<i>utekatem</i>] a <i>terua</i> a second time”</b> (Numbers 10:6). <b>As</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “A second time,”</b> since it is clear from the context that this is the second <i>terua</i>, <b>what</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “A second time?” This is a paradigm</b> of the principle <b>that</b> in <b>all places where it is stated <i>terua</i>, a <i>tekia</i> should be second to it. I have</b> derived this <i>halakha</i> <b>only in the wilderness. From where</b> do I derive that the same applies <b>to Rosh HaShana? The verse states “<i>terua</i>”</b> with regard to the wilderness, and the verse states <b>“<i>terua</i>”</b> with regard to Rosh HaShana. This comes to teach <b>by verbal analogy</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of one applies to the other.

### Part 9
<b>And three <i>teruot</i> are stated</b> with regard <b>to Rosh HaShana: “A solemn rest, a memorial of blasts [<i>terua</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 23:24); “It is <b>a day of sounding the <i>shofar</i> [<i>terua</i>]</b> to you” (Numbers 29:1); <b>“Then you shall make proclamation with the blast of the <i>shofar</i> [<i>terua</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 25:9). <b>And</b> there are <b>two <i>tekiot</i> for each and every one</b> of the <i>teruot</i>, one before and one after.

### Part 10
Consequently, <b>we are found to have learned</b> that <b>three <i>teruot</i> and six <i>tekiot</i> are stated</b> with regard <b>to Rosh HaShana. Two</b> of the <i>teruot</i> are required <b>by the statement of the Torah and one by the statement of the Sages,</b> i.e., based on the verses but not derived directly from them. How so? <b>“A solemn rest, a memorial of blasts [<i>terua</i>]”</b> and <b>“Then you shall make proclamation with the blast of the <i>shofar</i></b> [<b><i>terua</i></b>]”; these apply <b>by Torah law.</b> However, the verse <b>“It is a day of sounding the <i>shofar</i></b> [<b><i>terua</i></b>] <b>to you” comes for its</b> own <b>statement,</b> i.e., for the verbal analogy, which teaches that the <i>halakhot</i> of the wilderness apply to Rosh HaShana as well. Consequently, the third <i>terua</i> is merely alluded to in that verse and its obligation applies by rabbinic law.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani</b> said that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said: One</b> <i>terua</i> applies <b>by Torah law, and two</b> apply <b>by rabbinic law: “Then you shall make proclamation with the blast of the <i>shofar</i></b> [<b><i>terua</i></b>]” applies <b>by Torah law.</b> However, the verses: <b>“A solemn rest, a memorial of blasts</b> [<b><i>terua</i></b>]” <b>and “It is a day of sounding the <i>shofar</i></b> [<b><i>terua</i></b>] <b>to you”;</b> these two phrases <b>come for their</b> own <b>statement.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani mean when he says that the verse: “It is a day of sounding the <i>shofar</i> [<i>terua</i>] to you,” <b>comes for its</b> own <b>statement?</b> What other <i>halakha</i> is derived from this verse? The Gemara explains: <b>It is required</b> to teach that the <i>shofar</i> must be sounded <b>during the day and not at night,</b> as indicated by the phrase: “A day of sounding the <i>shofar</i>.”

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> <i>tanna</i>, who does not derive this <i>halakha</i> from this verse, <b>from where</b> does he learn that the <i>shofar</i> must be sounded <b>during the day and not at night?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>He derives it from</b> that which is stated with regard to the Jubilee Year: <b>“On the Day of Atonement”</b> (Leviticus 25:9), which indicates that the <i>shofar</i> must be sounded during the day, not at night.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>If</b> that <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the phrase: <b>“On the Day of Atonement,” let us also derive from it</b> that one must sound <b>a straight</b> blast of a <i>tekia</i> <b>before</b> each <i>terua</i> <b>and a straight one after it.</b> Since he derives one <i>halakha</i> from the verses that deal with Yom Kippur of the Jubilee Year, why not derive this <i>halakha</i> from there as well? In that case, he would not need to derive it from the verses that deal with the wilderness. The Gemara answers: The phrases <b>“Then you shall make proclamation</b> [<b><i>veha’avarta</i></b>]” (Leviticus 25:9) and <b>“You shall make proclamation</b> [<b><i>ta’aviru</i></b>]” from the same verse <b>do not indicate</b> a <i>tekia</i> <b>according to him,</b> as they come to teach a different matter.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>Rather, what does he learn from</b> those phrases? The Gemara answers: He expounds: <b>“<i>Veha’avarta</i>,” in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Mattana, as Rav Mattana said: “<i>Veha’avarta</i>,”</b> which literally means: And you shall carry, indicates that the <i>shofar</i> must be shaped <b>in the</b> same <b>way that</b> the animal <b>carries</b> it on its head while alive, i.e., the natural narrow end must be maintained. One should not widen that side and narrow the naturally wide end. And the word <b>“<i>ta’aviru</i>”</b> teaches <b>that the Merciful One states</b> it so that one should not mistakenly explain as follows: <b>Let us</b> merely <b>carry</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>by hand</b> throughout the land rather than sounding it.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> from where does <b>the other</b> <i>tanna</i> derive these <i>halakhot</i>, as he used this verse to learn that the <i>terua</i> must be preceded by a <i>tekia</i>. The Gemara answers: He derives the <i>halakha</i> <b>of Rav Mattana from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the verse <b>changed its normal language.</b> It employs the term “<i>ta’aviru</i>” instead of <i>titke’u</i>, the more common expression for sounding the <i>shofar</i>.

### Part 17
As for the concern that one might think the verse means: <b>You shall</b> merely <b>carry</b> the <i>shofar</i> <b>by hand</b> and not sound it, <b>you cannot</b> in any event <b>say</b> that, as that <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> by verbal analogy between the root <b><i>avara</i></b> used here and the same root <b><i>avara</i></b> that is found <b>with</b> regard to <b>Moses. It is written here: “Then you shall make proclamation</b> [<b><i>veha’avarta</i></b>] <b>with the blast of the <i>shofar</i>,” and it is written elsewhere: “And Moses commanded, and they caused to be proclaimed [<i>vaya’aviru</i>] throughout the camp”</b> (Exodus 36:6). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to Moses, they proclaimed <b>with a sound, so too here,</b> the proclamation must be <b>with a sound.</b>

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to the opinion of <b>this <i>tanna</i>, who derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> that each <i>terua</i> of Rosh HaShana must be preceded by a <i>tekia</i> <b>from</b> the sounding of the <i>shofar</i> in <b>the wilderness</b> at the time of the gathering of the assembly, one can argue as follows: <b>If</b> so, <b>just as there,</b> in the wilderness, there was sounding of <b>trumpets, so too, here,</b> on Rosh HaShana, there must be sounding of <b>trumpets.</b>

### Part 19
Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Sound the <i>shofar</i> at the New Moon, at the full moon</b> [<b><i>keseh</i></b>] <b>for our feast day”</b> (Psalms 81:4). <b>Which is the Festival on which the month,</b> i.e., the moon, <b>is covered</b> [<b><i>mitkaseh</i></b>]? <b>You must say</b> that <b>this is Rosh HaShana,</b> the only Festival that coincides with the new moon, which cannot be seen. <b>And the Merciful One states:</b> “Sound <b>the <i>shofar</i></b> at the New Moon,” which indicates that on Rosh HaShana one sounds a <i>shofar</i> and nothing else.

### Part 20
§ <b>Rabbi Abbahu instituted in Caesarea</b> the following order of sounding of the <i>shofar</i>: First <b>a <i>tekia</i>,</b> a simple uninterrupted sound; next <b>three <i>shevarim</i>,</b> broken sounds; followed by <b>a <i>terua</i>,</b> a series of short blasts; and, finally, another <b><i>tekia</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Whichever way you look at it,</b> this is difficult. <b>If,</b> according to the opinion of Rabbi Abbahu, the sound the Torah calls a <i>terua</i> is <b>a whimpering,</b> i.e., short, consecutive sounds, <b>one</b> should <b>perform <i>tekia</i>-<i>terua</i>-<i>tekia</i></b> set. <b>And if</b> he holds that a <i>terua</i> is <b>moaning,</b> i.e., longer, broken sounds, <b>he</b> should <b>sound</b> a set as follows: <b><i>Tekia</i>,</b> followed by <b>three <i>shevarim</i>,</b> and then another <b><i>tekia</i>.</b> Why include both a <i>terua</i> and a <i>shevarim</i>?

### Part 21
The Gemara answers: Rabbi Abbahu <b>was uncertain whether</b> a <i>terua</i> means <b>moaning or whimpering,</b> and he therefore instituted that both types of sound should be included, to ensure that one fulfills his obligation. <b>Rav Avira strongly objects to this: But perhaps</b> a <i>terua</i> <b>is whimpering, and the</b> addition of <b>three <i>shevarim</i> interrupts between the <i>terua</i> and</b> the initial <b><i>tekia</i>,</b> which disqualifies the entire set. The Gemara answers: <b>That</b> is why one <b>then performs a <i>tekia</i>-<i>terua</i>-<i>tekia</i></b> set, to account for this possibility. <b>Ravina strongly objects to this: But perhaps</b> a <i>terua</i> <b>is moaning, and the <i>terua</i> interrupts between the <i>shevarim</i> and</b> the final <b><i>tekia</i>,</b> once again disqualifying the entire set. The Gemara likewise answers: <b>That</b> is why one <b>then performs a <i>tekia</i>-<i>shevarim</i>-<i>tekia</i></b> set, to cover this possibility as well.

### Part 22
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if in any case one must perform the two sets of blasts, for <b>what</b> purpose <b>did Rabbi Abbahu institute</b> that one should perform a <i>tekia</i>-<i>shevarim</i>-<i>terua</i>-<i>tekia</i> set? <b>If</b> a <i>terua</i> <b>is moaning, one</b> already <b>did it; if it is whimpering, one</b> already <b>did</b> this, too. The Gemara answers: Rabbi Abbahu <b>was uncertain,</b> and he thought that <b>perhaps</b> a <i>terua</i> consists of <b>moaning</b> followed by <b>whimpering.</b> Consequently, all three sets are necessary.

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, let one perform the opposite</b> set <b>as well: <i>Tekia</i>, <i>terua</i>, three <i>shevarim</i>, <i>tekia</i>,</b> as <b>perhaps</b> a <i>terua</i> consists of <b>whimpering and</b> then <b>moaning.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>The normal</b> way <b>of things</b> is that <b>when a person experiences a bad event, he first moans and then whimpers,</b> but not the reverse.

### Part 24
§ The mishna taught: If <b>one sounded the first</b> <i>tekia</i> <b>and</b> then <b>extended the second</b> <i>tekia</i> of that series <b>to</b> the length of <b>two</b> <i>tekiot</i>, so that it should count as both the second <i>tekia</i> of the first set and the first <i>tekia</i> of the second set, it is considered as only one <i>tekia</i>, and one must begin the second set with a new <i>tekia</i>. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> If <b>one heard</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC