
### Part 1
The Gemara raises a difficulty: But if this was at the time that the Temple was standing, <b>derive</b> the prohibition against fasting on the third of Tishrei from the fact that <b>it is the day that Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, was killed.</b> During the time of the Temple the biblical fast days were celebrated as days of joy. <b>Rav said: It was only necessary</b> to include the third of Tishrei in <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i> <b>in order to prohibit</b> fasting on <b>the preceding</b> day as well. Fasting was forbidden not only on the actual days listed in <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i>, but also on the preceding day and the following day.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises another difficulty: With regard to the prohibition against fasting on <b>the preceding day,</b> the second of Tishrei, <b>also derive it because it is</b> the <b>day after</b> the <b>New Moon,</b> and fasting is forbidden not only on festive days, but also on the preceding day and the following day. The Gemara rejects this argument: The <b>New Moon is by Torah law,</b> and festive days that are <b>by Torah law do not require reinforcement.</b> Therefore no decree was ever enacted prohibiting fasting on the days before and after.

### Part 3
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>These days that are written in <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i> are</b> days on which fasting is <b>prohibited,</b> as are <b>both</b> the day <b>before them and</b> the day <b>after them.</b> With regard to <b><i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals,</b> fasting on <b>them is forbidden,</b> but on the day <b>before them and</b> the day <b>after them</b> fasting <b>is permitted. What is the difference between this</b> class of days <b>and that</b> class of days? <b>These</b> days, <i>Shabbatot</i> and Festivals, <b>are</b> by <b>Torah law, and Torah laws do not need reinforcement,</b> and therefore even if a fast day were decreed on the day before or after them, the Festival itself would not be nullified; whereas <b>those</b> days mentioned in <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i> <b>are</b> by <b>rabbinic law, and rabbinic laws need reinforcement,</b> and therefore fasting is prohibited even on the day before and the day after.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises yet another difficulty: The prohibition against fasting on the second of Tishrei, <b>derive it</b> from the fact that <b>it is the day before the day that Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, was killed,</b> and since in Temple times the fast of Gedaliah was celebrated as a festive day, fasting should also be prohibited on the preceding day. <b>Rav Ashi said:</b> The fast of <b>Gedaliah, son of Ahikam, is</b> derived from <b>the texts of the tradition,</b> i.e., Prophets and Writings, <b>and</b> as <b>the texts of the tradition are</b> treated <b>like Torah statements</b> for this purpose, they too do not need reinforcement.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Tovi bar Mattana raised an objection</b> against the opinion that <i>Megillat Ta’anit</i> was nullified, from that which is written in it: <b>On the twenty-eighth of</b> Adar the <b>good tidings came to the Jews that they should not turn away from the Torah,</b> and on that day fasting is forbidden. And this is explained: <b>For the wicked kingdom issued a decree against Israel that they should not occupy themselves with Torah</b> study, <b>and that they should not circumcise their sons, and that they should desecrate Shabbat. What did Yehuda ben Shammua and his colleagues do? They went and took advice from</b> a certain <b>matron [<i>matronita</i>] whom all the prominent men of Rome would visit regularly,</b> thinking that she would know how to annul the decree.

### Part 6
<b>She said to them</b> as follows: <b>Come and cry out [<i>hafgginu</i>] at night</b> in the streets and markets. <b>They went and cried out at night, saying: O Heavens! Are we</b> Jews <b>not your brothers; are we not children of one father; are we not children of one mother? How are we different from every</b> other <b>nation and tongue that you issue</b> such <b>harsh decrees against us? And</b> indeed the decrees <b>were annulled, and</b> the Sages <b>made that day a festive day. And if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b><i>Megillat Ta’anit</i> has been nullified,</b> can you say that <b>the first</b> prohibitions against fasting <b>they annulled, and</b> then <b>later</b> ones <b>were added?</b>

### Part 7
<b>And if you say that here too</b> it is referring to <b>the time when the Temple was standing,</b> there is a difficulty, <b>as Yehuda ben Shammua was a student of Rabbi Meir, and Rabbi Meir was after</b> the destruction of the Temple. And proof that Rabbi Yehuda ben Shammua was a student of Rabbi Meir may be brought, <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna: With regard to <b>glass vessels that had holes</b> in them, which afterward <b>were filled in with lead,</b> the Sages dispute whether the utensil is considered a whole utensil, which can become ritually impure, or whether it is considered a broken utensil, which does not. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: Yehuda ben Shammua</b> declares that it <b>becomes impure, in the name of Rabbi Meir;</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC