
### Part 1
<b>Abaye said to him:</b> This <b>is obvious; which of</b> his sons would <b>he render sinners,</b> who are too lazy to ascend, <b>and which of them</b> would <b>he render vigilant,</b> eager to perform the mitzva at the first opportunity?

### Part 2
<b>Rather, for what</b> purpose <b>does</b> the <b>verse:</b> “All your males,” <b>come?</b> It comes to teach <b>that which <i>Aḥerim</i></b> taught. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b><i>Aḥerim</i> say</b> that <b>a scrimper,</b> one who gathers dog feces to give them to tanners for the purpose of tanning hides; <b>a melder of copper,</b> who purifies copper from dross; <b>and a tanner</b> of hides <b>are</b> all <b>exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b>appearance,</b> as their occupation inflicts upon them an unpleasant odor. <b>As it is stated: “All your males,”</b> which indicates that only <b>one who is able to ascend with all your males</b> is obligated, <b>excluding these. As</b> people avoid their company, <b>they cannot ascend with all your males.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Burnt</b>-offerings that one sacrifices <b>on</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival</b> must <b>come from non-sacred</b> property, not from sacred property such as second-tithe money. <b>But the peace-</b>offerings may be brought <b>from the</b> second <b>tithe,</b> i.e., from money with which one redeemed second tithe, which is subsequently used to purchase food in Jerusalem. With regard to the Festival peace-offering sacrificed on <b>the first day of the festival of Passover, Beit Shammai say:</b> It must come <b>from non-sacred</b> property, <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> It may be brought even <b>from the</b> second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 4
In general, <b>Israelites fulfill their obligation</b> to eat peace-offerings of rejoicing <b>with</b> their voluntary <b>vows and gift</b> offerings donated during the year and sacrificed on the Festival; <b>and</b> likewise <b>with animal tithes. And the priests</b> fulfill their obligation of rejoicing <b>with</b> the meat of <b>sin</b>-offerings <b>and guilt</b>-offerings <b>and with firstborn</b> offerings, as the priests receive a portion of these, <b>and with the breast and thigh</b> of peace-offerings, to which they are also entitled. <b>However,</b> they do <b>not</b> fulfill their obligation <b>with birds,</b> e.g., a bird sacrificed as a sin-offering, <b>nor with meal</b>-offerings, as only the eating of meat constitutes rejoicing.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> When the mishna states that <b>burnt-</b>offerings sacrificed <b>during the</b> intermediate days of <b>the Festival may come from non-sacred</b> property, this leads to the surprising conclusion that <b>on the Festival</b> they may even come <b>from the</b> second <b>tithe.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> should this be the case? The burnt-offering <b>is an obligatory matter, and</b> there is a principle that <b>any obligatory matter</b> with regard to offerings <b>may come only from non-sacred</b> property that was consecrated expressly for this purpose alone, not from property that was previously consecrated for another purpose.

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>this teaches us that burnt-</b>offerings <b>may come,</b> i.e., be sacrificed, <b>on</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival,</b> whereas <b>on the Festival they may not come</b> at all, <b>in accordance with whose</b> opinion is this mishna? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Beit Shammai.</b>

### Part 7
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Beitza</i> 19a) that <b>Beit Shammai say: One brings peace-</b>offerings on a Festival, <b>but one does not place</b> his hands <b>on them,</b> as placing one’s hands on an animal on a Festival is prohibited by rabbinic law. <b>However,</b> one may <b>not</b> sacrifice <b>burnt-</b>offerings at all, as they are not eaten, and slaughtering is permitted on a Festival only for human needs. <b>And Beit Hillel say: One brings</b> both <b>peace-</b>offerings <b>and burnt-</b>offerings, <b>and one does place</b> his hands <b>on them.</b> It is unlikely that an anonymous mishna would follow the opinion of Beit Shammai, whose rulings are not accepted as <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: This mishna <b>is incomplete, and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching: Burnt-</b>offerings brought as a fulfillment of one’s <b>vow or as gift</b> offerings <b>may come on</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival.</b> However, <b>on the Festival</b> itself <b>they may not come. And the burnt-</b>offering <b>of appearance comes even on the Festival, but when it comes, it may come only from non-sacred</b> property, as it is obligatory. <b>And peace-</b>offerings <b>of rejoicing may come even from the</b> second <b>tithe. And</b> with regard to <b>the Festival peace-</b>offering brought on <b>the first day of Passover, Beit Shammai say:</b> It may come only <b>from non-sacred</b> property, <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> It may come even <b>from the</b> second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 9
<b>That</b> opinion <b>is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Burnt-</b>offerings brought as a fulfillment of one’s <b>vow or</b> as <b>gift</b> offerings <b>may come on</b> the intermediate days of <b>the Festival.</b> However, <b>on</b> the Festival <b>itself they may not come. And the burnt</b>-offering <b>of appearance comes even on the Festival, but when it comes it may come only from non-sacred</b> property. <b>And peace-</b>offerings <b>of rejoicing may come even from the</b> second <b>tithe. And</b> with regard to <b>the Festival peace-</b>offering brought on <b>the first day of the festival of Passover, Beit Shammai say:</b> It may come only <b>from non-sacred</b> property, <b>and Beit Hillel say:</b> It may come even <b>from the</b> second <b>tithe.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about <b>the Festival peace-</b>offering brought on <b>the first day of the festival of Passover? Rav Ashi said: This</b> emphasis on the specific date <b>teaches us</b> that for <b>the Festival peace-</b>offering <b>of the fifteenth,</b> i.e., the pilgrimage Festival offerings brought on the first day of Passover, <b>yes,</b> this restriction applies; however, for <b>the Festival peace-</b>offering <b>of the fourteenth, no,</b> this limitation is not in force. If the Paschal lamb was too small for a group, they would bring an additional peace-offering so that the Paschal lamb could be eaten when one was full. This offering was called the Festival peace-offering of the fourteenth of Nisan. Since this offering is not obligatory, everyone agrees that it may be purchased with second-tithe money.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC