
### Part 1
<b>I can engage in intercourse several times without blood.</b> In other words, I can have relations with a woman while leaving her hymen intact. If this is so, it is possible that the assumed virgin had intercourse in this manner and is forbidden to the High Priest. <b>Or, perhaps</b> a person who can act like <b>Shmuel is not common</b> and the <i>halakha</i> is not concerned with this case. <b>He said to them:</b> One like <b>Shmuel is not common, and we are concerned that she may have conceived in a bath.</b> Perhaps she washed in a bath that contained a man’s semen, from which she became impregnated while remaining a virgin.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: How could she possibly become pregnant in such a manner? <b>Didn’t Shmuel say: Any semen that is not shot like an arrow cannot fertilize?</b> The Gemara answers: This does not mean that it must be shot like an arrow at the moment of fertilization. Even if <b>initially,</b> when released from the male, <b>it was shot as an arrow,</b> it can <b>also</b> fertilize a woman at a later moment.

### Part 3
With regard to the fate of ben Zoma, <b>the Sages taught: There was once an incident with regard to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, who was standing on a step on the Temple Mount, and ben Zoma saw him and did not stand before him</b> to honor him, as he was deep in thought. Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to him: From where</b> do you come <b>and where are you going, ben Zoma,</b> i.e., what is on your mind? <b>He said to him:</b> In my thoughts <b>I was looking upon</b> the act of Creation, at the gap <b>between the upper waters and the lower waters, as there is only</b> the breadth of <b>a mere three fingers between them, as it is stated: “And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters”</b> (Genesis 1:2), <b>like a dove hovering over its young without touching</b> them. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua said to his students</b> who had overheard this exchange: <b>Ben Zoma is still outside;</b> he has not yet achieved full understanding of these matters.

### Part 4
The Gemara explains: <b>Now,</b> this verse: <b>“And the spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters,” when was</b> it stated? <b>On the first day,</b> whereas <b>the division</b> of the waters <b>occurred on the second day, as it is written: “And let it divide the waters from the waters”</b> (Genesis 1:6). How, then, could ben Zoma derive a proof from the former verse? The Gemara asks: <b>And how much,</b> in fact, is the gap between them? <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said: Like the thickness of a thread; and the Rabbis said: Like</b> the gap between <b>the boards of a bridge. Mar Zutra, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Asi, said: Like two robes spread one over the other,</b> with a slight gap in between. <b>And some said: Like two cups placed one upon the other.</b>

### Part 5
§ The Gemara stated earlier that <b><i>Aḥer</i> chopped down the saplings,</b> becoming a heretic. <b>With regard to him, the verse states: “Do not let your mouth bring your flesh into guilt”</b> (Ecclesiastes 5:5). The Gemara poses a question: <b>What was</b> it that led him to heresy? <b>He saw</b> the angel <b>Mitatron, who was granted permission to sit and write the merits</b> of <b>Israel. He said:</b> There is <b>a tradition</b> that in the world <b>above there is no sitting; no competition; no</b> turning one’s <b>back before Him,</b> i.e., all face the Divine Presence; <b>and no lethargy.</b> Seeing that someone other than God was seated above, <b>he said: Perhaps,</b> the Gemara here interjects, <b>Heaven forbid, there are two authorities,</b> and there is another source of power in control of the world in addition to God. Such thoughts led <i>Aḥer</i> to heresy.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>They removed Mitatron</b> from his place in heaven <b>and smote him</b> with <b>sixty rods [<i>pulsei</i>] of fire,</b> so that others would not make mistake that <i>Aḥer</i> made. <b>They said</b> to the angel: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>when you saw</b> Elisha ben Avuya <b>you did not stand before him?</b> Despite this conduct, since Mitatron was personally involved, he <b>was granted permission to erase the merits of <i>Aḥer</i></b> and cause him to stumble in any manner. <b>A Divine Voice went forth saying: “Return, rebellious children”</b> (Jeremiah 3:22), <b>apart from <i>Aḥer</i>.</b>

### Part 7
Upon hearing this, Elisha ben Avuya <b>said: Since that man,</b> meaning himself, <b>has been banished from that world, let him go out and enjoy this world. <i>Aḥer</i> went astray. He went</b> and <b>found a prostitute</b> and <b>solicited her</b> for intercourse. <b>She said to him: And</b> are <b>you not Elisha ben Avuya?</b> Shall a person of your stature perform such an act? <b>He uprooted a radish from a patch</b> of radishes <b>on Shabbat and gave it to her,</b> to demonstrate that he no longer observed the Torah. The prostitute <b>said: He is other</b> than he was. He is not the same Elisha ben Avuya, he is <i>Aḥer</i>, other.

### Part 8
The Gemara relates: <b><i>Aḥer</i> asked Rabbi Meir</b> a question, <b>after he had gone astray. He said to him: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “God has made even the one as well as the other”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:14)? Rabbi Meir <b>said to him: Everything that the Holy One, Blessed be He, created, He created</b> a similar creation <b>corresponding to it. He created mountains, He created hills; He created seas, He created rivers.</b>

### Part 9
<i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to him: Rabbi Akiva, your teacher, did not say so, but</b> explained the verse as follows: Everything has its opposite: <b>He created the righteous, He created the wicked; He created the Garden of Eden, He created Gehenna. Each and every</b> person <b>has two portions, one in the Garden of Eden and one in Gehenna.</b> If he <b>merits</b> it, by becoming <b>righteous, he takes his portion and the portion of his</b> wicked <b>colleague in the Garden of Eden;</b> if he is found <b>culpable</b> by becoming <b>wicked, he takes his portion and the portion of his colleague in Gehenna.</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rav Mesharshiyya said: What is the verse</b> from which it is derived? <b>With regard to the righteous, it is stated: “Therefore in their land they shall possess double”</b> (Isaiah 61:7); whereas <b>with regard to the wicked, it is stated: “And destroy them with double destruction”</b> (Jeremiah 17:18); therefore, each receives a double portion.

### Part 11
<b><i>Aḥer</i> asked Rabbi Meir</b> another question, again <b>after he had gone astray. What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Gold and glass cannot equal it; neither shall its exchange be vessels of fine gold”</b> (Job 28:17)? If it is referring to the praise and honor of the Torah, it should have compared it only to gold, not to glass. <b>He said to him:</b> This is referring to <b>words of Torah, which are as difficult to acquire as gilded vessels and vessels of fine gold but are as easy to lose as glass vessels.</b> <i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to him: Rabbi Akiva, your teacher, did not say so, but</b> taught as follows: <b>Just as golden vessels and glass vessels have a remedy even when they have broken,</b> as they can be melted down and made into new vessels, <b>so too a Torah scholar, although he has transgressed, has a remedy.</b> Rabbi Meir <b>said to him:</b> If so, <b>you too, return</b> from your ways. <b>He said to him: I have already heard</b> the following declaration <b>behind the</b> dividing <b>curtain,</b> which conceals God from the world: <b>“Return, rebellious children,”</b> (Jeremiah 3:22) <b>apart from <i>Aḥer</i>.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara cites a related story: <b>The Sages taught: There was once an incident involving <i>Aḥer</i>, who was riding on a horse on Shabbat, and Rabbi Meir was walking behind him to learn Torah from him.</b> After a while, <i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to him: Meir, turn back, for I have already estimated</b> and measured <b>according to the steps of my horse</b> that <b>the Shabbat boundary ends here,</b> and you may therefore venture no further. Rabbi Meir <b>said to him: You, too, return</b> to the correct path. <b>He said to him: But have I not already told you</b> that <b>I have already heard behind the</b> dividing <b>curtain: “Return, rebellious children,” apart from <i>Aḥer</i>?</b>

### Part 13
Nevertheless, Rabbi Meir <b>took hold of him</b> and <b>brought him to the study hall.</b> <i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to a child,</b> by way of divination: <b>Recite your verse</b> that you studied today <b>to me. He recited</b> the following verse <b>to him: “There is no peace, said the Lord, concerning the wicked”</b> (Isaiah 48:22). <b>He brought him to another study hall.</b> <i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to a child: Recite your verse to me. He recited to him: “For though you wash with niter, and take for you much soap, yet your iniquity is marked before Me”</b> (Jeremiah 2:22). <b>He brought him to another study hall.</b> <i>Aḥer</i> <b>said to</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC