
### Part 1
<b>before the creation of the world, but they were not created.</b> The Torah was supposed to have been given a thousand generations after the world was created, as it is written: “He commanded His word for a thousand generations” (Psalms 105:8), but God gave it earlier, after only twenty-six generations, so that nine-hundred and seventy-four generations should have been created but were not. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, acted by planting</b> a few of <b>them in each and every generation, and they are the insolent ones of the generation,</b> as they belonged to generations that should not have been created at all.

### Part 2
<b>And Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said</b> that the verse: <b>“Who were snatched [<i>kumtu</i>]”</b> (Job 22:16), <b>is written for a blessing,</b> as the verse is not referring to lowly, cursed people, but to the blessed. <b>These are Torah scholars, who shrivel [<i>mekamtin</i>],</b> i.e., humble, <b>themselves over the words of Torah in this world. The Holy One, Blessed be He, reveals a secret to them in the World-to-Come, as it is stated: “Whose foundation [<i>yesodam</i>] was poured out as a stream”</b> (Job 22:16), implying that He will provide them with an abundant knowledge of secret matters [<i>sod</i>].

### Part 3
<b>Shmuel said to Ḥiyya bar Rav: Son of great ones, come and I will tell you something of the great things that your father would say: Each and every day, ministering angels are created from the River Dinur, and they recite song</b> to God <b>and</b> then immediately <b>cease</b> to exist, <b>as it is stated: “They are new every morning; great is Your faithfulness”</b> (Lamentations 3:23), indicating that new angels praise God each morning. The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this opinion <b>disagrees with</b> that <b>of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani, as Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan said:</b> With <b>each and every word that emerges from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, an angel is created, as it is stated: “By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the breath of His mouth all their hosts”</b> (Psalms 33:6). The hosts of heaven are the angels, who, he claims, are created from the mouth of God, rather than from the River Dinur.

### Part 4
§ The Gemara continues to reconcile verses that seem to contradict each other: <b>One verse states: “His raiment was as white snow, and the hair of his head like pure</b> white <b>wool”</b> (Daniel 7:9), <b>and it is written: “His locks are curled, black as a raven”</b> (Song of Songs 5:11). The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. Here</b> the verse in Daniel is referring to when He is <b>in the</b> heavenly <b>academy,</b> while <b>there</b> the verse in Song of Songs speaks of when He is <b>at war, for the Master said: There is no finer</b> individual to study Torah <b>in an academy than an old man, and there is no finer</b> individual to wage war <b>than a youth.</b> A different metaphor is therefore used to describe God on each occasion.

### Part 5
The Gemara poses another question: <b>One verse states: “His throne was fiery flames”</b> (Daniel 7:9), <b>and</b> another phrase in the same <b>verse states: “Till thrones were placed, and one who was ancient of days sat,”</b> implying the existence of two thrones. The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult. One</b> throne is <b>for Him and one</b> is <b>for David, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to this issue: <b>One</b> throne <b>for Him and one for David;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yosei HaGelili said to him: Akiva, how long shall you make the Divine Presence profane,</b> by presenting it as though one could sit next to Him? <b>Rather,</b> the two thrones are designated for different purposes: <b>One for judgment and one for righteousness.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: Did Rabbi Akiva <b>accept</b> this rebuff <b>from him, or did he not accept</b> it <b>from him?</b> The Gemara offers a proof: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the following teaching of a different <i>baraita</i>: <b>One</b> throne is <b>for judgment and one</b> is <b>for righteousness;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya said to him: Akiva, what are you doing</b> occupying yourself <b>with</b> the study of <b><i>aggada</i>?</b> This is not your field of expertise. <b>Take [<i>kelakh</i>] your words to</b> the topics of <b>plagues and tents.</b> Meaning, it is preferable that you teach the <i>halakhot</i> of the impurity of leprosy and the impurity of the dead, which are within your field of expertise. <b>Rather,</b> with regard to the two thrones: <b>One</b> throne is <b>for a seat and one</b> is <b>for a small seat.</b> The <b>seat</b> is <b>to sit on,</b> and the <b>small seat</b> is <b>for His footstool, as it is stated: “The heavens are My seat, and the earth My footstool”</b> (Isaiah 66:1).

### Part 7
§ The Gemara stated earlier that one who studies the secrets of Torah must be “a captain of fifty and a man of favor” (Isaiah 3:3), but it did not explain the meaning of these requirements. It now returns to analyze that verse in detail. <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> from Israel to Babylonia, <b>he said: Isaiah cursed Israel with eighteen curses, and his mind was not calmed,</b> i.e., he was not satisfied, <b>until he said to them the</b> great curse of the <b>following verse: “The child shall behave insolently against the aged, and the base against the honorable”</b> (Isaiah 3:5).

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>What are these eighteen curses?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>As it is written: “For behold, the Master, the Lord of hosts, shall take away from Jerusalem and from Judah support and staff, every support of bread, and every support of water; the mighty man, and the man of war; the judge, and the prophet, and the diviner, and the elder; the captain of fifty, and the man of favor, and the counselor, and the cunning charmer, and the skillful enchanter. And I will make children their princes, and babes shall rule over them”</b> (Isaiah 3:1–4). The eighteen items listed in these verses shall be removed from Israel.

### Part 9
The Gemara proceeds to clarify the homiletical meaning of these terms: <b>“Support”; these are masters of the Bible. “Staff”; these are masters of Mishna, such as Rabbi Yehuda ben Teima and his colleagues.</b> The Gemara interjects: <b>Rav Pappa and the Rabbis disagreed with regard to this. One</b> of them <b>said:</b> They were proficient in <b>six hundred orders of Mishna, and</b> the other <b>one said:</b> In <b>seven hundred orders of Mishna,</b> only six of which remain today.

### Part 10
<b>“Every support of bread”; these are masters of Talmud, as it is stated: “Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mingled”</b> (Proverbs 9:5). <b>“And every support of water”; these are the masters of <i>aggada</i>, who draw people’s hearts like water by</b> means of <b><i>aggada</i>. “The mighty man”; this is the master of halakhic tradition,</b> one who masters the <i>halakhot</i> transmitted to him from his rabbis. <b>“And the man of war”; this is one who knows how to engage in the discourse of Torah,</b> generating novel teachings <b>in the war of Torah. “A judge”; this is a judge who judges a true judgment truthfully. “A prophet”; as it literally indicates. “A diviner”; this is a king.</b> Why is he called a diviner? <b>For it is stated: “A divine sentence is on the lips of the king”</b> (Proverbs 16:10). <b>“An elder”; this is one fit for</b> the position of head of <b>an academy.</b>

### Part 11
<b>“A captain of fifty,” do not read</b> it as <b>“<i>sar ḥamishim</i>,” rather</b> read it as <b>“<i>sar ḥumashin</i>”; this is one who knows how to engage in discourse</b> with regard to <b>the five books of [<i>ḥamisha ḥumshei</i>] the Torah. Alternatively, “a captain of fifty”</b> should be understood <b>in</b> accordance with <b>Rabbi Abbahu, for Rabbi Abbahu said: From here</b> we learn <b>that one may not appoint a disseminator over the public</b> to transmit words of Torah or teachings of the Sages if he is <b>less than fifty years</b> of age. <b>“And the man of favor”; this is</b> one <b>for whose sake favor is shown to his generation.</b> The Gemara provides different examples of this: Some garner favor <b>above, such as Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa,</b> whose prayers for his generation would invariably be answered. Others gain favor <b>below, for example: Rabbi Abbahu,</b> who would plead Israel’s case <b>in the house of</b> the <b>emperor.</b>

### Part 12
<b>“The counselor”;</b> this is referring to one <b>who knows how to intercalate years and determine months,</b> due to his expertise in the phases of the moon and the calculation of the yearly cycle. <b>“The cunning”; this is a student who makes his rabbis wise</b> through his questions. <b>“Charmer [<i>ḥarashim</i>]”;</b> this is referring to one so wise <b>that when he begins speaking matters of Torah, all</b> those listening <b>are as though deaf [<i>ḥershin</i>],</b> as they are unable to comprehend the profundity of his comments. <b>“The skillful”; this is one who understands something</b> new <b>from something else</b> he has learned. <b>“Enchanter [<i>laḥash</i>]”; this</b> is referring to one <b>who is worthy of having words of the Torah that were given in whispers [<i>laḥash</i>],</b> i.e., the secrets of the Torah, <b>transmitted to him.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara continues to interpret this verse: <b>“And I will make children their princes”</b> (Isaiah 3:4). The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“And I will make children [<i>ne’arim</i>] their princes”? Rabbi Elazar said: These are people who are devoid [<i>menu’arin</i>] of mitzvot;</b> such people will become the leaders of the nation.

### Part 14
<b>“And babes [<i>ta’alulim</i>] shall rule over them”; Rav Pappa bar Ya’akov said:</b> <i>Ta’alulim</i> means <b>foxes [<i>ta’alei</i>], sons of foxes.</b> In other words, inferior people both in terms of deeds and in terms of lineage. <b>And</b> the prophet Isaiah’s <b>mind was not calmed until he said to them: “The child shall behave insolently against the aged, and the base against the honorable”</b> (Isaiah 3:5). “The child” [<i>na’ar</i>]; <b>these are people who are devoid of mitzvot,</b> who <b>will behave insolently toward one who is as filled with mitzvot as a pomegranate. “And the base [<i>nikleh</i>] against the honorable [<i>nikhbad</i>]”;</b> this means that <b>one for whom major [<i>kaved</i>]</b> transgressions <b>are like minor ones [<i>kalot</i>] in his mind will come and behave insolently with one for whom</b> even <b>minor</b> transgressions <b>are like major ones in his mind.</b>

### Part 15
§ The Gemara continues its explanation of the chapter in Isaiah. <b>Rav Ketina said: Even at the time of Jerusalem’s downfall, trustworthy men did not cease to exist</b> among its people, <b>as it is stated: “For a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his father,</b> and say: <b>You have a cloak, be our ruler”</b> (Isaiah 3:6). The Gemara explains that they would approach someone and say to him: <b>Things that people</b> are careful to keep <b>covered as with a cloak,</b> i.e., words of Torah that are covered and concealed, <b>are under your hand,</b> as you are an expert with regard to them.

### Part 16
<b>What is</b> the meaning of the end of that verse: <b>“And this stumbling block”</b> (Isaiah 3:6)? <b>Things that people cannot grasp unless they have stumbled over them,</b> as they can be understood only with much effort, <b>are under your hand. Although</b> they will approach an individual with these statements, he <b>“shall swear that day, saying: I will not be a healer, for in my house there is neither bread nor a cloak; you shall not make me ruler of a people”</b> (Isaiah 3:7). When the verse states: <b>“Shall swear [<i>yissa</i>],” <i>yissa</i> is none</b> other <b>than an expression of an oath, as it is stated: “You shall not take [<i>tissa</i>] the name of the Lord your God</b> in vain” (Exodus 20:6). Therefore, the inhabitant of Jerusalem swears: <b>“I will not be a healer [<i>ḥovesh</i>]”</b> (Isaiah 3:7), which means: <b>I was never</b> one <b>of those who sit [<i>meḥovshei</i>] in the study hall; “for in my house there is neither bread nor a cloak,” as I possess</b> knowledge of <b>neither</b> the <b>Bible, nor Mishna, nor Gemara.</b> This shows that even at Jerusalem’s lowest spiritual ebb, its inhabitants would admit the truth and own up to their complete ignorance.

### Part 17
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But perhaps it is different there, for if he had said: I have learned, they would have said to him: Tell us,</b> and people do not lie about things that can be easily verified. The Gemara rejects this claim: If he were a liar, <b>he would have said</b> that <b>he learned and forgot,</b> thereby avoiding shame. <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“I will not be a healer,”</b> which seems to imply that he had learned in the past? It means: <b>I will not be a healer at all,</b> as I have never learned. Consequently, there were trustworthy men in Jerusalem after all.

### Part 18
The Gemara raises another difficulty: <b>Is that so? But didn’t Rava say: Jerusalem was not destroyed until trustworthy men ceased to exist in it, as it is stated: “Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in its broad places, if you can find a man, if there is any that acts justly, that seeks truth, and I will pardon her”</b> (Jeremiah 5:1), implying there were no trustworthy people at that time? The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC