
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: One may leave Jerusalem only in the morning, after staying there for the night following the Festival, <b>as it is written</b> following the laws of the Paschal offering: <b>“And you shall turn in the morning and go to your tents”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:7).

### Part 2
§ <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> occurs on the eve of Shabbat, Beit Shammai say: The day of slaughter is after Shabbat; and Beit Hillel say: It does not have a day of slaughter. What, is it not</b> that <b>it does not have a day of slaughter at all;</b> i.e., there are no days of redress for an offering that was meant to be sacrificed on the festival of <i>Shavuot</i> itself? The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> Beit Hillel means that <b>it does not require a day of slaughter.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And what does this teach us; that</b> all offerings <b>are sacrificed on their day? But they have</b> already <b>disputed this once, as we learned</b> in a mishna: <b>Beit Shammai say: One may bring peace-offerings</b> on a Festival <b>but one may not place</b> his <b>hands on them. However,</b> one may <b>not</b> bring <b>burnt-offerings</b> at all; <b>and Beit Hillel say: One may bring peace-offerings and</b> also <b>burnt-offerings, and one places</b> his <b>hands on</b> both of <b>them.</b> Why is it necessary to restate this argument in different terms?

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: It is <b>necessary, for had</b> the mishna <b>taught us</b> only <b>this</b> case, that Beit Shammai prohibits bringing burnt-offerings on a Festival, we might have said: It is <b>with regard to this</b> case, a regular Festival followed by a weekday, <b>that Beit Shammai state</b> their opinion, <b>because</b> it is <b>possible</b> to sacrifice these burnt-offerings <b>on the following day,</b> on the day of slaughter after the Festival; <b>but there,</b> with regard to a <i>Shavuot</i> that occurs on a Friday, when one cannot sacrifice offerings on the following day, <b>you</b> might perhaps <b>say</b> that <b>they agree with Beit Hillel</b> that the burnt-offerings should be sacrificed on the Festival itself. It was therefore necessary to state that Beit Shammai’s view is the same in both cases.

### Part 5
The reverse also applies: <b>And had it taught us</b> only <b>that</b> case, that there is no day of slaughter after Shabbat, we might have said: It is <b>with regard to that</b> case <b>that Beit Hillel state</b> their view, that the offerings should be sacrificed on the Festival itself, <b>because</b> it is <b>not possible</b> to sacrifice them <b>on the following day,</b> which is Shabbat; <b>but here,</b> on a regular Festival followed by a weekday, <b>you</b> might <b>say</b> that perhaps <b>they agree with Beit Shammai.</b> It is therefore <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to specify both cases. The question of whether there days of redress for <i>Shavuot</i> according to Beit Hillel therefore remains unresolved.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from a different source: <b>One who did not celebrate</b> by sacrificing the peace-offerings of the Festival on <b>the seven days of Passover, or</b> on <b>the eight days of the festival</b> of <i>Sukkot</i>, <b>or</b> on <b>the first day of <i>Shavuot</i> may no longer celebrate</b> and sacrifice those offerings. The Gemara infers: <b>Does</b> this <b>not</b> mean that if one did not sacrifice on <b>the Festival day of <i>Shavuot</i></b> itself, this lapse cannot be remedied, thereby demonstrating that there are no days of redress for <i>Shavuot</i>? The Gemara refutes this: <b>No,</b> the term Festival day is referring to the <b>day of slaughter,</b> rather than the Festival itself. The Gemara immediately counters: <b>If so, let us</b> at least <b>resolve from here,</b> i.e., the mishna <b>that</b> there is only <b>one day of slaughter</b> and not seven days. The Gemara rejects this: <b>Say</b> that the wording of the mishna should be corrected, so that instead of: A day of slaughter, it reads: <b>Days of slaughter.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara suggests further: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from another source, <b>as Rabba bar Shmuel taught</b> the following <i>baraita</i>: The <b>Torah said</b> to <b>count</b> thirty <b>days, as it is stated:</b> “A month of days” (Numbers 11:20), <b>and</b> then <b>sanctify</b> the <b>month</b> with offerings. And the Torah also said to <b>count days</b> from Passover <b>and</b> then <b>sanctify the festival of <i>Shavuot</i></b> with offerings, <b>as it is stated: “You shall count fifty days” (</b>Leviticus 23:16<b>).</b> From this comparison, we learn the following <i>halakha</i>: <b>Just as</b> the new <b>month is</b> sanctified <b>for</b> the unit of time <b>by which it is counted,</b> i.e., for one day, <b>so too, <i>Shavuot</i></b> is sanctified for the unit of time by which it is counted, i.e., for one full week, as it is stated: “Seven complete weeks shall there be” (Leviticus 23:15). The Gemara infers from this: <b>Does</b> this <b>not</b> mean that <b>we learn from</b> the <b>month?</b> If so, we can also learn that <b>just as</b> the festival of <b>a month,</b> the New Moon, is <b>one day, so too <i>Shavuot</i></b> is only <b>one day,</b> without days of redress.

### Part 8
<b>Rava said: And</b> how can <b>you understand</b> it that way? <b>Is that to say</b> that for <b><i>Shavuot</i> we count days</b> but <b>we do not count weeks? Didn’t Abaye say:</b> It is <b>a mitzva to count days,</b> in the counting of the <i>omer</i>, <b>as it is written:</b> “Until the morrow of the seventh week, <b>you shall count fifty days”</b> (Leviticus 23:16); <b>and</b> it is also <b>a mitzva to count weeks, as it is written: “Seven weeks you shall count for yourself,</b> from when the sickle is first put to the standing corn” (Deuteronomy 16:9);<b>and further, it is written: “The festival of weeks [<i>shavuot</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 16:10), which indicates that it is a Festival that is established through a count of weeks? Consequently, the days of redress for <i>Shavuot</i> should last a week, in accordance with its components.

### Part 9
§ In <b>the school of Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b> a Sage <b>taught</b> the following: <b>The verse states</b> with regard to <i>Shavuot</i>: <b>“And you shall make a proclamation</b> on this very day, it shall be a holy convocation, you shall do no kind of laborious work” (Leviticus 23:21), and it states in the same chapter: <b>“And when you reap</b> the harvest of your land” (Leviticus 23:22). <b>Which is the Festival on which you make a proclamation and</b> also <b>reap,</b> i.e., which Festival occurs in the harvest season? <b>You must say it is the festival of <i>Shavuot</i>.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara proceeds to analyze the teaching: <b>When</b> exactly does this refer to? <b>If we say</b> it is referring <b>to the Festival day</b> itself, is it <b>permitted to reap on a Festival?</b> Obviously, ordinary work is prohibited on Festivals. <b>Rather, is it not</b> referring <b>to</b> the issue of <b>redress?</b> In other words, it speaks of those days on which redress can be made for the offerings of the Festival, i.e., the days of slaughter, on which one may indeed reap because they are regular weekdays, and they nevertheless have a festive quality.

### Part 11
The Gemara comments: <b>And even though</b> the teaching <b>that Rabbi Elazar</b> said that <b>Rabbi Oshaya said,</b> that the <i>halakha</i> of the redress for <i>Shavuot</i> is derived from the comparison to Passover, <b>was stated,</b> it was nevertheless <b>necessary</b> to state the teaching of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> as well, <b>for if</b> we had learned only the proof <b>that Rabbi Elazar</b> said that <b>Rabbi Oshaya said, I would say</b> the following: <b>Just as</b> on <b>the</b> days of <b>redress for the festival of Passover it is prohibited to perform</b> any <b>work</b> that will not cause irretrievable loss, as they are part of the Festival, <b>so too</b> on <b>the</b> days of <b>redress for <i>Shavuot</i> it is also prohibited to perform work.</b> We are therefore <b>taught</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov</b> as well, that on these festive days one may reap, as they are weekdays. Conversely, <b>if</b> we had learned the <i>halakha</i> only <b>from</b> the words of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC