
### Part 1
<b>This</b> case is referring <b>to words of Torah,</b> while <b>that</b> case is referring <b>to commerce. With regard to words of Torah, they were</b> trustworthy; <b>with regard to commerce, they were not.</b>

### Part 2
§ The Gemara returns to the topic of the Design of the Divine Chariot. <b>The Sages taught: An incident</b> occurred <b>involving Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai, who was riding on a donkey and was traveling along the way, and</b> his student, <b>Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh, was riding a donkey behind him.</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said to him: My teacher, teach me one chapter in the Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot. He said to him:</b> Have <b>I not taught you: And one may not</b> expound the Design of the Divine Chariot <b>to an individual, unless he is a Sage who understands on his own accord?</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said to him: My teacher, allow me to say before you one thing that you taught me.</b> In other words, he humbly requested to recite before him his own understanding of this issue. <b>He said to him: Speak.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Immediately, Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai alighted from the donkey, and wrapped</b> his head in his cloak in a manner of reverence, <b>and sat on a stone under an olive tree.</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said to him: My teacher, for what reason did you alight from the donkey? He said:</b> Is it <b>possible that</b> while <b>you are expounding the Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot, and the Divine Presence is with us, and the ministering angels are accompanying us, that I should ride on a donkey? Immediately, Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh began</b> to discuss <b>the Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot and expounded, and fire descended from heaven and encircled all the trees in the field, and all</b> the trees <b>began reciting song.</b>

### Part 4
<b>What song did they recite? “Praise the Lord from the earth, sea monsters and all depths…fruit trees and all cedars…praise the Lord”</b> (Psalms 148:7–14). <b>An angel responded from the fire, saying: This is the very Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot,</b> just as you expounded. <b>Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai stood and kissed</b> Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh <b>on his head, and said: Blessed be God, Lord of Israel, who gave our father Abraham a son</b> like you, <b>who knows</b> how <b>to understand, investigate, and expound the Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot. There are some who expound</b> the Torah’s verses <b>well but do not fulfill</b> its imperatives <b>well,</b> and there are some <b>who fulfill</b> its imperatives <b>well but do not expound</b> its verses <b>well,</b> whereas <b>you expound</b> its verses <b>well and fulfill</b> its imperatives <b>well. Happy are you, our father Abraham, that Elazar ben Arakh came from your loins.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: <b>And when</b> these <b>matters,</b> this story involving his colleague Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh, <b>were recounted before Rabbi Yehoshua, he was walking along the way with Rabbi Yosei the Priest. They said: We too shall expound the Design of the</b> Divine <b>Chariot. Rabbi Yehoshua began expounding. And that was the day of the summer solstice,</b> when there are no clouds in the sky. Yet the <b>heavens became filled with clouds, and there was the appearance of a kind of rainbow in a cloud. And ministering angels gathered and came to listen, like people gathering and coming to see the rejoicing of a bridegroom and bride.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Yosei the Priest went and recited</b> these <b>matters before Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai,</b> who <b>said</b> to him: <b>Happy are</b> all of <b>you, and happy are</b> the mothers <b>who gave birth to you; happy are my eyes that saw this,</b> students such as these. <b>As for you and I,</b> I saw <b>in my dream</b> that <b>we were seated at Mount Sinai, and a Divine Voice came to us from heaven: Ascend here, ascend here,</b> for <b>large halls</b> [<b><i>teraklin</i></b>] <b>and pleasant couches are made up for you. You, your students, and the students of your students are invited to</b> the <b>third group,</b> those who will merit to welcome the Divine Presence.

### Part 7
The Gemara poses a question: <b>Is that so? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: There are three lectures.</b> In other words, there are three Sages with regard to whom it states that they delivered lectures on the mystical tradition: <b>Rabbi Yehoshua lectured</b> on these <b>matters before Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai; Rabbi Akiva lectured before Rabbi Yehoshua;</b> and <b>Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai lectured before Rabbi Akiva. However, Rabbi Elazar ben Arakh was not included</b> in the list, despite the testimony that he lectured before Rabban Yoḥanan. The Gemara explains: Those <b>who lectured and were</b> also <b>lectured to were included;</b> but those <b>who lectured and were not lectured to were not included.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But wasn’t</b> there <b>Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai, who was not lectured to, and</b> yet <b>he is included?</b> The Gemara answers: Ḥananya ben Ḥakhinai <b>actually lectured before one who lectured</b> in front of his own rabbi, so he was also included in this list.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught: Four entered the orchard [<i>pardes</i>],</b> i.e., dealt with the loftiest secrets of Torah, <b>and they are as follows: Ben Azzai; and ben Zoma; <i>Aḥer</i>,</b> the other, a name for Elisha ben Avuya; <b>and Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Akiva,</b> the senior among them, <b>said to them: When,</b> upon your arrival in the upper worlds, <b>you reach pure marble stones, do not say: Water, water,</b> although they appear to be water, <b>because it is stated: “He who speaks falsehood shall not be established before My eyes”</b> (Psalms 101:7).

### Part 9
The Gemara proceeds to relate what happened to each of them: <b>Ben Azzai glimpsed</b> at the Divine Presence <b>and died. And with regard to him the verse states: “Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His pious ones”</b> (Psalms 116:15). <b>Ben Zoma glimpsed</b> at the Divine Presence <b>and was harmed,</b> i.e., he lost his mind. <b>And with regard to him the verse states: “Have you found honey? Eat as much as is sufficient for you, lest you become full from it and vomit it”</b> (Proverbs 25:16). <b><i>Aḥer</i> chopped down the shoots</b> of saplings. In other words, he became a heretic. <b>Rabbi Akiva came out safely.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara recounts the greatness of ben Zoma, who was an expert interpreter of the Torah and could find obscure proofs: <b>They asked ben Zoma: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>castrating a dog?</b> The prohibition against castration appears alongside the sacrificial blemishes, which may imply that it is permitted to castrate an animal that cannot be sacrificed as an offering. <b>He said to them:</b> The verse states “That which has its testicles bruised, or crushed, or torn, or cut, you shall not offer to God, nor <b>shall you do so in your land”</b> (Leviticus 22:24), from which we learn: With regard to <b>any</b> animal <b>that is in your land, you shall not do</b> such a thing. <b>They</b> also <b>asked ben Zoma:</b> A woman considered <b>to be a virgin who became pregnant, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>A High Priest</b> may marry only a virgin; is he permitted to marry her? The answer depends on the following: <b>Are we concerned for</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel? Shmuel says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC