
### Part 1
<b>but</b> an impure hand does <b>not</b> render impure <b>the hand of another. And Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> An impure hand renders another hand impure <b>whether it is his</b> own <b>hand or the hand of another,</b> provided the second hand is touched <b>by the same hand</b> that came into contact with the impurity. Moreover, the impure hand affects the food it touches only <b>to disqualify</b> it, <b>but not to render</b> it <b>impure.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara elaborates on Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion. <b>From where</b> did he learn this? <b>From</b> the fact <b>that it teaches</b> in <b>a latter clause</b> in the mishna: <b>For one renders its counterpart,</b> i.e., the other hand, <b>impure</b> with regard <b>to sacrificial</b> food <b>but not</b> with regard <b>to <i>teruma</i>. Why do I need this</b> phrase <b>as well? It was</b> already <b>taught in the first clause</b> that one hand renders the other hand impure with regard to sacrificial food. <b>Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from</b> this added phrase that it comes <b>to include</b> the rendering impure of <b>the hand of another</b> as well as his own other hand?

### Part 3
The Gemara observes: <b>And Reish Lakish, too, retracted</b> his own opinion in favor of Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion. For <b>Rabbi Yona said</b> that <b>Rabbi Ami said</b> that <b>Reish Lakish said:</b> The decree that one hand renders another impure applies <b>whether it is his</b> own <b>hand or the hand of another,</b> provided the second hand is touched <b>by the same hand</b> that came into contact with the impurity. Moreover, the impure hand affects the food it touches only <b>to disqualify render</b> it, <b>but not to render</b> it <b>impure.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: <b>And</b> this opinion, that an impure hand affects the sacrificial food only <b>to disqualify</b> it <b>but not to render</b> it <b>impure, is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Yadayim</i> 3:2): <b>Anything that disqualifies <i>teruma</i></b> by contact with it, i.e., anything that is impure at least to the second degree, <b>renders the hands impure</b> to the <b>second</b> degree. <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>a hand</b> that is impure to the second degree <b>renders its counterpart,</b> the other hand, <b>impure;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehoshua. But the Rabbis say: Hands</b> themselves <b>are</b> impure to the <b>second</b> degree, <b>and</b> that which is impure to the <b>second</b> degree <b>cannot impart</b> second-degree impurity to something else <b>with regard to non-sacred</b> food.

### Part 5
From the Rabbis’ response to Rabbi Yehoshua it is clear that the latter’s opinion is that the second hand is indeed rendered impure to the second degree, imparting third-degree impurity to sacrificial food that it touches. Moreover: <b>What, is it not</b> correct to infer from the Rabbis’ words that <b>it is</b> impurity to the <b>second</b> degree <b>that</b> the first hand <b>does not impart</b> to for the second hand by touching it, <b>but</b> impurity to the <b>third</b> degree it <b>does impart</b> to the second hand? The second hand would thus only disqualify the sacrificial food that it touches by imparting to it a fourth-degree impurity. Therefore, the Rabbis and Rabbi Yehoshua are arguing about this very point: Does the second hand only disqualify sacrificial food by imparting to it fourth-degree impurity, or does it render the food impure with third-degree impurity?

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> the Rabbis meant that the first hand does <b>not impart</b> impurity to the second hand to <b>either the second or the third</b> degree, for in their opinion one impure hand does not defile the other hand at all, in contradiction to the mishna, whereas the opinion expressed in the mishna would be following Rabbi Yehoshua.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> the issue of which degree of impurity is imparted to the second hand is <b>like</b> the following dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>, as it is taught</b> in the <i>baraita</i> cited earlier: Even <b>a dry hand</b> that is impure <b>renders its counterpart,</b> i.e., the other hand, <b>impure to</b> the extent that the second hand will now <b>render impure</b> food that it touches. This is true with regard <b>to sacrificial</b> food <b>but not</b> with regard <b>to <i>teruma</i>.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: The</b> second <b>hand</b> is not rendered impure to such a severe extent. It can merely <b>disqualify</b> sacrificial food that it touches, by making it impure to the fourth degree, <b>but not render</b> it <b>impure</b> to the third degree.

### Part 8
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>One may eat dry</b> food<b>s,</b> i.e., foods that have never been wetted and are thus not susceptible to impurity, <b>with impure hands</b> in the case of <i>teruma</i>, but not in the case of sacrificial food. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that there is a difficulty with this statement of the mishna: <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus said: Now, is there</b> such a possibility as <b>dry</b> food, i.e., food that is not susceptible to impurity, with regard <b>to sacrificial</b> food? <b>Is it not so that the reverence</b> accorded <b>to sacrificial</b> food itself <b>renders it fit</b> to contract impurity even if it has never been in contact with liquid at all? All sacrificial food is thus automatically susceptible to impurity, and whether it is dry, i.e., it has never been wetted, or not is irrelevant.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to state this. And the case is not one of dry sacrificial food, as was first assumed. Rather, the mishna is dealing with a case in <b>which, for example, his friend inserted</b> sacrificial food or <i>teruma</i> <b>into his mouth, or,</b> alternatively, a case in <b>which he inserted</b> it <b>into his own</b> mouth <b>by</b> means of <b>a spindle or whorl,</b> which are wooden vessels without receptacles that cannot contract impurity. In either event the food arrives in his mouth without being rendered impure by his impure hands. <b>And</b> then, while the sacrificial food or <i>teruma</i> is still in his mouth, he <b>wishes to</b> put into his mouth and <b>eat a non-sacred radish or onion along with them.</b>

### Part 10
Non-sacred food is not rendered impure by being touched with impure hands, so it should not be problematic to put a radish or onion into one’s mouth with his hands. However, <b>regarding sacrificial food the Sages enacted a decree against</b> doing so, lest the person inadvertently touch the sacrificial food in his mouth with his impure hand. This decree, the mishna teaches, applies only to sacrificial food, <b>but in</b> a case in which he had <b><i>teruma</i></b> in his mouth <b>the Sages did not enact a decree against it.</b>

### Part 11
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>An acute mourner and one who is lacking atonement</b> require immersion in order to eat sacrificial food, but this is not necessary for <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason</b> for this decree? <b>Since until now it was prohibited</b> for <b>them</b> to partake of sacrificial food and they therefore might not have guarded themselves properly from impurity, <b>the Sages required them</b> to undergo <b>immersion</b> before eating sacrificial food.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The previous mishna listed stringencies that apply to sacrificial food but not to <i>teruma</i>. However, there are also <b>stringencies</b> that apply <b>to <i>teruma</i></b> over sacrificial food: <b>In Judea</b> all people, even people who are not generally meticulous in their observance of the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual purity [<i>amei ha’aretz</i>], <b>are trusted with regard to the purity of</b> consecrated <b>wine and oil</b> throughout <b>all the days of the year. And during the period of the winepress and olive press,</b> when grapes and olives are pressed and made into wine and oil, respectively, they are trusted <b>even with regard to</b> the purity of <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> as all people, including <i>amei ha’aretz</i>, purify their vessels for this season.

### Part 13
But once <b>the</b> periods of the <b>winepress and olive press have passed,</b> if <i>amei ha’aretz</i> <b>brought to him,</b> i.e., to a priest who is meticulous concerning the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual purity [<i>ḥaver</i>], a <b>barrel of <i>teruma</i> wine, he may not accept it from them,</b> as <i>amei ha’aretz</i> are not trusted with regard to matters of ritual purity during the rest of the year. <b>But</b> the giver <b>may leave it</b> over <b>for the following winepress</b> season, in the following year, at which point the <i>ḥaver</i> priest may accept it from him, although it was prohibited for him to accept the same barrel beforehand. <b>And if</b> the giver <b>said to</b> the priest: <b>I separated</b> and placed <b>into</b> this barrel of <i>teruma</i> <b>a quarter</b>-<i>log</i> <b>of sacrificial</b> wine or oil, <b>he is trusted</b> with regard to the entire contents of the barrel. Since an <i>am ha’aretz</i> is trusted with regard to the purity of sacrificial food, he is also believed with regard to <i>teruma</i> that is mingled with the sacrificial food.

### Part 14
With regard to <b>jugs of wine and jugs of oil</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC