
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>One must wash his hands</b> by pouring a quarter-<i>log</i> of water over them before eating <b>non-sacred</b> food, <b>and for tithes and for <i>teruma</i>; but for</b> eating <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>one must immerse</b> one’s hands in <b>purification</b> waters, such as those of a ritual bath. <b>And with</b> regard to one who wishes to touch the <b>purification</b> waters of the red heifer used for sprinkling, concerning which the Sages ordained further measures of sanctity, <b>if one’s hands were rendered impure</b> even by rabbinical ritual impurity, which usually only renders the hands impure, <b>his</b> entire <b>body is rendered impure,</b> and he must immerse himself in a ritual bath.

### Part 2
The mishna continues to list additional differences between various levels of ritual purity: If <b>one immersed for</b> the purpose of eating <b>non-sacred</b> food, he <b>assumes a presumptive status</b> of ritual purity <b>for non-sacred</b> food, and <b>it is prohibited for him</b> to eat <b>tithes,</b> as he did not purify himself with the intention of eating tithes. If one <b>immersed to</b> eat <b>tithes, he assumes a presumptive status for tithes,</b> but he is <b>prohibited from</b> eating <b><i>teruma</i>.</b> If one <b>immersed for <i>teruma</i>, he assumes a presumptive status for <i>teruma</i>,</b> but he is <b>prohibited from</b> eating <b>sacrificial</b> food. If he <b>immersed for sacrificial</b> food, <b>he assumes a presumptive status for sacrificial</b> food, but he is <b>prohibited from</b> coming in contact with the <b>purification</b> waters. The principle is as follows: One who <b>immersed to</b> eat a food in <b>a stringent</b> category <b>is permitted to</b> eat a food in <b>a lenient</b> one. Another principle: One who <b>immersed without</b> the intention to <b>assume a presumptive status</b> of ritual purity, i.e., one who immersed but did not intend to purify himself, it is <b>as though he has not immersed</b> at all.

### Part 3
The mishna continues: <b>The garments of an <i>am ha’aretz</i>,</b> one who is not careful with regard to the laws of ritual purity, <b>are</b> considered impure with the ritual impurity imparted by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i>. That is considered a primary level of impurity <b>for individuals who are scrupulous with regard to impurity [<i>perushin</i>]. The garments of <i>perushin</i></b> are considered impure by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> priests <b>who eat <i>teruma</i>; the garments of</b> those <b>who eat <i>teruma</i></b> are considered impure by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> those who eat <b>sacrificial</b> food; and likewise <b>the garments of</b> those who eat <b>sacrificial</b> food are considered impure by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> those dealing with the preparation of the <b>purification</b> waters.

### Part 4
The mishna relates: <b>Yosef ben Yo’ezer was the most pious</b> member <b>of the priesthood</b> and was extremely careful to eat <i>teruma</i> in a state of ritual purity, <b>and</b> yet <b>his cloth was</b> considered impure by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> those who ate <b>sacrificial</b> food. <b>Yoḥanan ben Gudgeda would eat</b> non-sacred food while following the laws of <b>ritual purity for sacrificial</b> food <b>all his days, and</b> nevertheless <b>his cloth was</b> considered impure by the <b>treading</b> of a <i>zav</i> <b>for</b> those preparing the <b>purification</b> waters.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Before discussing the details of the <i>halakhot</i> listed in the mishna, the Gemara poses a basic question: <b>Do non-sacred</b> foods <b>and tithes</b> indeed <b>require washing the hands?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> to the mishna, from the following mishna in tractate <i>Bikkurim</i> (2:1): With regard to <b><i>teruma</i> and first fruits, one is liable to</b> the <b>death</b> penalty <b>for them,</b> e.g., if a non-priest ate them intentionally; if he did so unintentionally, he must restore the amount he ate with the addition of <b>a fifth; and they are prohibited to non-priests; and they are the property of the priest.</b> Consequently, a priest can purchase anything he wishes with them, or betroth a woman with them. <b>And</b> if they fell into non-sacred produce and became mixed with it, <b>they are nullified</b> only <b>in</b> a mixture that contains <b>one hundred and one</b> times their amount; <b>and they require washing of the hands and the setting of the sun</b> before they can be eaten, i.e., an impure priest who has immersed at the proper time must still wait for the sun to set before he is fit to eat them. <b>These</b> laws apply <b>to <i>teruma</i> and first fruits, but not to tithes.</b> The mishna adds: <b>And all the more so</b> do they not apply <b>to non-sacred</b> food.

### Part 7
This is <b>difficult:</b> The <i>halakha</i> of <b>tithes</b> stated in <i>Bikkurim</i> seems to contradict the <i>halakha</i> of <b>tithes</b> taught in the mishna here, which states that the hands must be washed before tithes are eaten. Additionally, it is <b>difficult</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of <b>non-sacred</b> food, as it contradicts the <i>halakha</i> applicable to <b>non-sacred</b> food stated in the mishna here.

### Part 8
The Gemara comments: <b>Granted,</b> one of the laws with regard to <b>tithes,</b> as opposed to the other law with regard to <b>tithes,</b> is <b>not difficult,</b> since the contradiction can be resolved as follows: <b>This</b> case, the mishna in <i>Bikkurim</i>, is in accordance <b>with Rabbi Meir, while that</b> case, the mishna here, follows <b>the Rabbis.</b>

### Part 9
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Para</i> 11:5): <b>Anything that requires immersion in water by rabbinic law renders sacrificial</b> food <b>impure.</b> If it touches a consecrated item, the latter is itself rendered impure with a second-degree ritual impurity. It also renders impure any other consecrated object that comes into contact with it with a third-degree ritual impurity <b>and invalidates <i>teruma</i>,</b> meaning that it renders the <i>teruma</i> itself impure, but not to the extent that the <i>teruma</i> can render other <i>teruma</i> impure. <b>And</b> anything that requires immersion in water by rabbinic law <b>is permitted for non-sacred</b> produce <b>and for tithes,</b> meaning that it does not render these items impure, as something impure to such a low degree does not invalidate even non-sacred food. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. But the Rabbis prohibit</b> this <b>in</b> the case of <b>tithes,</b> meaning that they are invalidated. This source demonstrates that according to the Rabbis, the <i>halakha</i> that applies to tithes differs from that of non-sacred produce, which explains why one must wash his hands for tithes. <b>However,</b> the law with regard to <b>non-sacred</b> food as opposed to the other law of <b>non-sacred</b> food is still <b>difficult.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: It is <b>not difficult. Here</b> the mishna is referring <b>to eating,</b> before which one must wash his hands. <b>There</b> the mishna in <i>Bikkurim</i> deals <b>with touching</b> alone, for which prior washing of the hands is not necessary.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi strongly objects to this: The Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Meir only with regard to eating tithes, but with regard to touching tithes and eating non-sacred</b> food <b>they do not disagree</b> with him. Therefore, the Gemara’s resolution of the difficulty with regard to non-sacred food is not acceptable. <b>Rather,</b> the previous explanation is to be rejected in favor of the following: Both <b>this</b> mishna <b>and that</b> mishna are referring <b>to eating, and</b> it is <b>not difficult: Here</b> the mishna is dealing <b>with eating bread,</b> which requires washing one’s hands, whereas <b>there,</b> in <i>Bikkurim</i>, the mishna is referring <b>to eating non-sacred fruit,</b> for which one need not wash his hands, <b>for Rav Naḥman said: Anyone who washes his hands for fruit is of the haughty of spirit</b> because he shows himself to be more particular than required by the Sages.

### Part 12
§ <b>The Sages taught: One who washes his hands,</b> if <b>he intended</b> to purify them, <b>his hands are pure; if he did not intend</b> to do so, <b>his hands are impure. Similarly,</b> in the case of <b>one who immerses his hands</b> in forty <i>se’a</i> of water, if <b>he intended</b> to purify them, <b>his hands are pure; if he did not</b> so <b>intend, his hands are impure.</b> The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>his hands are pure whether he did or did not intend</b> to purify them? <b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>there</b>, the second <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to non-sacred</b> food, for which one need not have the intention to purify his hands;

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC