
### Part 1
It refers to <b>speaking animals of fire.</b> Electrum [<i>ḥashmal</i>] is an acrostic of this phrase [<b><i>ḥayyot esh memallelot</i></b>]. <b>It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>: At times they are silent; at times they speak. When the divine speech emerges from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, they are silent; and when the divine speech does not emerge from the mouth of the Holy One, Blessed be He, they speak.</b>

### Part 2
§ The verse states: <b>“And the divine creatures ran and returned like the appearance of a flash of lightning [<i>bazak</i>]”</b> (Ezekiel 1:14). <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“ran and returned”? Rav Yehuda said: Like fire that is emitted from a furnace,</b> whose flame is continuously bursting out and withdrawing. <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“like the appearance of a flash of lightning”? Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: Like the fire that is emitted</b> from <b>between</b> pieces of <b>earthenware</b> used for refining gold, as an additional meaning ascribed to the word <i>bazak</i> is shards of earthenware.

### Part 3
The verse states: <b>“And I looked and, behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud, with a fire flashing up, so that a brightness was round about it; and out of its midst was like the color of electrum, out of the midst of the fire”</b> (Ezekiel 1:4). The Gemara poses a question: <b>Where did</b> that wind <b>go? Rav Yehuda said</b> that <b>Rav said: It went to conquer the entire world under the wicked Nebuchadnezzar. And why was all of this necessary?</b> Why was it necessary that the entire world be subjected to his dominion? <b>So that the nations of the world would not say: The Holy One, Blessed be He, delivered His children into the hands of a lowly nation.</b> Since it was already decreed that the kingdom of Israel would fall into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, God made him into a great conqueror, so that Israel would not be ashamed of being defeated by him. <b>The Holy One, Blessed be He, said</b> with regard to this: <b>Who caused Me to be an attendant to worshippers of molten images,</b> forcing Me to wage their wars? <b>It was the sins of Israel that led Me</b> to do so.

### Part 4
Another verse in the same chapter states: <b>“Now as I beheld the divine creatures, behold, one wheel [<i>ofan</i>] was upon the earth near the divine creatures”</b> (Ezekiel 1:15). <b>Rabbi Elazar said:</b> This wheel is <b>a certain angel who stands on the earth and its head reaches the divine creatures. It was taught in a <i>baraita</i>:</b> This angel <b>is named Sandalfon, who is taller than his colleague by a distance of five hundred years, and he stands behind the</b> Divine <b>Chariot and weaves crowns for his Maker.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so?</b> Can crowns be woven for God? <b>But isn’t it written: “Blessed be the Lord’s glory from His place”</b> (Ezekiel 3:12), which proves <b>by inference</b> that <b>no one knows His place?</b> Therefore, how can crowns be woven for Him? Rather, it can be done <b>by saying a name for the crown, and</b> then the crown <b>goes and sits on</b> God’s <b>head</b> of its own accord.

### Part 5
§ <b>Rava said: All that Ezekiel saw,</b> the prophet <b>Isaiah saw</b> as well, but the latter did not find it necessary to describe his vision in such detail. <b>To what may Ezekiel be compared? To a villager who saw the king</b> and is excited by all the extravagances of the king’s palace and everything it contains, as he is unaccustomed to them. <b>And to what may Isaiah be compared? To a city dweller who saw the king.</b> Such an individual focuses on the encounter with the king, and is oblivious to all the distractions. <b>Reish Lakish said: What is</b> the meaning of that <b>which is written: “I will sing to the Lord, for He is highly exalted”</b> (Exodus 15:1)? It is fitting to <b>sing to He Who is exalted above the exalted. As the Master said: The king of the beasts</b> is <b>the lion, the king of the domestic animals</b> is <b>the ox, the king of the birds</b> is <b>the eagle, and man is exalted</b> and lords <b>over them, but the Holy One, Blessed be He, is exalted above all of them and above the entire world,</b> as the creatures that appear in the Divine Chariot are the ox, the lion, the eagle, and man.

### Part 6
The Gemara poses a question with regard to the animals of the Divine Chariot: <b>One verse states: “As for the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man; and the four had the face of a lion on the right side; and the four had the face of an ox on the left side”</b> (Ezekiel 1:10). <b>And it is</b> also <b>written: “And each one had four faces: The first face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle”</b> (Ezekiel 10:14), <b>but it does not include</b> the face of <b>an ox</b> in this second list. <b>Reish Lakish said: Ezekiel requested mercy</b> with regard to <b>it,</b> i.e., the face of the ox, <b>and had it turned into a cherub. He said before Him</b> as follows: <b>Master of the Universe.</b> Shall <b>an accuser [<i>kateigor</i>] become a defender [<i>saneigor</i>]?</b> As the face of an ox recalls Israel’s sin of the Golden Calf, it would be preferable for there to be a different face on the Divine Chariot.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of <b>“cherub”? Rabbi Abbahu said: Like a baby</b> [<b><i>keravya</i></b>], <b>for in Babylonia they call a baby <i>ravya</i>. Rav Pappa said to Abaye: However, if that is so, what is</b> the meaning of <b>that which is written: “The first face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle”? The face of a cherub is</b> the same as <b>the face of a man;</b> what is the difference between them? He replied: The difference is that the face of a man is referring to <b>a large face,</b> whereas the face of a cherub means the <b>small face</b> of a baby.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks another question: <b>One verse states: “Each one had six wings;</b> with two it covered its face and with two it covered its feet, and with two it flew” (Isaiah 6:2), <b>and another verse states: “And every one had four faces, and every one of them had four wings”</b> (Ezekiel 1:6). The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here,</b> when the verse states they each had six wings, it is referring <b>to the time when the Temple is standing,</b> while <b>there,</b> where four wings are described, it is referring <b>to the time when the Temple is not standing,</b> for <b>it is as if</b> the number of <b>the wings of the animals were diminished</b> so that they now have only four.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Which of</b> the wings <b>were diminished? Rav Ḥananel said</b> that <b>Rav said: Those with which they recite song.</b> The proof is that <b>it is written here: “And with two it flew</b> [<b><i>yeofef</i></b> ]. <b>And one called to the other and said”</b> (Isaiah 6:2–3), <b>and it is written: “Will you set</b> [<b><i>hata’if</i> ] your eyes upon it? It is gone”</b> (Proverbs 23:5), implying that the flight of these wings had ceased.

### Part 10
<b>And the Rabbis say</b> that the wings they lost are <b>those with which they cover their feet, for it is stated: “And their feet were straight feet”</b> (Ezekiel 1:7). <b>Now if</b> these wings <b>had not been diminished, how would he know</b> what their feet looked like? Clearly their feet were no longer covered. The Gemara rejects this: This is no proof, for <b>perhaps they were</b> momentarily <b>revealed,</b> allowing him to <b>see them. Because if you do not say so,</b> that he saw them for a moment, then with regard to the verse: <b>“And the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man”</b> (Ezekiel 1:10), <b>so too</b> will you say <b>that these</b> the wings covering their faces <b>were diminished</b> as well? <b>Rather,</b> it must be <b>that they were revealed and he saw them. Here too, they were revealed and he saw them.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara refutes this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? Granted,</b> it is logical that <b>his face</b> was revealed, as <b>it is proper conduct</b> for an angel <b>to reveal</b> his face <b>before his Master,</b> and therefore it is possible that they would have revealed their faces at certain times; but with regard to <b>his feet,</b> it is <b>not proper conduct to reveal</b> them <b>before his Master.</b> Therefore, they must have lacked wings to cover their feet.

### Part 12
§ The Gemara continues to address apparent contradictions between verses concerning similar matters: <b>One verse states: “A thousand thousands ministered to Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him”</b> (Daniel 7:10), <b>and another verse states: “Is there a number to His troops?”</b> (Job 25:3), implying that they are even more numerous than “ten thousand times ten thousand.” The Gemara answers: This is <b>not difficult,</b> for <b>here,</b> when they are without number, the verse is referring <b>to the time when the Temple is standing; there,</b> the other verse is referring <b>to the time when the Temple is not standing,</b> for <b>it is as though the heavenly entourage [<i>pamalya</i>] were diminished.</b>

### Part 13
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says in the name of Abba Yosei ben Dosai: “A thousand thousands ministered to Him”</b> is referring to the <b>number</b> of angels in <b>a single troop,</b> but with regard to the number of his troops, it can be said: <b>“And to his troops, there is no number”. And Rabbi Yirmeya bar Abba said:</b> There is no contradiction, since with regard to the phrase <b>“a thousand thousands ministered to Him,”</b> the pronoun “Him” can be literally translated as: It, referring not to those who serve God Himself, but to those who administer <b>to the River Dinur, as it is stated: “A fiery [<i>dinur</i>] river issued and came forth from before him; a thousand thousands ministered to it, and a myriad myriads stand before it”</b> (Daniel 7:10). The ministers of God, however, are indeed too numerous to count.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>From where does</b> this river <b>flow?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>From the perspiration of the divine creatures. And where does</b> it <b>flow to? Rav Zutra bar Toviya said</b> that <b>Rav said: Upon the heads of the wicked in Gehenna, as it is stated: “Behold, a storm of the Lord has gone forth in fury, a whirling storm; it shall whirl upon the head of the wicked”</b> (Jeremiah 23:19). <b>And Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said:</b> The river flows <b>over those who were snatched away,</b> i.e., the generations that were never created, <b>as it is stated: “Who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured out as a stream”</b> (Job 22:16), implying that the River Dinur flows over them. <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon HeḤasid said</b> in explanation of this verse: <b>These</b> people “who were snatched away” are <b>those nine hundred and seventy-four generations that were snatched away;</b> they were to have <b>been created</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC