
### Part 1
<b>that are mingled,</b> <i>amei ha’aretz</i> <b>are trusted with regard to them during the period of the winepress and the olive press, and</b> also up to <b>seventy days before the winepress,</b> for that is when people begin to purify their vessels in preparation for the wine-pressing season.

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that <i>amei ha’aretz</i> are trusted with regard to the purity of sacrificial wine and oil in Judea. The Gemara infers: <b>In Judea, yes, but in the Galilee, no. What is the reason</b> for this distinction between the two places?

### Part 3
<b>Reish Lakish said:</b> It is <b>because a strip</b> of land inhabited <b>by Samaritans [<i>Kutim</i>] separates between</b> Judea and the Galilee, and it is impossible to travel from one land to the other without traversing this strip. The Sages decreed that lands inhabited by non-Jewish nations are considered ritually impure, so that it would be impossible to transport food from the Galilee to Judea, where the Temple is located, without the food becoming impure. Therefore, even oil and wine prepared by <i>ḥaverim</i> who lived in the Galilee were not accepted for sacrificial use.

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>And let</b> the residents of the Galilee <b>place</b> the wine and oil and transport it to Judea <b>in a</b> closed <b>box, a chest, or a closet,</b> whose contents cannot contract impurity, as they have the status of separate tents. The Gemara answers: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>who said: A thrown tent,</b> i.e., a moving tent, <b>is not called a</b> proper <b>tent,</b> and therefore its contents are subject to impurity. In our case, then, the contents would contract the impurity decreed upon the lands of non-Jewish nations. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Concerning <b>one who enters a land of non-Jewish nations</b> sitting <b>in a box, a chest, or a closet, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>declares</b> him to be <b>impure, and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, declares</b> him to be <b>pure.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a further difficulty: <b>And let them bring</b> oil and wine to the Temple <b>in an earthenware vessel sealed</b> with <b>a tightly bound cover,</b> which cannot contract impurity even if it is in the same tent as a corpse, as it states: “And every open vessel, which has no covering tightly bound upon it, is unclean” (Numbers 19:15). <b>Rabbi Eliezer said:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Sacrificial</b> food, unlike other items, is <b>not spared</b> from impurity <b>by</b> being in a container with <b>a tightly bound cover.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Water of <b>purification</b> containing ashes from the red heifer <b>is not spared</b> from impurity <b>by</b> being in a vessel with <b>a tightly bound cover? What, is it not</b> implied in the <i>baraita</i> <b>this</b> inference: That <b>sacrificial</b> food <b>is spared</b> from impurity in such a situation? The <i>baraita</i> seems to imply that this is a special stringency for water of purification, which does not apply to anything else, including sacrificial food. The Gemara rejects this: <b>No,</b> the <i>baraita’s</i> inference should be understood differently, as <b>this: Water that has not</b> yet <b>been consecrated</b> by being mixed with ashes of the red heifer <b>is spared</b> from impurity <b>by</b> being in a vessel with <b>a tightly bound cover,</b> even if they are designated for such a use at a later stage.

### Part 7
The Gemara raises another difficulty: <b>But didn’t Ulla say: <i>Ḥaverim</i> purify</b> their wine and oil, i.e., they produce their wine and oil by the standards of purity used for sacrificial food <b>in the Galilee,</b> to be used for sacrificial purposes? This indicates that there must have been some way of transporting them from the Galilee to the Temple, for otherwise why would they have prepared such items? The Gemara answers: Indeed, they could not transfer these items to the Temple. Rather, they would <b>leave</b> them in their place, <b>and</b> their thought was that <b>when Elijah comes</b> in messianic times and <b>purifies</b> the road from Galilee to Judea, these items will become eligible for use.

### Part 8
§ It was taught in the mishna: <b>And during the period of the winepress</b> and olive press, <i>amei ha’aretz</i> <b>are trusted even with regard to</b> the purity of <b><i>teruma</i>. And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from the following teaching: An <i>am ha’aretz</i> <b>who finishes</b> pressing <b>his olives should leave over one sack</b> of unpressed olives, <b>and give it to a poor priest</b> as <i>teruma</i>, so that the priest himself can make ritually pure oil from it. This shows that even during the period of the olive press the <i>am ha’aretz</i> is not trusted to make pure olive oil himself.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Naḥman said:</b> This is <b>not difficult. This</b> case of the mishna, where <i>amei ha’aretz</i> are trusted to produce pure olive oil themselves, is referring <b>to</b> people who press their olives <b>early,</b> during the regular season of the olive press, while <b>that</b> case is referring <b>to</b> those who press their olives <b>later,</b> after the period when most people press their olives has passed. <b>Rav Adda bar Ahava said to him:</b> Such as <b>what</b> case, <b>for example?</b> Such <b>as those</b> olives <b>of your father’s house.</b> Rav Naḥman’s father had many olives, and he often pressed them after the regular pressing season.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Yosef said</b> a different resolution of the above contradiction. The source that states that <i>amei ha’aretz</i> are not trusted <b>was taught</b> with <b>regard to the Galilee,</b> and as the mishna taught earlier concerning sacrificial wine and oil, <i>amei ha’aretz</i> are trusted only in Judea and not in the Galilee. <b>Abaye raised an objection to him</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Transjordan and the Galilee are like Judea,</b> in that <b>they are trusted with regard to wine</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>during the period of wine</b> production, <b>and with regard to oil</b> of <i>teruma</i> <b>during the period of oil</b> production. <b>However,</b> they are <b>not</b> trusted <b>with regard to wine during the period of oil</b> production, <b>nor</b> are they trusted <b>with regard to oil during the period of wine</b> production. This <i>baraita</i> shows that with regard to <i>teruma</i> there is no difference between the trustworthiness of <i>amei ha’aretz</i> who live in the Galilee and that of those who live in Judea.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> Rav Yosef’s answer must be rejected, and <b>it is clear</b> that the correct answer is <b>as we answered initially,</b> that it is speaking of the period following the conclusion of the winepress.

### Part 12
§ It was taught in the mishna: Once <b>the</b> periods of the <b>winepress and olive press have passed,</b> if <i>amei ha’aretz</i> <b>brought to</b> a <i>ḥaver</i> priest a <b>barrel of <i>teruma</i> wine, he may not accept it from them. But</b> the giver <b>may leave it</b> over <b>for the following winepress</b> season, in the following year. <b>They raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> If the priest <b>violated</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>and did accept</b> the wine from an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Is it permissible <b>that he should leave it</b> over for himself <b>for the following winepress</b> season? Since it is permissible to accept the wine and oil of an <i>am ha’aretz</i> intentionally left until that time, perhaps it is also permissible if the priest himself intentionally leaves it over until that time. <b>He said to him: You learned it</b> in a mishna (<i>Demai</i> 6:9):

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC