
### Part 1
The Gemara asks with regard to the fact that Jehoahaz was anointed: <b>And was there anointing oil</b> during the days of Jehoahaz? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When the Ark of the Covenant was sequestered, the anointing oil, and the jar of <i>manna</i></b> (see Exodus 16:33), <b>and Aaron’s staff</b> with <b>its almonds and blossoms</b> (see Numbers 17:23), <b>and the chest that the Philistines sent</b> as <b>a gift to Israel,</b> were all <b>sequestered</b> with it, <b>as it is stated:</b> “And you shall take the Ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart, <b>and put the vessels of gold that you return Him as a guilt-offering in a chest by its side and send it away that it may go”</b> (I Samuel 6:8).

### Part 2
<b>And who sequestered</b> the Ark? <b>Josiah, king of Judea, sequestered it, as he saw that it is written in the Torah</b> in the portion of rebuke: <b>“The Lord will lead you, and your king</b> whom you shall establish over you, unto a nation that you have not known” (Deuteronomy 28:36). <b>He commanded and</b> the people <b>sequestered them, as it is stated: “And he said to the Levites who taught all Israel, and who were sacred unto the Lord: Place the sacred Ark in the room that Solomon, son of David, king of Israel built; there shall be no more burden upon your shoulders. Now serve the Lord your God and His people Israel”</b> (II Chronicles 35:3).

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Elazar says: One derives</b> a verbal analogy between the term: <b>There,</b> written with regard to the Ark (see Exodus 29:43), and the term: <b>There,</b> written with regard to the jar of <i>manna</i> (see Exodus 16:33); and between the term: <b>Keepsake,</b> written with regard to the jar of <i>manna</i> (see Exodus 16:33), and the term: <b>Keepsake,</b> written with regard to Aaron’s staff (see Numbers 17:25–26); and between the term: <b>Generations,</b> written with regard to the jar of <i>manna</i> (see Exodus 16:33), and the term: <b>Generations,</b> written with regard to the anointing oil (see Exodus 30:31). By means of these verbal analogies it is derived that all of these items were sequestered. <b>Rav Pappa said:</b> They anointed Jehoahaz <b>with pure balsam</b> oil, not with anointing oil.

### Part 4
§ <b>The Sages taught: How does one anoint the kings?</b> One smears the oil in a manner that is <b>similar to</b> the form of <b>a crown</b> around his head. <b>And</b> how does one anoint <b>the priests?</b> One smears the oil in a shape <b>like</b> the Greek letter <b>chi.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Like</b> the Greek letter <b>chi? Rav Menashya bar Gadda said: Like</b> the <b>Greek</b> equivalent of the Hebrew letter <b><i>kaf</i>.</b>

### Part 5
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>one</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Initially, they pour oil on</b> the priest’s <b>head, and thereafter, they place oil for him between the lashes of his eyes. And it is taught</b> in <b>a different</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>Initially, they place oil for him between the lashes of his eyes, and thereafter, they pour oil on his head.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>It is</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. Some say: Anointing</b> with oil between his eyes <b>is preferable</b> and takes precedence, <b>and some say: Pouring</b> oil on his head <b>is preferable</b> and takes precedence.

### Part 6
<b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of the one who said</b> that <b>pouring</b> oil on his head <b>is preferable?</b> It is <b>as it is written: “And he poured from the anointing oil upon Aaron’s head and anointed him to sanctify him”</b> (Leviticus 8:12), indicating that pouring precedes anointing. <b>And the one who said</b> that <b>anointing is preferable</b> and takes precedence, <b>what is the reason</b> for his opinion? <b>He holds:</b> Anointing takes precedence <b>as</b> that is what <b>you find with regard to service vessels</b> (see Numbers 7:1). They were anointed, but the anointing oil was not poured on them. The Gemara asks: <b>But isn’t it written</b> with regard to the priests: <b>“And he poured,” and ultimately: “And anointed”?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>This</b> is what the verse <b>is saying: What is the reason</b> that <b>he poured</b> the oil? It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he</b> had already <b>anointed</b> them. Anointing is the primary component of the process.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught: “It is like the precious oil upon the head coming down upon the beard, Aaron’s beard,</b> that comes down upon the collar of his garments” (Psalms 133:2). <b>Two drops</b> of anointing oil, <b>shaped like pearls, were suspended for Aaron from his beard. Rav Pappa said</b> that it is <b>taught: When</b> Aaron would <b>speak</b> and his beard would move, those drops would miraculously <b>rise and settle on the roots of his beard</b> so that they would not fall. <b>Moses was concerned about this matter. He said: Perhaps, Heaven forfend, I misused</b> the consecrated <b>anointing oil</b> and poured more than necessary, as two additional drops remain? <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said: “It is like the precious oil</b> upon the head coming down upon the beard, Aaron’s beard, that comes down upon the collar of his garments. <b>Like the dew of Hermon”</b> (Psalms 133:2–3). This analogy teaches: <b>Just as there is no misuse of the dew of Hermon,</b> which is not consecrated, <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>the anointing oil that is on Aaron’s beard, there is no misuse</b> of consecrated property.

### Part 8
<b>And still Aaron was concerned. He said: Perhaps Moses did not misuse</b> consecrated property; <b>but</b> perhaps <b>I misused</b> consecrated property, as the additional oil is on my beard and I enjoy it. <b>A Divine Voice emerged and said: “Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity”</b> (Psalms 133:1). <b>Just as</b> your brother <b>Moses did not misuse</b> consecrated property, <b>so too, you did not misuse</b> consecrated property.

### Part 9
<b>The Sages taught: One anoints the kings only upon a spring,</b> as an omen, <b>so that their kingdom will continue</b> like a spring, <b>as it is stated</b> with regard to the coronation of Solomon before the death of David: <b>“And the king said unto them: Take with you the servants of your lord,</b> and let Solomon my son ride upon my own mule, <b>and bring him down to Gihon.</b> And let Tzadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel and sound the shofar and say: Long live King Solomon” (I Kings 1:33–34).

### Part 10
§ Apropos good omens, the Gemara cites a statement that <b>Rabbi Ami said: This</b> person <b>who seeks to know if he will complete his year or if</b> he will <b>not,</b> i.e., whether or not he will remain alive in the coming year, <b>let him light a lamp, during the ten days that are between Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur, in a house in which wind does not blow. If its light continues</b> to burn, <b>he knows that he</b> will <b>complete his year.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And one who seeks to conduct a business venture and wishes to know if he will succeed</b> or <b>if</b> he will <b>not succeed, let him raise a rooster. If</b> the rooster <b>grows fat and healthy, he will succeed.</b>

### Part 12
<b>One who seeks to embark on a journey and wishes to know if he</b> will <b>return and come to</b> his <b>home</b> or <b>if</b> he will <b>not, let him go to a dark [<i>daḥavara</i>] house. If he sees the shadow of a shadow he shall know that he</b> will <b>return and come home.</b> The Sages reject this: This omen <b>is not</b> a significant <b>matter. Perhaps he will be disheartened</b> if the omen fails to appear, <b>and his fortune will suffer</b> and it is this that causes him to fail. <b>Abaye said: Now that you said</b> that <b>an omen is</b> a significant <b>matter, a person should always be accustomed to seeing</b> these <b>on Rosh HaShana: Squash, and fenugreek, leeks, and chard, and dates,</b> as each of these grows quickly and serves as a positive omen for one’s actions during the coming year.

### Part 13
Apropos good omens, <b>Rav Mesharshiyya said to his son: When you seek to enter and study before your teacher, study the <i>baraita</i></b> first, <b>and</b> only then <b>enter before your teacher. And when you are sitting before him, look to his mouth, as it is written: “And your eyes shall see your teacher”</b> (Isaiah 30:20). <b>And when you study, study adjacent to a river of water; just as the water flows, your studies will flow</b> unimpeded. He added: <b>And</b> it is preferable for you to <b>sit on the rubbish heaps [<i>akilkelei</i>] of Mata Meḥasya, and do not sit in the palaces [<i>appadnei</i>] of Pumbedita. Better to eat the rotten fish [<i>gildana</i>] of Mata Meḥasya than</b> to eat <b><i>kutḥa</i>, which displaces rocks,</b> a metaphor for how potent it is.

### Part 14
Apropos good omens for anointing, it is stated in the prayer of Hannah, Samuel’s mother: <b>“My horn is exalted in my God”</b> (I Samuel 2:1). The Gemara infers: <b>My horn is exalted, and my jug is not exalted. David and Solomon were anointed with</b> oil from <b>a horn.</b> This was a good omen for them and <b>their reign endured. Saul and Jehu were anointed with</b> oil from <b>a jug and their reign did not endure.</b>

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches: And who is the anointed priest? It is the High Priest <b>who is anointed with the anointing oil,</b> not the High Priest consecrated by donning multiple garments. <b>The Sages taught: “Anointed”</b> is written in the verse (Leviticus 6:15). One <b>might</b> have thought that the reference is to <b>a king.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Priest.” If</b> the reference is to <b>a priest,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the reference is to a priest consecrated by donning <b>multiple garments.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “Anointed.” If</b> the reference is to one who is <b>anointed,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that the reference is even to a priest <b>anointed for war.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And the anointed priest,”</b> indicating <b>that there is no anointed</b> priest <b>over him;</b> rather, he is the highest-ranking priest.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is this <b>inferred?</b> The Gemara answers: It is <b>as Rava said</b> with regard to the term <b>“the thigh”</b> in the verse: “The sciatic nerve that is on the hollow of the thigh” (Genesis 32:33); the reference is to <b>the stronger of the thighs. Here too,</b> where the verse states: <b>“The anointed,”</b> the reference is to <b>the</b> most <b>distinguished of</b> those <b>anointed,</b> i.e., the High Priest.

### Part 17
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>The Master said: “Anointed”</b> is written in the verse. One <b>might</b> have thought that the reference is to <b>a king.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is it a bull that a king brings</b> for a sin-offering? <b>It is a male goat that he brings,</b> as the Torah states explicitly, later in that passage. The Gemara answers: It <b>was necessary</b> for the <i>tanna</i> to say this, as it may <b>enter your mind to say:</b> It is <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> for which all people are liable to bring a sin-offering that a king <b>shall bring</b> a male goat as his offering; but <b>for absence</b> of awareness <b>of the matter</b> with the unwitting performance of an action, a king <b>shall bring a bull.</b> Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches us</b> that it is only the High Priest who brings a bull.

### Part 18
§ The mishna teaches: <b>The difference between</b> a High <b>Priest anointed with the anointing oil</b> and one consecrated by donning multiple garments is only that the latter does not bring the bull that comes for the transgression of any of the mitzvot. The Gemara comments: <b>The mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, as, if it was</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: A priest who is consecrated by donning <b>multiple garments brings a bull that comes for</b> the transgression of <b>any of the mitzvot;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir, but the Rabbis did not concede</b> that point <b>to him.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Meir?</b> It is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“Anointed”</b> is written in the verse. <b>I have</b> derived <b>only a priest anointed with the anointing oil. From where</b> do I derive the <i>halakha</i> of a priest who is consecrated by donning <b>multiple garments? The verse states: “The anointed priest,”</b> from which it is derived that anyone who is appointed as the High Priest is included, even if he was not anointed.

### Part 20
The Gemara asks: <b>In accordance with which</b> opinion <b>did you interpret</b> the mishna? It is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC