
### Part 1
<b>I am granting you servitude, as it is stated: “And they spoke to him saying: If you will be a servant to this people today”</b> (I Kings 12:7). This explains the phrase “in an independent house.”

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states concerning a king: <b>“When [<i>asher</i>] a king sins”</b> (Leviticus 4:22). <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said: Happy [<i>ashrei</i>] is the generation whose king</b> feels the need to <b>bring an offering for his unwitting</b> transgression. <b>If</b> the generation’s <b>king brings an offering, you must say</b> all the more so <b>what a commoner</b> will do to atone for his sin, i.e., he will certainly bring an offering. <b>And if</b> the king <b>brings an offering for his unwitting</b> transgression, <b>you must say</b> all the more so <b>what</b> he will do to atone for <b>his intentional</b> transgression, i.e., he will certainly repent.

### Part 3
<b>Rava, son of Rabba, objects to this: If that is so,</b> and the term <i>asher</i> is interpreted in that manner, then concerning that <b>which is written: “And he shall pay for that which [<i>asher</i>] he has sinned from the sacred item”</b> (Leviticus 5:16), <b>and with regard to Jeroboam, son of Nevat, about whom it is written: “Who [<i>asher</i>] sinned and caused others to sin”</b> (I Kings 14:16), <b>so too</b> is the interpretation <b>that this generation is happy?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Here,</b> in the case of a king who brings an offering, it <b>is different, as the verse altered its formulation;</b> in parallel verses, the term “if” is utilized, e.g., in the verse: “If the anointed priest shall sin” (Leviticus 4:3). In the other instances, <i>asher</i> is the standard formulation.

### Part 4
Apropos the homiletic interpretation of the term <i>asher</i>, <b>Rav Naḥman bar Ḥisda interpreted</b> a verse homiletically: <b>What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “There is a vanity that is [<i>asher</i>] performed upon the earth;</b> that there are [<i>asher</i>] righteous men to whom it happens according to [<i>asher</i>] the action of the wicked, and there are wicked men to whom it happens according to the action of the righteous” (Ecclesiastes 8:14)? <b>Happy [<i>ashrei</i>] are the righteous, to whom it happens in this world according to the experiences of the wicked in the World-to-Come,</b> i.e., they suffer in this world. <b>Woe unto the wicked, to whom it happens in this world according to the experiences of the righteous in the World-to-Come,</b> i.e., they enjoy this world.

### Part 5
<b>Rava said: Is that to say that if the righteous enjoyed two worlds it would be awful for them?</b> Why must the righteous suffer in this world? <b>Rather, Rava said</b> as follows: <b>Happy are the righteous to whom it happens in this world according to the experiences of the wicked in this world,</b> i.e., happy are the righteous who enjoy this world as well. <b>Woe to the wicked, to whom it happens in this world according to the experiences of the righteous in this world,</b> i.e., like the many righteous people who suffer in this world.

### Part 6
The Gemara relates: <b>Rav Pappa and Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, came before Rava.</b> Rava <b>said to them: Have you mastered this tractate and that tractate? They said to him: Yes.</b> Rava said to them: <b>Have you become somewhat wealthy? They said to him: Yes, as</b> each of <b>us bought a parcel of land</b> from which we earn our livelihoods. Rava <b>proclaimed about them: Happy are the righteous, to whom it happens in this world according to</b> the goodness resulting from <b>the actions of the wicked in this world.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “For the ways of the Lord are right, and the righteous will walk in them and transgressors will stumble in them”</b> (Hosea 14:10)? It is <b>comparable to</b> an incident involving <b>two people who roasted their Paschal offerings. One ate it for the sake of</b> the <b>mitzva, and</b> the other <b>one ate it</b> with gusto, <b>for the sake of excessive eating.</b> With regard to <b>that</b> person <b>who ate it for the sake of</b> the <b>mitzva,</b> it is written: <b>“The righteous will walk in them.”</b> With regard to <b>that</b> person <b>who ate it for the sake of excessive eating,</b> it is written: <b>“And transgressors will stumble in them.”</b>

### Part 8
<b>Reish Lakish said to</b> Rabba bar bar Ḥana: <b>Did you call</b> the one who ate the Paschal offering for the sake of excessive eating <b>wicked? Although he did not perform</b> the <b>mitzva</b> in the <b>ideal</b> manner, <b>didn’t he eat</b> the <b>Paschal offering?</b> Since he fulfilled the mitzva, how can he be characterized as a transgressor? <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>analogous to</b> an incident involving <b>two people; this</b> one has <b>his wife and his sister with him in</b> a dark <b>house and that</b> one has <b>his wife and his sister with him in</b> a dark <b>house. One</b> of them, <b>his wife happened</b> to come <b>to him</b> and he engaged in intercourse with her, <b>and</b> the other <b>one, his sister happened</b> to come <b>to him</b> and he engaged in intercourse with her. With regard to <b>that</b> one, <b>to whom his wife happened</b> to come, it is written: <b>“The righteous will walk in them.”</b> With regard to <b>that</b> one, <b>to whom his sister happened</b> to come, it is written: <b>“And transgressors will stumble in them.”</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>Are these</b> matters <b>comparable?</b> In the verse, <b>we are speaking of one path</b> upon which both the righteous and the wicked walk, <b>and here,</b> in the incident mentioned by Reish Lakish, there are <b>two paths,</b> as the two people are not performing the same action. <b>Rather,</b> it is <b>analogous to</b> the incident involving <b>Lot and his two daughters</b> (see Genesis 19:30–38): With regard to the daughters, <b>who,</b> when engaging in intercourse with their father, <b>intended</b> their action <b>for the sake of a mitzva,</b> as they believed that the world had been destroyed and that only they remained alive, it is written: <b>“The righteous will walk in them.”</b> With regard to Lot, <b>who intended</b> his action <b>for the sake of a transgression,</b> it is written: <b>“And transgressors will stumble in them.”</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: <b>Perhaps</b> Lot <b>too intended</b> his action <b>for the sake of a mitzva. Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that <b>this entire verse:</b> “And Lot cast his eyes and beheld the entire plain of the Jordan that it was well watered everywhere” (Genesis 13:10), <b>is stated in the context of transgression.</b>

### Part 11
He explains: <b>“And Lot cast</b> his eyes” is an allusion to the verse: <b>“His master’s wife cast her eyes</b> upon Joseph and said: Lie with me” (Genesis 39:7). <b>“His eyes”</b> is an allusion to the verse: <b>“And Samson said: Get her for me, as she is pleasing to my eyes”</b> (Judges 14:3). <b>“And beheld”</b> is an allusion to the verse: <b>“And Shechem, son of Hamor,</b> the prince of the land, <b>beheld her;</b> and he took her and lay with her” (Genesis 34:2). <b>“The entire plain [<i>kikar</i>] of the Jordan”</b> is an allusion to the verse: <b>“For on account of a prostitute a man is brought to a loaf [<i>kikar</i>] of bread”</b> (Proverbs 6:26). <b>“That it was well watered [<i>mashke</i>] everywhere”</b> is an allusion to the verse <b>“I will follow my lovers, givers of my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, my oil and my drink [<i>veshikkuyai</i>]”</b> (Hosea 2:7).

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: Why is Lot accused of wrongdoing? <b>Wasn’t he</b> the victim of <b>circumstances beyond his control,</b> as he was drunk and asleep? It is <b>taught in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Rabbi Ḥoni: Why is it dotted over</b> the letter <b><i>vav</i> that</b> is in the word <b>“<i>bekumah</i>”</b> written with regard to Lot’s <b>elder</b> daughter in the verse: “And he knew not when she lay down, nor when she arose [<i>bekumah</i>]” (Genesis 19:33)? It is <b>to say to you that when she lay down he did not know; but when she arose, he knew.</b> Therefore, his action was not completely beyond his control. The Gemara asks: <b>And what was he to do? What was, was.</b> The Gemara answers: He should have <b>derived from it that on the following night he should not drink.</b> Since he drank again, this indicates that he did so with intent to engage in intercourse with his other daughter.

### Part 13
Apropos Lot, <b>Rabba taught: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “A brother betrayed a strong city, and their contentions are like the bars of a castle”</b> (Proverbs 18:19)? <b>“A brother betrayed a strong city”; that is Lot, who parted from Abraham. “And their contentions are like the bars of a castle”</b> is stated <b>because he,</b> i.e., Lot, <b>introduced contention between Israel and Ammon, as it is stated: “An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 23:4).

### Part 14
<b>Rava taught, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak</b> who taught: <b>What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “He that separates himself seeks his own desire, and snarls against all sound wisdom”</b> (Proverbs 18:1)? <b>“He that separates himself seeks his own desire”; that is Lot, who separated from Abraham</b> to pursue his lust. <b>“And snarls [<i>yitgalla</i>] against all sound wisdom”; his shame was revealed [<i>shenitgalla</i>] in synagogues and study halls,</b> where the <i>halakha</i> concerning his offspring is taught; <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 76a): <b>An Ammonite and a Moabite,</b> descendants of Lot, <b>are forbidden</b> with <b>a permanent prohibition.</b>

### Part 15
§ <b>And Ulla says: Tamar engaged in licentiousness</b> with Judah (see Genesis, chapter 38), <b>and Zimri engaged in licentiousness</b> with Cozbi (see Numbers 25:6–9). <b>Tamar engaged in licentiousness,</b> and <b>kings and prophets emerged from her. Zimri engaged in licentiousness,</b> and <b>tens of thousands from the Jewish people fell. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: A transgression</b> performed <b>for the sake of</b> Heaven <b>is greater than a mitzva</b> performed <b>not for its own sake, as it is stated: “Blessed above women shall be Yael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, above women in the tent shall she be blessed”</b> (Judges 5:24). <b>Who are</b> these <b>“women in the tent”?</b> They are <b>Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah,</b> and Yael is more blessed than they are. Apparently, a mitzva performed not for its own sake is a negative phenomenon.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say</b> that <b>Rav says: A person should always engage in Torah</b> study <b>and</b> the performance of <b>mitzvot, even</b> if he does so <b>not for its</b> own <b>sake, as through</b> the performance of mitzvot <b>not for its</b> own <b>sake,</b> one gains understanding and <b>comes</b> to perform them <b>for its</b> own <b>sake.</b> Apparently, even when performed not for its own sake a mitzva is still a positive phenomenon. The Gemara emends the statement: <b>Say</b> that the status of a transgression performed for the sake of Heaven is <b>like</b> that of <b>a mitzva</b> performed <b>not for its</b> own <b>sake.</b>

### Part 17
Apropos Yael, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: That wicked</b> man Sisera <b>performed seven</b> acts of <b>intercourse</b> with Yael <b>at that time, as it is stated: “Between her legs he crouched, he fell, he lay;</b> between her legs he crouched, he fell; where he crouched, there he fell dead” (Judges 5:27). Each of the seven verbs is a euphemism for intercourse. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t she experience pleasure from</b> the <b>transgression</b> of engaging in intercourse with Sisera? Why does the verse praise her? <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai: Even the good</b> provided <b>by the wicked is bad for the righteous,</b> so Yael did not experience any pleasure from her intercourse with Sisera.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: A person should always engage in Torah</b> study <b>and</b> the performance of <b>mitzvot, even</b> if he does so <b>not for its own sake, as through</b> the performance of mitzvot <b>not for its own sake,</b> one gains understanding and <b>comes</b> to perform them <b>for its own sake.</b> Proof for this can be adduced from the incident involving Balak, <b>as in reward for the forty-two offerings that Balak the wicked sacrificed</b> to God, despite the fact that he did this in order to curse the Jewish people (see Numbers, chapter 23), <b>he merited and Ruth emerged from him, as Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says: Ruth was the daughter of the son of Eglon, the son of the son of Balak, king of Moab.</b>

### Part 19
§ Apropos Lot and his daughters, <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not withhold even</b> the <b>reward for euphemistic speech?</b> It is derived <b>from here, as the elder</b> daughter <b>called her son Moab,</b> an allusion to the fact that the child is from her own father [<i>me’av</i>], and <b>the Merciful One said to Moses: “Be not at enmity with Moab, neither contend with them in battle”</b> (Deuteronomy 2:9). From this it may be inferred: <b>It is</b> in <b>battle</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC