
### Part 1
<b>Just as there,</b> in the passage with regard to the king, the reference is to one <b>over whom there is only the Lord his God, so too,</b> with regard to <b>a <i>nasi</i>,</b> the reference is to one <b>over whom there is only the Lord his God.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>raised a dilemma before Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> In a case <b>where I</b> perform an unwitting transgression, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: Would I be liable to atone <b>with a goat</b> as a sin-offering because I am the <i>Nasi</i>, or is my atonement with a ewe or a female goat, like a commoner, because I am not the king? Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to him: Your rival,</b> the Exilarch <b>in Babylonia,</b> is as great as you; therefore, you are not akin to a king. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>raised an objection to</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya from a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>kings of</b> the kingdom of <b>Israel and kings of the house of David</b> perform an unwitting transgression, <b>these bring</b> a sin-offering <b>for themselves</b> as kings, <b>and those bring</b> a sin-offering <b>for themselves</b> as kings. This indicates that even if a king has a counterpart who is as powerful as he is, he brings a male goat as his sin-offering. Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: <b>There,</b> the kings <b>were not subject to each other’s authority. Here,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, <b>we are subject to their authority,</b> as the authority of the Exilarch is greater than the authority of the <i>Nasi</i>.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Safra taught</b> the exchange in <b>this</b> manner: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>raised a dilemma before Rabbi Ḥiyya:</b> In a case <b>where I</b> perform an unwitting transgression, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>: Would I be liable to atone <b>with a male goat</b> as a sin-offering because I am the <i>Nasi</i>, or is my atonement with a ewe or a female goat, like a commoner, because I am not the king? Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>said to him: There,</b> the Exilarch has authority that is represented by <b>a scepter; here,</b> in Eretz Yisrael, we have lesser authority, which is represented by <b>a staff. And it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“The scepter shall not depart from Judah”</b> (Genesis 49:10); <b>this</b> is a reference to <b>the Exilarch in Babylonia, who reigns over the Jewish people with a rod,</b> as he is authorized by the gentile monarchy to impose his will. <b>“Nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet”</b> (Genesis 49:10); <b>these are the descendants of Hillel, who</b> serve in the role of the <i>Nasi</i> and <b>teach Torah to the Jewish people in public,</b> but who are not authorized by the government to impose their will.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And who is the anointed</b> priest? It is the High Priest <b>who is anointed with the anointing oil, not the</b> High Priest consecrated by donning <b>multiple garments,</b> i.e., one who served after the anointing oil had been sequestered, toward the end of the First Temple period. <b>The difference between</b> a High <b>Priest anointed with the anointing oil and</b> one consecrated by donning <b>multiple garments</b> unique to the High Priest <b>is only</b> that the latter does not bring the <b>bull that comes for</b> the transgression of <b>any of the mitzvot.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And the difference between</b> a High <b>Priest</b> currently <b>serving</b> in that capacity <b>and a former</b> High <b>Priest</b> who had temporarily filled that position while the High Priest was unfit for service <b>is only</b> with regard to the <b>bull</b> brought by the High Priest on <b>Yom Kippur and the tenth of an ephah</b> meal-offering brought by the High Priest daily. Each of these offerings is brought only by the current High Priest, and not by a former High Priest.

### Part 6
Both <b>this</b> High Priest currently serving <b>and that</b> former High Priest <b>are equal with regard to</b> performing the rest of <b>the Yom Kippur service, and they are</b> both <b>commanded with regard to</b> marrying <b>a virgin</b> (see Leviticus 21:13), <b>and</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> for both <b>to</b> marry <b>a widow</b> (see Leviticus 21:14), <b>and they may not render themselves impure</b> with impurity imparted by a corpse even <b>in</b> the event that one of <b>their relatives</b> dies (see Leviticus 21:11), <b>and they may not grow</b> their hair <b>long and they may not rend</b> their garments as expressions of mourning (see Leviticus 21:10), <b>and</b> when they die <b>they restore the</b> unwitting <b>murderer</b> to his home from the city of refuge (see Numbers 35:25).

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught:</b> To blend <b>the anointing oil that Moses prepared in the wilderness, they would boil in</b> the oil <b>the roots</b> of the spices in the quantities enumerated in the verse; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Yosei says: But isn’t</b> that amount of oil <b>insufficient</b> even <b>to smear on the roots</b> of those spices, as the oil would be absorbed into the roots? How then could the roots be boiled in the oil? <b>Rather, they soak the roots in water.</b> Once the roots are waterlogged, they do not absorb the oil. The fragrance of the spices gradually rises <b>and they float oil on</b> the water <b>and</b> the oil <b>absorbs the fragrance. And</b> at that point, <b>one removed</b> the oil <b>[<i>vekippeḥo</i>]</b> from the water, and that was the anointing oil.

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Yehuda said to him: And was</b> it merely <b>one miracle</b> that was <b>performed with regard to the anointing oil? But wasn’t it initially</b> only <b>twelve <i>log</i>, and from it the Tabernacle, and its vessels, Aaron, and his sons</b> were <b>anointed</b> for the <b>entire seven days of inauguration, and all of it</b> remains <b>in existence for the future, as it is stated: “This shall be a sacred anointing oil unto Me throughout your generations”</b> (Exodus 30:31)? Since the entire existence of the anointing oil is predicated on miracles, it is no wonder that its preparation also involved a miracle.

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>“And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the Tabernacle and all that was in it</b> and sanctified them” (Leviticus 8:10). <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>the anointing oil that Moses prepared in the wilderness, how many miracles were performed in its</b> regard continuously, <b>from beginning to end? Initially it was only twelve <i>log</i>. Consider how much</b> oil <b>a pot absorbs, and how much</b> oil is <b>absorbed by the roots, and how much</b> oil <b>the fire burns, and</b> yet <b>the Tabernacle, and its vessels, Aaron, and his sons</b> were <b>anointed with it</b> for the <b>entire seven days of inauguration, and High Priests and kings were anointed with it</b> throughout the generations.

### Part 10
Apropos the anointing oil, the <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And even a High Priest, son of a High Priest, requires anointing, but one does not anoint a king, son of a king. And if you say: For what</b> reason <b>did they anoint King Solomon</b> (see I Kings, chapter 1), who was the son of a king? It was <b>due to the challenge of Adonijah,</b> who sought to succeed their father David as king. <b>And</b> they anointed <b>Joash due to Athaliah</b> (see II Kings, chapter 11). <b>And</b> they anointed <b>Jehoahaz due to Jehoiakim, who was two years older than he</b> was (see II Kings 23:30). In all these cases, it was necessary to underscore that these men were crowned king. <b>And that oil remains in existence for the future, as it is stated: “This [<i>zeh</i>] shall be a sacred anointing oil unto Me throughout your generations”</b> (Exodus 30:31). <b>The numerical value of <i>zeh</i> is twelve <i>log</i>,</b> indicating that this amount of oil remains intact despite its use.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said: And even a High Priest, son of a High Priest, requires anointing.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And the anointed priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons”</b> (Leviticus 6:15). <b>Let the verse say</b> only: <b>The priest that shall be in his stead from among his sons. What</b> is the reason that it says: <b>“The anointed</b> priest”? The Torah <b>teaches us that</b> even <b>from among the sons of a High Priest, if he is anointed</b> with oil <b>he is a High Priest, and if not, he is not a High Priest.</b>

### Part 12
<b>The Master said: But one does not anoint a king, son of a king.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov said</b> that it is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written: “So that he may prolong his days in his kingdom,</b> he and his sons, in the midst of Israel” (Deuteronomy 17:20). His children are mentioned in the verse in order to teach them: The kingdom <b>is an inheritance for you.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And from where do we</b> derive <b>that when there is a dispute</b> with regard to succession, the king <b>requires anointing, and</b> it is <b>not</b> that <b>whenever the king wishes</b> he can <b>bequeath the kingdom to his son</b> without anointing him? <b>Rav Pappa said</b> that <b>the verse states: “He and his sons, in the midst of Israel.” When there is peace in Israel we read concerning him: “He and his sons,” even without anointing;</b> but when there is dispute, anointing is required.

### Part 13
It is <b>taught: Even Jehu, son of Nimshi,</b> king of Israel, <b>was anointed only due to the challenge of Joram</b> (see II Kings 9:1–14). The Sages challenge: <b>And let him derive</b> that Jehu was anointed <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he</b> was the <b>first</b> of his dynasty and was not the son of a king. The Gemara answers: The <i>baraita</i> <b>is incomplete and this</b> is what <b>it is teaching: Kings of the house of David are anointed; kings of Israel are not anointed.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rava said</b> that <b>the verse states: “Arise, anoint him, for this</b> is he” (I Samuel 16:12), from which it is derived: <b>This</b> king, David, <b>requires anointing, but another</b> king <b>does not require anointing.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said: Even Jehu, son of Nimshi,</b> king of Israel, <b>was anointed only due to the challenge of Joram.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And due to the challenge of Joram, son of Ahab, shall we misuse consecrated anointing oil</b> and anoint a king of Israel, who does not require anointing? The Gemara answers that it is <b>like</b> that <b>which Rav Pappa said</b> in another context: They anointed him <b>with pure balsam</b> oil, not with anointing oil. <b>So too,</b> with regard to Jehu, they anointed him <b>with pure balsam</b> oil, not with anointing oil.

### Part 15
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>And</b> they anointed <b>Jehoahaz due to Jehoiakim, who was two years older than he</b> was. The Gemara asks: <b>And was</b> Jehoiakim <b>older than</b> Jehoahaz? <b>But isn’t it written: “And the sons of Josiah: The firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum”</b> (I Chronicles 3:15), <b>and Rabbi Yoḥanan says: He is Shallum, he is Zedekiah;</b> these are two names for one person. Likewise, <b>he is Johanan, he is Jehoahaz,</b> who is mentioned in the book of Kings. Since Jehoahaz was the eldest, why was it necessary to anoint him? The Gemara answers: <b>Actually, Jehoiakim</b> was <b>older</b> than Jehoahaz. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the term <b>“firstborn”</b> written with regard to Jehoahaz? It means that his status was like that of <b>a firstborn</b> in terms of ascent <b>to the kingship.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And do younger</b> sons <b>rule before elder</b> sons? <b>But isn’t it written: “And the kingdom he gave to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn”</b> (II Chronicles 21:3). The Gemara answers: <b>Jehoram was a surrogate for his ancestors</b> as he was suited to serve as king, so since he was firstborn, he ascended to the throne. <b>Jehoiakim was not a surrogate for his ancestors;</b> he was not suited to serve as king. Therefore, his brother ascended to the throne before him.

### Part 17
<b>The Master said: He is Shallum, he is Zedekiah; he is Johanan, he is Jehoahaz.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the verse <b>enumerate them individually, as it is written: “The third</b> Zedekiah, <b>the fourth</b> Shallum,” indicating that they are two people? The Gemara answers: <b>What</b> is the meaning of <b>third?</b> It means the <b>third among the sons. And what</b> is the meaning of <b>fourth?</b> It means the <b>fourth</b> to ascend <b>to the kingship.</b> How so? <b>Initially, Jehoahaz reigned, and ultimately,</b> after him, <b>Jehoiakim, and ultimately,</b> after him, <b>Jeconiah,</b> son of Jehoiakim, <b>and ultimately,</b> after him, <b>Zedekiah,</b> who was fourth to the kingship.

### Part 18
<b>The Sages taught: He is Shallum, he is Zedekiah. And why was he called Shallum?</b> It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that he was perfect [<i>meshullam</i>] is his actions. Some say:</b> He was called <b>Shallum because the kingdom of the house of David was concluded [<i>sheshalema</i>] during his days. And what</b> was <b>his</b> actual <b>name? Mattaniah</b> was <b>his name, as it is stated: “And the king of Babylon crowned Mattaniah his uncle in his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah”</b> (II Kings 24:17). Why did Nebuchadnezzar call him Zedekiah? <b>He said to him: God will justify the judgment against you if you rebel against me; and it is written: “And he also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had imposed upon him an oath by God”</b> (II Chronicles 36:13).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC