
### Part 1
If so, these two passages are <b>difficult,</b> as they contradict <b>one another.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> This is <b>not difficult,</b> as there is a distinction between the rulings. <b>Here,</b> in the passage that deems the anointed priest liable in cases other than the defiling the Temple, it is <b>in</b> the case of an offering brought due to <b>poverty,</b> whereas <b>there,</b> in the latter clause, it is <b>in</b> the case of an offering brought due to <b>extreme poverty. And Rabbi Shimon holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva with regard to one</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>and disagrees with him with regard to one</b> other <i>halakha</i>. <b>He holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva in</b> the case of <b>extreme poverty that</b> the anointed priest is <b>exempt</b> from bringing that meal-offering. <b>And he disagrees with</b> Rabbi Akiva <b>in</b> the case of <b>poverty,</b> as he does not hold that the anointed priest is completely exempt from bringing a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 3
§ The mishna teaches that Rabbi Shimon says: <b>But</b> an anointed <b>High Priest is not liable</b> for the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods. <b>Ḥizkiyya said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon?</b> It is <b>as it is written</b> with regard to one who becomes ritually impure and enters the Temple: “And a man who shall be impure, and shall not be purified, <b>that soul shall be excised [<i>venikhreta</i>] from the midst of the congregation,</b> because he has defiled the Sanctuary of the Lord; the water of sprinkling has not been sprinkled on him: He is impure” (Numbers 19:20). It is derived from this verse that this <i>halakha</i> applies specifically to <b>one whose offering equals</b> the offering <b>of the congregation,</b> i.e., the Jewish people. This serves to <b>exclude</b> the High Priest, <b>as his offering does not equal</b> the offering <b>of the congregation,</b> as on Yom Kippur he brings a bull for his unwitting transgression, while he brings a goat to achieve atonement for the Jewish people.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, a king too,</b> should be exempt, as <b>his offering does not equal</b> the offering <b>of the congregation,</b> as he brings a goat. The Gemara answers: Even so, the king <b>equals</b> the congregation <b>in the atonement of Yom Kippur,</b> as his atonement is achieved by means of the same offerings through which the rest of the congregation achieves atonement. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, priests too</b> should be exempt from bring-ing the offering for the defiling of the Temple, as they <b>do not equal the congregation in the atonement of Yom Kippur,</b> as their atonement is achieved by means of the bull of the High Priest. The Gemara answers: <b>Priests equal the congregation with regard to</b> atonement for <b>the rest of the mitzvot of the entire year.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges: The <b>anointed priest, too, equals</b> the congregation <b>with regard to</b> atonement for <b>the rest of the mitzvot of the</b> entire <b>year. Rather, Rava said: Say this: One whose sin-offering equals</b> that of <b>individuals. And who are</b> these individuals? They are the <b>congregation.</b> The status of a congregation that performed an unwitting transgression not on the basis of the ruling of the court is that of individuals. The High Priest’s sin-offering is different, as he brings a sin-offering only for an unwitting transgression he performed on the basis of his own ruling.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: The king brings a goat,</b> and not a sliding-scale offering. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Eliezer stated</b> his opinion <b>only with regard to the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, <b>since <i>karet</i> is stated concerning it, as</b> it is stated <b>in</b> all matters where there is liability to bring <b>a fixed</b> sin-offering. Just as the king brings a goat as a sin-offering for any unwitting transgression for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, so too, he brings a goat for the defiling of the Temple. For other unwitting transgressions for which one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering and for whose intentional violation one is not liable to receive <i>karet</i>, the king is also liable to bring a sliding-scale offering.

### Part 7
<b>Rav Pappa said: So too, it is reasonable, as if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b>Rabbi Eliezer says</b> that the king brings a goat <b>for all</b> of the transgressions enumerated in the mishna, and the king brings a goat in cases where individuals bring a sliding-scale offering, then <b>since the goat of a king and the bull of an anointed</b> priest <b>stand in place of</b> liability of <b>an individual to</b> bring <b>a sin-offering, let</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>also teach: An anointed</b> priest <b>brings a bull for hearing of a voice and</b> for <b>an utterance of the lips. Rather, from</b> the fact <b>that</b> Rabbi Eliezer <b>does not teach</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an anointed</b> priest, <b>learn from it</b> that his statement that the king brings a goat <b>stands</b> in reference only <b>to the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, with regard to <b>which an anointed</b> priest is <b>exempt,</b> in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Huna, son of Rav Natan, said to Rav Pappa: From where</b> do you prove this? <b>Perhaps</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Eliezer stands</b> in reference <b>to all of them. And with regard to an anointed</b> priest, <b>he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: An anointed</b> priest <b>is exempt from all of</b> the cases where one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering. Rav Pappa <b>said to him: And Rabbi Akiva, does he exempt</b> an anointed priest <b>from</b> bringing <b>a bull?</b> Rabbi Akiva exempted him only from bringing a sliding-scale offering, but he holds that the High Priest is liable to bring the offering unique to him, the bull for an unwitting transgression he performed on the basis of his own erroneous ruling. <b>And nothing more</b> need be discussed.

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Rabbi Eliezer concedes that</b> a king <b>does not bring a guilt-offering</b> for the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods. <b>The <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall <b>recited</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>before Rav Sheshet:</b> In the case of a king, <b>a provisional guilt-offering comes for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods. Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: Who said</b> this <b>to you? Is it Rabbi Eliezer, who said: Since <i>karet</i> is stated in its</b> regard <b>as</b> it is stated <b>in</b> all matters where there is liability to bring <b>a fixed</b> sin-offering, <b>a king brings a goat for</b> the defiling of the Temple? Since the status of his offering is like that of a fixed sin-offering, in cases of uncertainty, he is liable to bring a provisional guilt-offering. Rav Sheshet asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Yoḥanan say: Rabbi Eliezer concedes that</b> a king <b>does not bring</b> a provisional <b>guilt-offering?</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, based on the statement of Rabbi Yoḥanan, the <i>baraita</i> is <b>difficult.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC