
### Part 1
that it is derived from the verse: “All that the Lord has commanded you by the hand of Moses, <b>from the day that the Lord commanded and onward throughout your generations”</b> (Numbers 15:23). <b>Which is</b> the <b>mitzva that was stated at the beginning</b> of all the mitzvot? <b>You must say: This is idol worship,</b> as it is the first mitzva in the Ten Commandments. The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t the Master say: The Jewish people were commanded ten mitzvot in Marah</b> soon after leaving Egypt, prior to the revelation at Sinai, <b>as it is written: “If you shall hearken to the voice of the Lord your God…</b>and listen to His mitzvot” (Exodus 15:26)? Evidently, there were mitzvot that preceded the prohibition against idol worship. <b>Rather, it is clear as we initially answered.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The court is <b>not liable</b> to bring a bull as an unwitting communal sin-offering for issuing a ruling with regard <b>to a positive</b> mitzva <b>or a prohibition related to</b> the defiling of <b>the Temple</b> by one being there while ritually impure, or the defiling of its sacrificial foods by one partaking of them while ritually impure. There is a positive mitzva to remove impure people from the Temple, and there is a prohibition against entering the Temple while in a state of ritual impurity. <b>And one does not bring a provisional guilt-offering for a positive</b> mitzva <b>or a prohibition related to</b> the defiling of <b>the Temple</b> or its sacrificial foods.

### Part 3
<b>But</b> the court <b>is liable</b> to bring a bull <b>for a positive</b> mitzva <b>or</b> for <b>a prohibition that is related to a menstruating woman, and one brings a provisional guilt-offering for a positive</b> mitzva <b>or</b> for <b>a prohibition that is related to a menstruating woman. What is</b> the <b>positive mitzva that is related to a menstruating woman? Distance</b> yourself <b>from the menstruating woman.</b> If a man engages in intercourse with a woman and she begins menstruating, he is required to separate from her. <b>And what is the prohibition? Do not engage in intercourse with</b> a woman whom you know is <b>a menstruating woman.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? That is, from where is it derived <b>that</b> the general <b>public is not liable</b> to bring any <b>offering at all</b> for a sin like the defiling of the Temple, which carries no liability for an individual to bring a fixed sin-offering for violating it unwittingly, <b>and</b> from where is it derived that <b>an individual too</b> is <b>not</b> liable to bring <b>a provisional guilt-offering</b> for the defiling of the Temple?

### Part 5
<b>Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi says:</b> The term <b>“and he is guilty” is stated with regard to a sin-offering</b> (Leviticus 4:27) <b>and with regard to a provisional guilt-offering</b> (Leviticus 5:17), <b>and</b> the similar term: <b>“And they are guilty”</b> (Leviticus 4:13), <b>is stated with regard to</b> the general <b>public. Just as</b> the term <b>“and he is guilty”</b> that is stated <b>with regard to an individual</b> is <b>concerning</b> a transgression for which one is liable to bring <b>a fixed sin-offering,</b> as it is written there, <b>so too,</b> the term <b>“and they are guilty”</b> that is stated <b>with regard to</b> the general <b>public</b> is <b>concerning</b> a transgression for which one is liable to bring <b>a fixed sin-offering.</b> For the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering, not a fixed offering.

### Part 6
<b>And just as with regard to</b> a transgression performed by the general <b>public</b> the liability is to bring <b>a fixed sin-offering, so too, a provisional guilt-offering comes only for uncertainty</b> with regard to a transgression that renders one obligated to bring <b>a fixed sin-offering.</b> This is the source for the fact that there is no liability to bring a sin-offering if the general public defiles the Temple or its sacrificial foods, and individuals are not liable to bring a provisional guilt-offering for those transgressions. The Sages <b>say: If so,</b> and the derivation is based on that term, this is difficult, as <b>isn’t it also written</b> with regard to <b>a sliding-scale offering: “And it shall be when he shall be guilty of one of these matters”</b> (Leviticus 5:5)? The Gemara responds: <b>One derives</b> the meaning of <b>“they are guilty” from</b> the meaning of <b>“he is guilty,” but one does not derive</b> the meaning of <b>“he is guilty” from</b> the meaning of <b>“he shall be guilty,”</b> even though both are stated in the singular.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And what difference</b> is there between the different verb conjugations? <b>But didn’t the school of Rabbi Yishmael teach</b> a verbal analogy with regard to leprosy of houses? The verse states: <b>“And the priest shall return [<i>veshav</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 14:39), and another verse with regard to the priest’s visit seven days later states: <b>“And the priest shall come [<i>uva</i>]</b> and look” (Leviticus 14:44). <b>This returning</b> and <b>this coming</b> have the same meaning and one can therefore derive by verbal analogy that the <i>halakha</i> that applies if the leprosy had spread at the conclusion of the first week applies if it had spread again by the end of the following week. If a verbal analogy can be derived between two different terms, it can certainly be derived from two conjugations of the same term. <b>And furthermore, let us derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>from</b> the term <b>“and he is guilty,”</b> written <b>with regard to the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, <b>as it is written: “And he is ritually impure and he is guilty”</b> (Leviticus 5:2), which is a verbal analogy between identical terms.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Pappa says: One derives</b> the meaning of: <b>“And he is guilty,” and: “The commandments of the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 5:17), which are written with regard to a provisional guilt-offering, <b>from</b> the meaning of: <b>“And they are guilty,” and: “The commandments of the Lord”</b> (Leviticus 4:13), which are written with regard to the unwitting communal sin-offering. The phrase: The commandments of the Lord, is not written with regard to the sliding-scale offering. <b>Rav Shimi bar Ashi said to Rav Pappa: Let us derive</b> the meaning of: <b>“And he is guilty and bearing of iniquity”</b> (see Leviticus 5:1, 4), <b>from</b> the meaning of: <b>“And he is guilty and bearing of iniquity”</b> (Leviticus 5:17).

### Part 9
<b>Rather, Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: One derives</b> the meaning of <b>“and he is guilty” and “the commandments of the Lord that shall not be done”</b> written with regard to a provisional guilt-offering, <b>from</b> the meaning of: <b>“And he is guilty,” and: “The commandments of the Lord that shall not be done”</b> (Leviticus 4:27), written with regard to a fixed sin-offering. <b>And</b> the cases of <b>hear-ing of a voice,</b> i.e., an oath of testimony, <b>and a statement of the lips,</b> i.e., an oath on an utterance, <b>and the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, for which one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering, <b>shall not prove</b> otherwise, <b>as it is not stated concerning them: And he is guilty, and: The commandments of the Lord that shall not be done.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The court <b>is not liable for</b> issuing a ruling with regard to <b>hearing of a voice,</b> i.e., a false oath of testimony taken by a witness who refuses to testify on behalf of a litigant who demands that he testify, <b>or for an utterance of the lips,</b> i.e., a false oath stated about some matter, <b>or for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods. <b>And the</b> status of the <b>king is like</b> that of the court, and he is exempt from bringing an offering in those cases; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili. Rabbi Akiva says: The king is liable in all of</b> those cases <b>except for</b> the case of <b>hearing of a voice,</b> and even in that case, his exemption is not intrinsic to the mitzva. Rather, it is for technical reasons, <b>as the king neither judges</b> others <b>nor</b> do others <b>judge him; he does not testify nor</b> do others <b>testify against him.</b> Therefore, a demand that he testify is not applicable.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Ulla said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili?</b> It is as <b>the verse states</b> with regard to a sliding-scale offering: <b>“And it shall be when he shall be guilty of one of these matters”</b> (Leviticus 5:5), indicating that <b>anyone who becomes liable in</b> every <b>one</b> of the instances for which one brings a sliding-scale offering <b>becomes liable in all of</b> those instances; <b>and anyone who does not become liable in</b> every <b>one</b> of the instances to bring a sliding-scale offering <b>does not become liable in any of</b> those instances. Since the king is exempt from taking an oath of testimony, he is exempt in the other cases as well.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: Why say this? <b>And say</b> an alternative interpretation of the verse: <b>Anyone who becomes liable in</b> any <b>one of these</b> instances brings a sliding-scale offering, <b>and</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though he does not become liable in all of them.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather, the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili is from here, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yirmeya would say: It is stated:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC