
### Part 1
<b>“And if his means suffice not”</b> (Leviticus 5:7), <b>and it is stated: “And if his means not suffice”</b> (Leviticus 5:11), indicating that the sliding-scale offering applies only to <b>one who can come to</b> a state of <b>poverty and wealth.</b> This serves to <b>exclude a king and an anointed</b> priest, <b>who cannot come to</b> a state of <b>poverty.</b>

### Part 2
The <b>king</b> cannot become poor, <b>as it is written</b> concerning him: <b>“And he performed one of all the mitzvot of the Lord his God”</b> (Leviticus 4:22), referring to the king as <b>one who has only the Lord his God upon him.</b> He is greater than the entire nation and is not a poor person dependent on others. <b>An anointed</b> priest cannot become poor, <b>as it is written: “And the priest that is greatest among his brethren”</b> (Leviticus 21:10), meaning <b>that he is greater than his brethren in beauty, in power, in wisdom, and in wealth,</b> not a poor person. <b>Others say: From where</b> is it derived <b>that if</b> the High Priest <b>does not have</b> personal wealth, one should <b>make him great from</b> the property <b>of his brethren? The verse states: “And the priest that is greatest among his brethren upon whose head the anointing oil is poured”</b> (Leviticus 21:10), from which it is derived: <b>Make him great from</b> the property <b>of his brethren,</b> who will provide him with enough property to render him wealthy.

### Part 3
<b>Ravina raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak:</b> In the case of <b>a king who was afflicted with leprosy</b> and unfit to serve as king during his affliction, <b>what is</b> his status with regard to the sliding-scale offering? Previously, during his reign, was <b>he</b> completely <b>eliminated</b> from the obligation to bring a sliding-scale offering to the extent that even now, when he is no longer king, he remains exempt? <b>Or</b> was he merely <b>exempted,</b> so that now that he is no longer king he is obligated to bring the offering? Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak <b>said to</b> Ravina: Does he bring the offering from <b>your</b> property, i.e., public property, <b>or</b> does he bring the offering <b>from</b> his personal <b>treasure [<i>degazza</i>]?</b> Since he obviously would bring the offering from his own personal treasure, he remains exempt from bringing the offering.

### Part 4
§ <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Akiva says: An anointed</b> priest <b>is exempt from</b> bringing an offering in <b>all</b> the cases where one is liable to bring a sliding-scale offering. <b>Rava said: What is the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva?</b> It is as <b>the verse states: “This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons</b> that they shall offer unto the Lord on the day that he is anointed: One-tenth part of an ephah of fine flour as a meal-offering” (Leviticus 6:13). One can infer: It is <b>this</b> tenth of an ephah that <b>comes</b> as <b>an obligation for him, and no other</b> such offering <b>comes</b> as <b>an obligation for him.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>say</b> that <b>when the Merciful One excludes</b> an anointed priest, it is particularly <b>from</b> the type of sliding-scale offering brought due to <b>extreme poverty? And what is it?</b> The <b>one-tenth of an ephah</b> meal-offering mentioned in the verse. <b>But the Merciful One did not exclude him</b> from the dove brought as a sliding-scale offering due to <b>poverty</b> and the sheep brought as a sliding-scale offering by one with <b>wealth.</b> The Gemara rejects this: That <b>should not enter your mind, as it is written</b> with regard to the sliding-scale offering: <b>“And the priest shall atone for him for his sin that he has committed from one of these”</b> (Leviticus 5:13), from which it is derived: <b>One who gains atonement with</b> every <b>one</b> of the types of a sliding-scale offering <b>gains atonement with any of</b> the types of the sliding-scale offering, <b>and one who</b> does <b>not gain atonement with</b> every <b>one</b> of the types of a sliding-scale offering does <b>not gain atonement with any of</b> the types of the sliding-scale offering.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>But if that is so,</b> and the verse is interpreted in that manner, then that <b>which is written</b> there: <b>“And it shall be when he shall be guilty of one of these matters”</b> (Leviticus 5:5), <b>so too</b> shall be interpreted: <b>Anyone who becomes liable in</b> every <b>one</b> of the instances for which one brings a sliding-scale offering <b>can become liable in any of</b> those instances, <b>and</b> anyone <b>who does not become liable in</b> every <b>one</b> of the instances to bring a sliding-scale offering <b>cannot become liable in any of</b> those instances. <b>Why,</b> then, did <b>we learn</b> in the mishna that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The <b>king is liable</b> in all of these cases <b>except for</b> the case of <b>hearing of a voice,</b> indicating that he can become liable in the rest of the instances even if he is exempt in one?

### Part 7
<b>Abaye and Rava both say</b> to resolve this difficulty: Rabbi Akiva <b>learns</b> this inference from the term: <b>“From one”</b> (Leviticus 5:13). <b>He does not learn</b> anything from the term: <b>“Of one”</b> (Leviticus 5:5). The Gemara asks: <b>And what is different</b> about the term <b>“from one” that he learns</b> a <i>halakha</i> from it?

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: The difference is <b>that the Merciful One wrote it at the end</b> of the passage discussing the sliding-scale offering, <b>with regard to the one-tenth of an ephah</b> meal-offering, <b>to say that anyone who can become liable to bring the one-tenth of an ephah can become liable to</b> bring <b>any of them. As, if it enters your mind</b> to say that <b>one can become liable to</b> bring <b>one even though he cannot become liable to</b> bring <b>any</b> one <b>of them, let</b> the Torah <b>write this</b> phrase: <b>From one of these, with regard to</b> the offering brought due to <b>poverty,</b> or <b>alternatively, with regard to</b> the offering brought by one with <b>wealth.</b> Since this term does not appear with regard to one of the other offerings, apparently, it is specifically with regard to the offering brought due to extreme poverty that one who cannot become liable for that offering is exempt from the entire matter.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In summation: <b>For all mitzvot that are in the Torah for whose intentional</b> violation one is <b>liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> and for whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering, the individual brings a ewe or female goat</b> for their unwitting transgression, <b>and the king</b> brings <b>a male goat</b> for their unwitting transgression, <b>and an anointed</b> priest <b>and a court</b> who issued an erroneous ruling <b>bring a bull. And for</b> unwittingly engaging in <b>idol worship, the individual, and the king, and the anointed</b> priest <b>bring a female goat, and the court</b> brings <b>a bull and a goat: A bull for a burnt-offering and a goat for a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 10
With regard to <b>a provisional guilt-offering, the individual and the king are liable, and an anointed</b> priest <b>and a court are exempt.</b> With regard to <b>a definite guilt-offering, the individual, the king, and the anointed</b> priest <b>are liable, and a court is exempt.</b>

### Part 11
<b>For hearing of a voice,</b> i.e., a false oath of testimony, <b>and for</b> a false oath on <b>an utterance of the lips, and for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, <b>a court is exempt, and the individual, the king, and the anointed</b> priest <b>are liable. But an anointed High Priest</b> is <b>not liable for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Shimon. And what</b> offering are <b>they</b> liable to <b>bring?</b> It is <b>a sliding-scale offering</b> based on their financial circumstances, as delineated in the Torah (see Leviticus 5:1–13). <b>Rabbi Elazar says: The king brings a goat.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon would posit a principle:</b> For <b>any</b> case in <b>which the individual</b> is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a provisional guilt-offering,</b> the status of <b>the king</b> is <b>like</b> that of the individual, <b>and an anointed</b> priest <b>and a court are exempt. And</b> for <b>any</b> case in <b>which</b> an individual is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a definite guilt-offering,</b> the status of <b>a king and an anointed</b> priest is <b>like</b> that of the individual, <b>and</b> the <b>court is exempt.</b>

### Part 13
He continues: For <b>hearing of a voice,</b> i.e., a false oath of testimony, <b>and</b> for a false oath on <b>an utterance of the lips, and</b> for <b>the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, <b>a court is exempt, and a king and an anointed</b> priest <b>are liable. But the king is not liable in</b> a case of <b>hearing of a voice, and an anointed</b> priest is not liable <b>for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods. In general, for <b>any</b> case for <b>which</b> an individual is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering, the status of <b>a king is like</b> that of the individual, <b>and an anointed</b> priest <b>and a court are exempt.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara expresses surprise: <b>This</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>itself</b> is <b>difficult. You said that an anointed</b> priest is <b>not liable for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods, and by inference: <b>It is for the defiling of</b> the <b>Temple or its sacrificial</b> foods <b>that he is exempt, but</b> he is <b>liable for hearing of a voice and</b> for <b>a statement of the lips. Say the latter clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>: For <b>any</b> case for <b>which</b> an individual is liable <b>to</b> bring <b>a sliding-scale</b> offering, the status of <b>a king</b> is <b>like</b> that of the individual, <b>and an anointed</b> priest <b>and a court are exempt. He teaches: An anointed priest and a court are exempt; just as a court is exempt from all of</b> the sliding-scale offerings, <b>so too, an anointed priest is exempt from all of them,</b> not only from the offering for the defiling of the Temple or its sacrificial foods.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC