
### Part 1
<b>Rav Pappa said: They gnaw even on the handle of a hoe.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: There are <b>five factors</b> that <b>cause</b> one to <b>forget</b> his Torah <b>study: One who eats from that which a mouse eats and from that which a cat eats, and one who eats the heart of an animal, and one who is accustomed to</b> eating <b>olives, and one who drinks water that remains from washing, and one who washes his feet</b> with <b>this</b> foot <b>atop that</b> foot. <b>And some say: Also one who places his garments under his head.</b> Correspondingly, there are <b>five factors</b> that <b>restore</b> forgotten Torah <b>study:</b> Eating <b>bread baked on coals and all the more so</b> one who warms himself with the heat of the <b>coals themselves, and one who eats a hard-boiled egg [<i>beitza megulgelet</i>] without salt, and one who is accustomed to</b> eating <b>olive oil, and one who is accustomed to</b> drinking <b>wine and</b> smelling <b>spices, and one who drinks water that remains from</b> kneading <b>dough. And some say: Also one who dips his finger in salt and eats</b> it.

### Part 3
The Gemara elaborates on the <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who is accustomed to</b> eating <b>olive oil</b> restores forgotten Torah study. The Gemara notes: This <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, as Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Just as</b> eating <b>an olive causes</b> one <b>to forget seventy years’ worth of</b> Torah <b>study, olive oil restores seventy years’ worth of</b> Torah <b>study.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And one who is accustomed to</b> drinking <b>wine and</b> smelling <b>spices</b> restores forgotten Torah study. The Gemara notes: This <b>supports</b> the opinion of <b>Rava, as Rava said: Wine and spices rendered me wise.</b>

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>One who dips his finger in salt</b> and eats it restores forgotten Torah study. <b>Reish Lakish says: And</b> that is the case <b>with regard to one</b> finger. The Gemara notes: This is <b>parallel to</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. Rabbi Yehuda says: One</b> finger <b>but not two. Rabbi Yosei says: Two</b> fingers <b>but not three. And your mnemonic</b> for the fact that the dispute is between one and two fingers is <b><i>kemitza</i>,</b> i.e., the ring finger. When one presses his ring finger to his palm, there remain two straight fingers on one side and one on the other.

### Part 6
<b>Ten factors are detrimental for</b> Torah <b>study: One who passes beneath the bit of the camel, and all the more so</b> one who passes <b>beneath a camel itself; and one who passes between two camels; and one who passes between two women; and a woman who passes between two men; and one who passes beneath</b> a place where there is the <b>foul odor of an animal carcass; and one who passes under a bridge beneath which water has not passed</b> for <b>forty days; and one who eats bread that was not sufficiently baked; and one who eats meat from <i>zuhama listeron</i>,</b> a utensil consisting of a spoon and a fork, used to remove the film on the surface of soup; <b>and one who drinks from an aqueduct that passes through a cemetery; and one who gazes at the face of the dead. And some say: Also one who reads the writing that is on</b> the stone of <b>a grave.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>When the <i>Nasi</i></b> of the Sanhedrin <b>enters, all the people stand and they do not sit until he says to them: Sit. When the deputy <i>Nasi</i></b> of the Sanhedrin <b>enters,</b> the people <b>form for him one row from here,</b> on this side of the path that he takes, <b>and one row from there,</b> on the other side of it, in a display of deference, <b>until he sits in his place,</b> and then they may be seated. <b>When the <i>Ḥakham</i>,</b> who is ranked third among the members of the Sanhedrin, <b>enters, one</b> person <b>stands</b> when he is within four cubits of the <i>Ḥakham</i>, <b>and another sits,</b> i.e., when one is no longer within four cubits of the <i>Ḥakham</i> he may sit. And all those whom the Ḥakham passes do this, <b>until he sits in his place. When the multitudes require their</b> services, i.e., they serve a public role, <b>sons of the Sages and Torah scholars may step over the heads of the people</b> seated on the ground in order to reach their places in the Sanhedrin. If one of the Sages <b>left for</b> the <b>purpose</b> of relieving himself, when he is finished <b>he may enter and sit in his place</b> in the Sanhedrin, and he need not be concerned that he is imposing upon those assembled.

### Part 8
<b>When they have the wisdom to hear</b> and to study, <b>the sons of Torah scholars, whose fathers are appointed as leaders of the congregation, enter and sit before their fathers, and their backs</b> are directed <b>toward the people. When they do not have the wisdom to hear</b> and to study <b>they enter and sit before their fathers, and their faces</b> are directed <b>toward the people,</b> so everyone sees that they are seated there in deference to their fathers but not as students. <b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, says: Even at</b> a wedding <b>party one renders them attachments [<i>senifin</i>]</b> and seats them adjacent to their fathers.

### Part 9
<b>The Master said:</b> If one of the Sages <b>left for</b> the <b>purpose</b> of relieving himself, when he is finished <b>he may enter and sit in his place. Rav Pappa said:</b> The Sages <b>said</b> this <b>only</b> with regard to one who leaves <b>for minor</b> bodily functions, i.e., to urinate. <b>But</b> with regard to one who leaves <b>for major</b> bodily functions, i.e., to defecate, <b>no,</b> he may not return to his place, because <b>he should have examined himself initially</b> so that he would not need to leave. His failure to do so constitutes negligence and he may not impose upon others when he returns, <b>as Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: A person should always accustom himself to</b> relieving himself <b>in the morning and in the evening so that he will not</b> need to <b>distance himself</b>  during the daylight hours to find an appropriate place. <b>Rava said: Today, when the world is weak</b> and people are not as healthy as they once were, one may <b>even</b> return after he leaves <b>for major</b> bodily functions.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Tzadok, says: Even at</b> a wedding <b>party one renders them attachments. Rava said:</b> This applies <b>during the lifetime of their fathers and in the presence of their fathers.</b>

### Part 11
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This mishna,</b> i.e., the preceding <i>baraita</i>, <b>was taught during the days of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> was the <b><i>Nasi</i>, Rabbi Meir</b> was the <b><i>Ḥakham</i>,</b> and <b>Rabbi Natan</b> was the <b>deputy <i>Nasi</i>. When Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel was there, everyone would arise before him. When Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan would enter, everyone would arise before them. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said: Shouldn’t there be a conspicuous distinction between me and them</b> in terms of the manner in which deference is shown? Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>instituted</b> the provisions delineated in <b>this <i>baraita</i></b> that distinguish between the <i>Nasi</i> and his subordinates with regard to the deference shown them.

### Part 12
<b>That day,</b> when Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel instituted these provisions, <b>Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan were not there. The following day when they came</b> to the study hall, <b>they saw that</b> the people <b>did not stand before them as the matter was typically</b> done. <b>They said: What is this?</b> The people <b>said to them: This</b> is what <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel instituted.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Meir said to Rabbi Natan: I am</b> the <b><i>Ḥakham</i> and you are</b> the <b>deputy <i>Nasi</i>. Let us devise a matter</b> and do to him <b>as he did to us. What shall we do to him? Let us say to him: Reveal</b> to us tractate <b><i>Okatzim</i>, which he does not</b> know. <b>And once</b> it is clear to all <b>that he did not learn,</b> he will not have anything to say. Then <b>we will say to him: “Who can express the mighty acts of the Lord, shall make all His praises heard?”</b> (Psalms 106:2), indicating: <b>For whom is it becoming to express the mighty acts of the Lord?</b> It is becoming for <b>one who is capable of making all His praises heard,</b> and not for one who does not know one of the tractates. <b>We will remove him</b> from his position as <i>Nasi</i>, <b>and I will be deputy <i>Nasi</i> and you</b> will be <b><i>Nasi</i>.</b>

### Part 14
<b>Rabbi Ya’akov ben Korshei heard them</b> talking, and <b>said: Perhaps, Heaven forfend,</b> this <b>matter</b> will <b>come to</b> a situation of <b>humiliation</b> for Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. He did not wish to speak criticism or gossip about Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan, so <b>he went</b> and <b>sat behind the upper story</b> where <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel</b> lived. <b>He explained</b> tractate <i>Okatzin</i>; <b>he studied</b> it aloud <b>and repeated</b> it, and <b>studied</b> it aloud <b>and repeated</b> it.

### Part 15
Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>said</b> to himself: <b>What</b> is this <b>that</b> is transpiring <b>before us? Perhaps, Heaven forfend, there is something</b> transpiring in <b>the study hall.</b> He suspected that Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan were planning something. <b>He concentrated and studied</b> tractate <i>Okatzin</i>. <b>The following</b> day Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan <b>said to him: Let the Master come and teach</b> a lesson <b>in</b> tractate <b><i>Okatzin</i>. He began and stated</b> the lesson he had prepared. <b>After he completed</b> teaching the tractate, <b>he said to them: If I had not studied</b> the tractate, <b>you</b> would have <b>humiliated me.</b>

### Part 16
Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel <b>commanded</b> those present <b>and they expelled</b> Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan <b>from the study hall</b> as punishment. Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan <b>would write difficulties on a scrap of paper [<i>pitka</i>] and would throw</b> them <b>there</b> into the study hall. Those difficulties <b>that were resolved were resolved;</b> as for those <b>that were not resolved,</b> Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan <b>wrote resolutions</b> on a scrap of paper <b>and threw</b> them into the study hall. <b>Rabbi Yosei said to</b> the Sages: How is it that the <b>Torah,</b> embodied in the preeminent Torah scholars, <b>is outside and we are inside?</b>

### Part 17
<b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said to them: Let us admit them</b> into the study hall. <b>But we will penalize them</b> in <b>that we will not cite <i>halakha</i> in their names. They cited</b> statements <b>of Rabbi Meir</b> in the name of <b><i>Aḥerim</i>,</b> meaning: Others, <b>and</b> they cited statements <b>of Rabbi Natan</b> in the name of <b><i>yesh omerim</i>,</b> meaning: Some say. Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Natan <b>were shown</b> a message <b>in their dreams: Go, appease Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel. Rabbi Natan went. Rabbi Meir did not go. He said</b> in his heart: <b>Matters of dreams are insignificant. When Rabbi Natan went, Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel said to him: Although the</b> ornate <b>belt,</b> i.e., the importance, <b>of your father was effective</b> in enabling you <b>to become deputy <i>Nasi</i>,</b> as Rabbi Natan’s father was the Babylonian Exilarch, <b>will it render you <i>Nasi</i> as well?</b>

### Part 18
Years later, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught Rabban Shimon his son</b> that <b><i>Aḥerim</i> say: If it was</b> considered <b>a substitute,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC