
### Part 1
<b>and thereafter sinned brings a bull.</b> Does the case of one who <b>sinned and thereafter moved on from his anointment need to be said?</b> It is obvious that he is liable to bring a bull. The Gemara answers: <b>Due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>teaches</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to a king, that when he moved on from his sovereignty and thereafter sinned he brings.</b> an offering <b>like</b> that of <b>a commoner; therefore, he teaches</b> the corresponding <i>halakha</i> <b>with regard to an anointed</b> priest: If <b>he sinned and thereafter moved on</b> from his priesthood, <b>he brings a bull.</b>

### Part 2
§ With regard to the statement in the mishna concerning an anointed priest who sinned after he was removed from his position, the Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? The Gemara answers: It is <b>as the Sages taught:</b> It is written with regard to the High Priest: <b>“And he shall sacrifice for his sin [<i>ḥattato</i>]</b> that he sinned” (Leviticus 4:3); this <b>teaches that he brings his sin-offering [<i>ḥattato</i>]</b> even <b>after he has moved on</b> from his priesthood.

### Part 3
This derivation is necessary, as one <b>might</b> have thought: <b>Could this not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference? And if a king, who brings</b> a goat as his sin-offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action, does not bring</b> a goat as <b>his sin-offering from</b> the moment <b>that he has moved on</b> from his sovereignty, <b>an anointed</b> priest, <b>who does not bring</b> a sin-offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> alone; <b>rather,</b> he is liable <b>only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of the matter</b> by the court together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action,</b> is it <b>not all the more so</b> that he will not bring a bull for his sin-offering once he has moved on from the High Priesthood? Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And he shall sacrifice for his sin [<i>ḥattato</i>]</b> that he sinned”; this <b>teaches that he brings his sin-offering [<i>ḥattato</i>]</b> even <b>after he has moved on</b> from his priesthood.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And let a king</b> who is no longer king, <b>too, bring</b> a goat as a sin-offering <b>based on an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And if an anointed</b> priest, <b>who does not bring</b> an offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action, brings a sin-offering after he has moved on</b> from the priesthood, then with regard to <b>a king, who brings a sin-offering for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action, is it not logical that he</b> still <b>brings his sin-offering once he has moved on</b> from his sovereignty? To counter this, <b>the verse states: “When a king sins”</b> (Leviticus 4:22), from which it is derived: If he sins <b>when he is king, yes,</b> he brings his sin-offering; if he sins <b>when he is a commoner, no,</b> he does not bring his sin-offering.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a king or High Priest <b>sinned before they were appointed, and thereafter they were appointed,</b> the status of <b>these</b> people is <b>like</b> that of <b>commoners;</b> they bring the sin-offering of an individual. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: If it became known to them, before they were appointed</b> as king or High Priest, that they had sinned, <b>they are liable</b> to bring the sin-offering of an individual, <b>but</b> if it became known to them <b>after they were appointed</b> as king or High Priest <b>they are</b> completely <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Who is</b> the <b><i>nasi</i>? This is a king, as it is stated:</b> “When a <i>nasi</i> sins, and performs any one <b>of all the mitzvot of the Lord his God</b> that shall not be performed, unwittingly, and he is guilty” (Leviticus 4:22), referring to one <b>who has only the Lord his God over him</b> and no other authority. That is only the king.

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: If a king or High Priest sinned before they were appointed, and thereafter they were appointed, the status of these people is like that of commoners. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? The Gemara answers: It is <b>as the Sages taught</b> with regard to the verse: <b>“If the anointed priest shall sin to bring guilt”</b> (Leviticus 4:3); this serves to <b>exclude the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his installation as High Priest.

### Part 8
<b>As</b> one <b>might</b> have thought: <b>Could this not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference? And if a king, who brings</b> a goat as his sin-offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action, does not bring</b> a sin-offering <b>for the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his coronation, then with regard to <b>an anointed</b> priest, <b>who brings</b> his sin-offering <b>only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of the matter</b> by the court <b>with the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action, is it not logical that he will not bring</b> his sin-offering <b>for the prior</b> transgressions?

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this: <b>No, if you said</b> this <b>with regard to a king,</b> that is reasonable, <b>as he does not bring his</b> goat for a <b>sin-offering once he has moved on</b> from his sovereignty, and instead brings the sin-offering of a commoner. <b>Shall you</b> also <b>say</b> this <b>with regard to an anointed</b> priest, <b>who brings</b> a bull for <b>his sin-offering once he has moved on</b> from his priesthood? <b>Since he brings</b> a bull for <b>his sin-offering</b> even <b>once he has moved on</b> from his priesthood, perhaps <b>he shall bring</b> a bull as a sin-offering <b>for the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his installation as High Priest? Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “If <b>the anointed priest shall sin,”</b> from which it is derived: If <b>he sins when he is</b> serving as <b>an anointed priest he brings</b> a bull as his sin-offering; if he sins <b>when he is an ordinary</b> priest <b>he does not bring</b> a bull as his sin-offering.

### Part 10
<b>And it is also taught in this way</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>with regard to a king: “When a king sins”</b> (Leviticus 4:22); this serves to <b>exclude the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his coronation as king.

### Part 11
<b>As</b> one <b>might</b> have thought: <b>Could this not</b> be derived through an <i>a fortiori</i> <b>inference? If an anointed</b> priest, <b>who brings</b> a bull for <b>his sin-offering</b> even <b>once he has moved on</b> from his priesthood, <b>does not bring</b> his sin-offering <b>for the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his installation, then with regard to <b>a king, who does not bring his</b> goat for a <b>sin-offering once he has moved on</b> from his sovereignty, <b>is it not logical that he will not bring</b> his sin-offering <b>for the prior</b> transgressions? Apparently, there is no need for the derivation from the verse.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes that this inference can be rejected. <b>What</b> is notable <b>about an anointed</b> priest? He is notable <b>in that he does not bring</b> a sin-offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> unless it was performed on the basis of an erroneous ruling. <b>Shall you say</b> the same <b>with regard to a king, who brings</b> an offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> alone, even without an erroneous ruling? <b>Since he brings</b> an offering <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> alone, <b>shall he bring</b> a bull as a sin-offering <b>for the</b> unwitting transgressions he performed <b>prior</b> to his coronation? Therefore, <b>the verse states: “When a king sins,”</b> from which it is derived: In a case <b>where he sins and he is king,</b> he brings a bull as his sin-offering, <b>and not</b> in a case <b>where he sins and he is still a commoner.</b>

### Part 13
§ Apropos a king, <b>the Sages taught:</b> In contrast to other cases where the verse states: If he will sin, it states concerning a king: <b>“When [<i>asher</i>] a king sins.”</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that this is <b>a decree,</b> i.e., that it is a given that the king will sin. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “If the anointed priest shall sin”</b> (Leviticus 4:3). <b>Just as there</b> the meaning is: <b>In the event that</b> the priest <b>shall sin, so too here,</b> the meaning is: <b>In the event that</b> the king <b>shall sin.</b>

### Part 14
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that this is <b>a decree.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>A decree? From where would this be derived?</b> Why would it enter one’s mind that there would be a decree that the king must sin?

### Part 15
The Sages <b>say: Yes,</b> there is a basis for that understanding, as <b>we find</b> that type of interpretation elsewhere; <b>as it is written:</b> “When you come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, <b>and I shall place the mark of leprosy in a house of the land of your possession”</b> (Leviticus 14:34). <b>These are tidings</b> informing <b>them,</b> i.e., the Jewish people, <b>that leprous marks</b> will <b>come upon them</b> when they enter Eretz Yisrael; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Shimon says:</b> This verse serves to teach that leprosy causes ritual impurity only when its origins are divine, <b>to the exclusion of leprosy</b> that results from <b>circumstances beyond one’s control,</b> i.e., those that have a clear physical cause. <b>Didn’t Rabbi Yehuda say</b> that leprosy could be <b>tidings,</b> i.e., that there will definitely be leprosy? <b>Here too,</b> with regard to the king, <b>say</b> that <b>it is a decree</b> that he will sin. <b>Therefore, it is written: “If</b> the anointed priest shall sin,” meaning that the sin is not a given.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks with regard to the <i>baraita</i>: <b>And according to Rabbi Shimon, do</b> leprous <b>marks</b> that result from <b>circumstances beyond one’s control not cause ritual impurity? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“When a person shall have</b> in the skin of his flesh a wool-white leprous mark or a scab” (Leviticus 13:2); these <i>halakhot</i> apply <b>from</b> this <b>statement onward,</b> i.e., from the time that God gave this mitzva to the Jewish people, and these <i>halakhot</i> do not apply to leprosy that preceded the giving of the mitzva? <b>And could this not</b> be derived through <b>logical inference:</b> The Torah <b>deemed</b> one <b>impure in</b> the case of <b>a <i>zav</i>, and</b> the Torah <b>deemed</b> one <b>impure in</b> the case of leprous <b>marks. Just as a <i>zav</i></b> is ritually impure only <b>from the statement onward, so too,</b> with regard to leprous <b>marks,</b> there is impurity only <b>from that statement onward.</b> There is no need for a derivation from the verse Leviticus 13:2.

### Part 17
The <i>baraita</i> continues: This inference can be rejected: <b>No, if you said</b> that <b>with regard to a <i>zav</i>,</b> this is reasonable, <b>as he does not become impure</b> if his condition was caused <b>by circumstances beyond his control. Shall you say</b> the same <b>with regard to</b> leprous <b>marks, which impart ritual impurity</b> when caused <b>by circumstances beyond one’s control?</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “When a person shall have,”</b> indicating that there is impurity only <b>from</b> that <b>statement onward.</b> In any case, it is clear that leprosy causes impurity even if it was caused by circumstances beyond his control. <b>Rava says</b> in explanation: The phrase “and I shall place the mark of leprosy” serves <b>to exclude</b> leprous <b>marks</b> caused <b>by</b> evil <b>spirits. Rav Pappa says</b> in explanation: That phrase serves <b>to exclude</b> leprous <b>marks</b> caused <b>by sorcery.</b>

### Part 18
§ Apropos a king, <b>the Sages taught</b> that when the verse states: <b>“When a king sins”</b> (Leviticus 4:22), this serves <b>to exclude</b> a king who is <b>ill.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Due to</b> the fact <b>that he is ill, is he removed from his sovereignty? Rav Avdimi bar Ḥama said:</b> The reference is not to all illnesses; rather, it is <b>to exclude a king who is afflicted with leprosy, as it is stated</b> concerning King Azariah: <b>“And the Lord afflicted the king, so that he was a leper until the day of his death, and dwelt in an independent house. And Jotham, son of the king, was over the household,</b> judging the people of the land” (II Kings 15:5). Azariah was removed from his sovereignty when he was afflicted with leprosy. The Gemara comments: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that</b> the verse <b>states: “In an independent house,” by inference</b> it may be understood <b>that until now he was a servant,</b> i.e., he was in servitude to the people.

### Part 19
The Gemara notes: This is <b>similar</b> to <b>that</b> incident <b>where Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Yehoshua were traveling</b> together <b>on a ship. Rabban Gamliel had</b> sufficient <b>bread</b> for the journey. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua</b> also <b>had</b> sufficient <b>bread, and</b> additionally he had <b>flour.</b> The journey lasted longer than expected, and <b>Rabban Gamliel’s bread was finished. He relied on Rabbi Yehoshua’s flour</b> for nourishment. Rabban Gamliel <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehoshua: <b>Did you know</b> from the outset <b>that we would have so substantial a delay?</b> Is that the reason <b>that you brought flour</b> with you? Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to</b> Rabban Gamliel: <b>There is one star that rises once in seventy years and misleads sailors</b> at sea, causing their journeys to be extended. <b>And I said: Perhaps</b> that star <b>will rise</b> during our journey <b>and mislead us.</b>

### Part 20
Rabban Gamliel <b>said to him: So much</b> wisdom is <b>at your</b> disposal, <b>and you board a ship</b> to earn your livelihood? Rabbi Yehoshua <b>said to him: Before you wonder about me, wonder about two students that you have on dry land, Rabbi Elazar Ḥisma and Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Gudgeda, who</b> are so wise that they <b>know</b> how <b>to calculate how many drops</b> of water <b>there are in the sea, and</b> yet <b>they have neither bread to eat nor a garment to wear.</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>made up his mind to seat them at the head</b> of the academy.

### Part 21
<b>When</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>ascended</b> to dry land, <b>he sent</b> a messenger <b>to them</b> to tell them to come so that he could appoint them <b>and they did not come. He again sent</b> a messenger to them <b>and they came.</b> Rabban Gamliel <b>said to them: Do you imagine that I am granting you authority,</b> and since you did not want to accept the honor you did not come when I sent for you?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC