
### Part 1
§ Apropos the ruling of a court to nullify a mitzva, <b>Rav Yosef raises a dilemma:</b> If the court issued a ruling that <b>there is no</b> prohibition against <b>plowing on Shabbat, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara elaborates: <b>Do we say</b> that <b>since</b> the judges <b>agree to</b> the application of <b>the entire matter</b> of prohibitions on Shabbat and their ruling is exclusively with regard to plowing, its status is <b>tantamount to nullification of a portion</b> of the mitzva <b>and fulfillment of a portion</b> of the mitzva? <b>Or perhaps, since</b> the judges <b>are abolishing</b> the principal category of labor of <b>plowing in its entirety,</b> it is <b>tantamount to abolishing</b> the <b>essence</b> of the mitzva of Shabbat.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> resolution of the dilemma from the mishna, which gives as an example of a ruling for which the court is liable to bring an offering: <b>There is</b> a prohibition against engaging in intercourse with <b>a menstruating woman</b> written <b>in the Torah, but one who engages in intercourse with</b> a woman <b>who observes</b> a clean <b>day for a day</b> that she experiences a discharge is <b>exempt. And why</b> should they be liable in that case? <b>Didn’t</b> the judges <b>abolish</b> the <i>halakha</i> of a woman <b>who observes</b> a clean <b>day for a day</b> that she experiences a discharge, <b>in its entirety?</b> Apparently, nullification of one category of <i>halakha</i> in a mitzva is not tantamount to abolition of the essence of an entire mitzva.

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Rav Yosef</b> could <b>say to you:</b> The ruling concerning a woman <b>who observes</b> a clean <b>day</b> for a day that she experiences a discharge is <b>as we stated, as we explained</b> earlier. The reference is not to abolition of the entire <i>halakha</i> of the woman who observes a day for a day, but rather to a case where the judges ruled that the initial stage of intercourse is permitted.

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> resolution of the dilemma from the mishna, which gives as an example of a ruling for which the court is liable to bring an offering: <b>There is</b> a prohibition against performing prohibited labor on <b>Shabbat</b> written <b>in the Torah, but one who carries out</b> objects <b>from the private domain to the public domain</b> is <b>exempt. And why</b> should they be liable in that case? <b>Didn’t</b> the judges <b>abolish</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the principal category of labor of <b>carrying out in its entirety?</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara rejects this: <b>That too</b> is <b>as we explained</b> earlier, that the court rules to nullify only a portion of the labor, e.g., throwing or passing an item from domain to domain.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> resolution of the dilemma from the mishna, which gives as an example of a ruling for which the court is liable to bring an offering: <b>There is</b> a prohibition against engaging in <b>idol worship</b> written <b>in the Torah, but one who bows</b> to the idol but did not sacrifice an offering is <b>exempt. And why</b> should the court be liable in that case? <b>But didn’t</b> the judges <b>abolish</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>bowing in its entirety?</b>

### Part 7
The Sages <b>say: Bowing, too,</b> is <b>as we explained</b> earlier, that the court rules to nullify only an aspect of bowing, not to abolish the prohibition against bowing in its entirety.

### Part 8
Apropos rulings to nullify a mitzva or part of a mitzva, <b>Rabbi Zeira raises a dilemma:</b> If a court issued a ruling that <b>there is no</b> prohibition against performing prohibited labor on <b>Shabbat during the Sabbatical</b> Year, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Before seeking to resolve that dilemma, the Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> matter <b>did they err</b> that resulted in that ruling? They erred <b>with regard to this verse</b> written with regard to Shabbat: <b>“In plowing and in harvest you shall rest”</b> (Exodus 34:21), which the judges interpreted to mean: <b>During a time when there is plowing,</b> i.e., in all years of the Sabbatical cycle other than the Sabbatical Year, <b>there is</b> a prohibition against performing labor on <b>Shabbat. But during a time when there is no plowing,</b> i.e., during the Sabbatical Year, <b>there is no</b> prohibition against performing labor on <b>Shabbat.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara elaborates on Rabbi Zeira’s dilemma. <b>Do we say: Since one fulfills</b> the mitzva of Shabbat <b>during the rest of the years of the Sabbatical</b> cycle, nullifying Shabbat during the Sabbatical Year is <b>tantamount to nullification of a portion</b> of the mitzva <b>and fulfillment of a portion</b> of the mitzva? <b>Or perhaps, since</b> the court <b>is abolishing</b> Shabbat <b>during the Sabbatical</b> Year, it is <b>tantamount to abolishing the</b> entire <b>essence</b> of the mitzva?

### Part 10
<b>Ravina said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> resolution of the dilemma from a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a prophet who prophesies to abolish a matter of the matters of the Torah,</b> he is deemed a false prophet and is <b>liable</b> to be executed through strangulation. If he prophesies <b>for the nullification of part and the fulfillment of part</b> of a matter in the Torah, <b>Rabbi Shimon says</b> he is <b>exempt</b> from execution. <b>And with regard to idol worship, even</b> if he <b>says: Worship it today and revoke its status tomorrow,</b> everyone agrees that he is <b>liable,</b> as with regard to idol worship, even a ruling to nullify part of the mitzva involves a severe prohibition. <b>Learn from it</b> that in a case where a court issued a ruling that <b>there is no</b> prohibition against performing prohibited labor on <b>Shabbat during the Sabbatical</b> Year, it is <b>tantamount to nullification of a portion</b> of the mitzva <b>and fulfillment of a portion</b> of the mitzva. The Gemara affirms: Indeed, <b>learn from it.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the <b>court issued a ruling, and one of</b> the judges <b>knew that they erred and he said to them: You are mistaken; or if the most distinguished [<i>mufla</i>]</b> member <b>of the court was not there</b> for that session of the Sanhedrin, <b>or if one of</b> the judges <b>was</b> disqualified from serving as a judge, e.g., because he was <b>a convert, or a child born from an incestuous or adulterous relationship [<i>mamzer</i>], or a Gibeonite, or an old man no</b> longer <b>able to</b> father <b>children, this</b> court <b>is exempt,</b> because they have not rendered a full-fledged ruling.

### Part 12
This is derived by means of a verbal analogy, <b>as “assembly” is stated here</b> with regard to a court that issues an erroneous ruling: “And if the entire assembly of Israel shall act unwittingly” (Leviticus 4:13), <b>and “assembly” is stated there</b> with regard to the <i>halakha</i> of one who commits murder unwittingly: “And the assembly shall judge between the one who struck and the blood redeemer” (Numbers 35:24). <b>Just as</b> in the <b>“assembly” stated there,</b> with regard to the unwitting murderer, <b>all</b> the judges must be <b>fit to issue rulings, so too,</b> in the <b>“assembly” stated here,</b> with regard to the court that issued an erroneous ruling; the court will not be liable <b>unless all</b> the judges <b>will be fit to issue rulings.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: <b>Or if the most distinguished member of the court was not there,</b> the court is exempt. <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Sheshet said, and likewise the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught: For what</b> reason <b>did</b> the Sages <b>say:</b> If the court <b>issued a ruling with regard to a matter with which the Sadducees agree,</b> the judges are <b>exempt?</b> It is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that it was</b> incumbent <b>upon them to learn</b> that <i>halakha</i> that is written explicitly in the Torah, <b>and they did not learn</b> it. Similarly, in a case where <b>the most distinguished member of the court was not there,</b> the judges are <b>also exempt, as it was</b> incumbent <b>upon them to learn and they did not learn.</b>

### Part 14
The mishna teaches: <b>“Assembly” is stated there and “assembly” is stated here…</b>the court will not be liable <b>unless all</b> the judges <b>will be fit to issue rulings.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And there, from where do we</b> derive that all the judges must be fit to issue rulings? The Gemara answers that this is <b>as Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>the verse states</b> in connection with the transfer of the Divine Spirit from Moses to the Elders: <b>“That they may stand there with you”</b> (Numbers 11:16). The term <b>“with you”</b> is explained to mean: <b>With similarity to you,</b> in the sense that they must be fit to issue rulings.

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges: <b>And say that</b> the term <b>“with you,”</b> means that they shall be like Moses in that they will all be fit <b>for the Divine Presence</b> to rest upon them. <b>Rather, Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says</b> that it is derived as <b>the verse states</b> in the context of the advice that Yitro gave to Moses: “And they shall judge the people at all times…and ease your burden from upon you <b>and bear it with you”</b> (Exodus 18:22). <b>“With you”</b> is interpreted to mean: <b>Similar to you.</b>

### Part 16
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the judges of the <b>court issued</b> an erroneous <b>ruling unwittingly and the entire congregation performed</b> a transgression <b>unwittingly</b> on the basis of their ruling, the court <b>brings a bull,</b> as it is stated in the Torah with regard to an unwitting communal sin-offering. If the court issued the erroneous ruling <b>intentionally,</b> as they knew that their ruling was incorrect, <b>and</b> the congregation <b>performed</b> a transgression <b>unwittingly</b> on the basis of the ruling of the court, each member of the congregation <b>brings a female lamb or a female goat</b> as an individual sin-offering. If the court issued the erroneous ruling <b>unwittingly and</b> the congregation <b>performed</b> a transgression <b>intentionally,</b> i.e., with the knowledge that the ruling of the court was erroneous, <b>these</b> people <b>are exempt</b> from bringing an offering.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: If the court issued the erroneous ruling <b>unwittingly and</b> the congregation <b>performed</b> a transgression <b>intentionally, these</b> people <b>are exempt.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>But</b> if the person performed a transgression <b>unwittingly</b> in a manner <b>similar to</b> that of <b>an intentional</b> transgression, the court is <b>liable. And what are the circumstances</b> of that performance? It is a case <b>where the court issued a ruling that</b> forbidden <b>fat</b> is <b>permitted, and</b> the forbidden <b>fat became confused for</b> a person <b>with</b> permitted <b>fat and he ate</b> the forbidden fat.

### Part 18
The Gemara suggests: If so, <b>let us say: Resolve</b> from here <b>that which Rami bar Ḥama raises as a dilemma</b> (2a) with regard to this case, a dilemma that remained unresolved. The Gemara rejects this: Rami bar Ḥama could <b>say to you</b> that the dilemma cannot be resolved based on this inference, as <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught the first clause</b> of the mishna: If the court issued the erroneous ruling <b>intentionally, and</b> the congregation <b>performed</b> a transgression <b>unwittingly, he taught the latter clause</b> employing a similar style: If the court issued the erroneous ruling <b>unwittingly and</b> the congregation <b>performed</b> a transgression <b>intentionally.</b>

### Part 19
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the judges of <b>the court issued</b> an erroneous <b>ruling and the entire congregation or a majority thereof performed</b> a transgression <b>on the basis of their</b> ruling, the judges <b>bring a bull</b> as an unwitting communal sin-offering. <b>And</b> if the erroneous ruling <b>involved idol worship,</b> the judges <b>bring a bull and a goat,</b> as it is written in the Torah (see Numbers 15:24); this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It is not the court that brings the offering, it is the people. <b>Twelve tribes,</b> each of which performed a transgression, <b>bring twelve bulls,</b> i.e., each tribe brings one, <b>and for idol worship they bring twelve bulls and twelve goats,</b> as each tribe is a congregation.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC