
### Part 1
<b>so too,</b> this <b>sin-offering is not eaten.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Similarly, Rabbi Yosei said</b> that it is stated with regard to those who returned to Zion from Babylonia in the days of Ezra: “The children of the captivity <b>who came out of exile sacrificed burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bulls</b> for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, twelve goats as a sin-offering; <b>all this was a burnt-offering</b> unto the Lord” (Ezra 8:35). The question arises: Does it <b>enter your mind</b> to say: <b>“All this was a burnt-offering”?</b> Is it <b>possible that a sin-offering</b> is <b>a burnt-offering? Rather,</b> say: <b>All this</b> was <b>like a burnt-offering. Just as a burnt-offering is not eaten, so too,</b> this <b>sin-offering is not eaten, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> It was as atonement <b>for idol worship</b> that <b>they brought them; and Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> It was atonement <b>for the idol worship that they practiced during the days of Zedekiah.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara clarifies: <b>Granted, according to Rabbi Yehuda,</b> whose opinion is cited in the mishna, <b>you find</b> liability for <b>these twelve sin-offerings</b> in a case <b>where twelve tribes sinned</b> by engaging in idol worship, <b>as</b> in that case <b>they bring twelve goats. Alternatively,</b> you find liability in a case <b>where seven tribes sinned, and the rest of these</b> tribes that did not sin are <b>drawn</b> after the majority of tribes that sinned and each brings a sin-offering. <b>And according to Rabbi Shimon as well, you find</b> liability for these twelve sin-offerings in a case <b>where eleven tribes sinned, as</b> in that case <b>they bring eleven goats and the other</b> goat is brought <b>by the court. But according to Rabbi Meir, who says</b> that <b>the court brings</b> an offering <b>and</b> the <b>public</b> does <b>not,</b> and only one bull is sacrificed, <b>how do you find this</b> a case of liability to bring <b>twelve offerings?</b> The Gemara answers: It is in a case <b>where they sinned, and then sinned</b> again, <b>and then sinned</b> again, <b>until</b> they sinned <b>twelve times.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t those who sinned</b> by engaging in idol worship during the time of Zedekiah and the Babylonian exile already <b>die?</b> How can their descendants bring a sin-offering on their behalf? The status of those animals is that of a sin-offering whose owner has died, which is disqualified from sacrifice on the altar.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa said: When</b> it <b>is learned</b> as a tradition that the fate of <b>a sin-offering whose owners have died</b> is to allow the animal <b>to die</b> without its being sacrificed, <b>this matter</b> applies specifically <b>with regard to an individual</b> who died <b>but not with regard to a congregation, because there is no death with regard to a congregation;</b> the entity of the congregation remains even when specific members die. The Gemara asks: <b>From where does Rav Pappa derive this? If we say</b> that he derives it <b>from</b> that <b>which is written: “Instead of your fathers shall be your sons”</b> (Psalms 45:17), indicating that as long as the sons are alive it is as though the fathers are alive, then <b>if so,</b> the same should be true <b>even with regard to an individual as well,</b> and sons should be able to sacrifice the sin-offerings of their dead fathers.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, the inference of Rav Pappa is from the goat of the New Moon, as the Merciful One states: Bring</b> those sin-offerings <b>from the collection of the</b> Temple treasury <b>chamber,</b> where the half-shekels contributed by the Jewish people every Adar are stored. <b>But haven’t some of the Jewish people died</b> since Adar? If so, <b>how can those who remain bring</b> a sin-offering if some of the owners of the offering have died? <b>Rather, learn from it</b> that <b>a sin-offering whose owners have died may be sacrificed in</b> the case of <b>a communal</b> offering.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>Are</b> these matters <b>comparable?</b> In the case of <b>the goat of the New Moon, perhaps no</b> one <b>from</b> the <b>public died</b> in the interim. <b>But here,</b> in the case of those who returned to Zion from Babylonia, those who engaged in idol worship in the days of Zedekiah <b>certainly died,</b> as many years have passed since then. <b>Rather, the reason</b> for the opinion <b>of Rav Pappa is from here, as it is written</b> in the confession recited by the Sages during the rite of the heifer whose neck is broken: <b>“Atone for Your people Israel whom You have redeemed, Lord”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:8). <b>This atonement is fit to atone</b> even <b>for those who emerged from Egypt, from</b> the fact <b>that it is written: “Whom You have redeemed.”</b> The reference is to those whom God redeemed from Egypt, even though they died long ago.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Are</b> these matters <b>comparable? There,</b> in the case of the heifer whose neck is broken, <b>all</b> the residents of the city on whose behalf the rite was performed <b>are present</b> when they perform the rite, and <b>since it atones for the living, it also atones for the dead. But here,</b> in the case of those returning from Zion, <b>are</b> any of the people who worshipped idols during the time of Zedekiah <b>alive</b> when the offering is sacrificed? The Gemara answers: <b>Yes, it is indeed so</b> that there were people from that period still alive, <b>as it is written: “Many of the priests and Levites and heads of patrilineal houses,</b> the elders that had seen the first house standing on its foundation, wept with a loud voice when this house was before their eyes. And many shouted aloud for joy” (Ezra 3:12).

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: <b>But perhaps those</b> elders <b>were few</b> in number, <b>and were not many,</b> and the majority of those present consisted of people who were not alive during the days of Zedekiah. The Gemara answers: <b>Isn’t it written: “And the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people;</b> as the people shouted with a loud shout, <b>and the noise was heard far off”</b> (Ezra 3:13)? This indicates that the weeping elders who survived from the era of Zedekiah outnumbered the younger people.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t</b> those who engaged in idol worship in the era of Zedekiah do so <b>intentionally?</b> Sin-offerings are brought for unwitting, not intentional sins. The Gemara answers: <b>It was a provisional edict</b> issued in exigent circumstances to enable them to sacrifice a sin-offering to atone for an intentional sin. The Gemara comments: <b>So too it is reasonable, as if you do not say so,</b> then with regard to these <b>“ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs,”</b> to <b>what</b> do they <b>correspond? Rather,</b> the sacrifice of those rams and lambs <b>was a provisional edict. Here too,</b> concerning sin-offerings for intentional transgressions, <b>it was a provisional edict.</b>

### Part 11
§ On a related note, <b>the Sages taught:</b> If the court unwittingly issued a ruling and the congregation performed a transgression on the basis of that ruling, and before the offering was brought <b>one</b> member <b>of the public died,</b> they are <b>liable</b> to bring an offering. If <b>one</b> member <b>of the court</b> died, they are <b>exempt.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who stated this <i>halakha</i>? <b>Rav Ḥisda said</b> that <b>Rabbi Zeira said</b> that <b>Rav Yirmeya said</b> that <b>Rav said: It is Rabbi Meir, who says:</b> The <b>court, and not the public, brings</b> the offering. <b>Therefore,</b> if <b>one</b> member <b>of the public died</b> the court is <b>liable, as the entire court</b> remains <b>intact.</b> If <b>one</b> member <b>of</b> the <b>court died</b> the court is <b>exempt, as</b> the <i>halakha</i> here <b>is</b> like the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a sin-offering that one of the partners</b> who co-own the offering <b>died, and due to that</b> reason the court is <b>exempt.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yosef objects to this: And let us establish</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon, who says:</b> The <b>court,</b> together <b>with the public,</b> brings the offering. Therefore, if <b>one</b> member <b>of the public died</b> the court is still <b>liable, as</b> the <b>public does not die.</b> But if <b>one</b> member <b>of</b> the <b>court died</b> the court is <b>exempt, in accordance with</b> that <b>which we say, that it is a sin-offering</b> belonging to <b>partners.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Yosef: <b>We heard with regard to Rabbi Shimon that he says: A sin-offering</b> belonging to <b>partners is not</b> left to <b>die, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>a bull and a goat of Yom Kippur were lost, and one designated other</b> animals <b>in their place,</b> and then the lost animals were found, <b>they shall all</b> be left to <b>die;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehuda. Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shimon say: They shall graze</b> until they develop a blemish, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that a communal sin-offering is not</b> left to <b>die.</b> The bull sacrificed on Yom Kippur belongs to the priests, and is therefore a sin-offering belonging to partners; nevertheless, Rabbi Shimon holds that its status is not that of a bull whose owners died.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Yosef said to</b> Abaye: <b>Priests, you say? Priests are different, as they are characterized as a congregation</b> in and of themselves, <b>as it is written: “And for the priests and for all the people of the congregation he shall atone”</b> (Leviticus 16:33).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC