
### Part 1
The general <b>public is removed from the category of an individual,</b> as an individual brings a ewe or female goat as a sin-offering, whereas when the general public sins the sin-offering is a bull. <b>And</b> likewise, <b>an anointed</b> priest <b>is removed from the category of an individual,</b> as his sin-offering is also a bull. Therefore, <b>just as</b> the general <b>public is liable only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> by the court together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> by the people, <b>so too, an anointed</b> priest <b>will be liable only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Or</b> perhaps <b>go this way</b> and draw a different analogy: <b>A king [<i>Nasi</i>] is removed from the category of an individual,</b> as his sin-offering is a goat. <b>And an anointed</b> priest <b>is removed from the category of an individual.</b> Therefore, <b>just as a king brings</b> an offering <b>for unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action,</b> even <b>without absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> leading to an erroneous ruling, like any individual liable to bring a sin-offering, <b>so too, an anointed</b> priest <b>brings</b> an offering <b>for unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action,</b> even <b>without absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> leading to an erroneous ruling. It is possible to liken the anointed priest to either the general public or to the king.

### Part 3
The Gemara considers these two comparisons: <b>Let us see to which</b> of them, the general public or the king, an anointed priest <b>is simi-lar.</b> The general <b>public</b> achieves atonement <b>with a bull and does not bring a provisional guilt-offering, and an anointed</b> priest achieves atonement <b>with a bull and does not bring a provisional guilt-offering.</b> Therefore one might say: <b>Just as</b> the general <b>public is liable only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> by the court together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> by the people, <b>so too, an anointed</b> priest <b>will be liable only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Or</b> perhaps <b>go this way</b> and draw a different analogy: <b>The king brings a female goat for</b> unwitting <b>idol worship and brings a definite guilt-offering</b> for certain other transgressions where there is liability to bring a guilt-offering, e.g., misuse of consecrated property and robbery, <b>and an anointed</b> priest <b>brings a female goat for</b> unwitting <b>idol worship and brings a definite guilt-offering</b> for the same transgressions as the king. This is in contrast to the general public, which brings a bull as a sin-offering for unwitting idol worship and does not bring a definite guilt-offering at all. Therefore conclude: <b>Just as a king brings</b> an offering <b>for unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> without absence of awareness of the matter, like any individual liable to bring a sin-offering, <b>so too, an anointed</b> priest <b>brings</b> an offering <b>for unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> without absence of awareness of the matter.

### Part 5
Since either conclusion can be derived logically, another source is necessary. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “If the anointed priest shall sin <b>so as to bring guilt upon the people”</b> (Leviticus 4:3), indicating that the status of the <b>anointed</b> priest <b>is like</b> that of the general <b>public.</b> Therefore, <b>just as</b> the general <b>public brings</b> an offering <b>only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter</b> by the court <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> by the people, <b>so too, an anointed</b> priest <b>brings</b> an offering <b>only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara challenges the comparison: Based on the comparison between the anointed priest and the general public, why not <b>say: Just as</b> with regard to the general <b>public,</b> if the court <b>issued a ruling and</b> the general public <b>performed</b> the transgression <b>after its</b> ruling and <b>in accordance with its ruling,</b> the court is <b>liable, so too,</b> with regard to <b>an anointed</b> priest, <b>when he issued a ruling and</b> the general public <b>performed</b> the transgression <b>after his</b> ruling and <b>in accordance with his ruling, he should be liable.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states</b> with regard to the anointed priest: <b>“Then he shall offer for his sin that he has sinned”</b> (Leviticus 4:3), from which it is derived: <b>He brings</b> an offering <b>for that</b> sin <b>that he sinned</b> on the basis of his ruling, <b>but he does not bring</b> an offering <b>for that</b> sin <b>that others sinned</b> on the basis of his ruling.

### Part 7
The Gemara elaborates on that which <b>the Master said: An anointed</b> priest achieves atonement <b>with a bull and does not bring a provisional guilt-offering.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where does</b> the <i>tanna</i> derive <b>that</b> an anointed priest <b>does not bring a provisional guilt-offering?</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara answers: It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of the guilt-offering: <b>“And the priest shall atone for him for his unwitting act that he performed unwittingly”</b> (Leviticus 5:18), from which it is derived that this <i>halakha</i> applies only to <b>one whose transgression and his unwitting</b> action <b>are equal,</b> i.e., an ordinary person, whose unwitting act is the very transgression that he performed unwittingly. This serves to <b>exclude an anointed</b> priest, <b>whose unwitting</b> action <b>and his transgression are not equal,</b> as his unwitting act is the erroneous ruling and he is liable to bring an offering only if he performed the transgression on the basis of that ruling. <b>As it is written</b> about the anointed priest: <b>“So as to bring guilt upon the people”</b> (Leviticus 4:3), indicating that the status of the <b>anointed</b> priest <b>is like</b> that of the general <b>public.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara questions this proof: How can the Gemara base the <i>halakha</i> on an interpretation of the verse: <b>“So as to bring guilt upon the people”? To this point,</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>did not state</b> this verse. The <i>tanna</i> first states that the anointed priest does not bring a provisional guilt-offering and only then cites the verse from which he proves the <i>halakha</i> that an anointed priest brings an offering only for absence of awareness of the matter together with unwitting performance of an action. <b>Rather,</b> he stated the <i>halakha</i> of the provisional guilt-offering <b>for no reason.</b> Although the <i>halakha</i> is correct, there was no reason to cite it in the <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If the anointed priest <b>issued a ruling by himself and performed</b> a transgression <b>by himself, he achieves atonement by himself</b> by bringing a bull as his sin-offering. If <b>he issued a ruling with the</b> general <b>public,</b> i.e., the Sanhedrin, <b>and performed</b> a transgression <b>with the</b> general <b>public,</b> i.e., the Jewish people, <b>he achieves atonement with the</b> general <b>public. As, the court is not liable unless</b> the judges <b>issue a ruling to nullify part</b> of a commandment <b>and to sustain part</b> of that commandment, <b>and likewise</b> with regard to the ruling of <b>the anointed</b> priest. <b>And</b> the court and the priest are <b>not</b> liable for a ruling <b>with regard to idol worship unless they issue a ruling to nullify part</b> of that commandment <b>and to sustain part</b> of it.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> Concerning the <i>halakha</i> that there is a difference between an unwitting transgression that the anointed priest performs by himself and one that he performs with the general public, the Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter</b> derived? The Gemara explains: It is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If the anointed priest <b>issued a ruling with the</b> general <b>public and performed</b> a transgression <b>with the</b> general <b>public,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that he is liable to <b>bring a bull</b> as a sin-offering <b>for himself.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> there <b>is a logical inference</b> to support this: <b>A king is removed from the category of an individual and an anointed</b> priest <b>is removed from the category of an individual,</b> as each brings a different sin-offering than an individual. <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b>a king,</b> if <b>he sinned by himself he brings</b> his sin-offering of a goat <b>by himself,</b> and if <b>he sinned with the</b> general <b>public, he achieves atonement with the</b> general <b>public, so too,</b> with regard to <b>an anointed</b> priest, if <b>he sinned by himself he brings</b> his sin-offering of a bull <b>by himself,</b> and if <b>he sinned with the</b> general <b>public, he achieves atonement with the</b> general <b>public.</b>

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> rejects this: <b>No, if you said with regard to a king</b> that he achieves atonement with the general public, that is logical, <b>as he achieves atonement with the</b> general <b>public on Yom Kippur. Shall you</b> also <b>say</b> the same <b>with regard to an anointed</b> priest, <b>who does not achieve atonement with the</b> general <b>public on Yom Kippur</b> but rather brings his own atonement offering?

### Part 14
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Since he does not achieve atonement with the</b> general <b>public on Yom Kippur,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>he will bring a bull for himself</b> even if he unwittingly performed a transgression with the general public. Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “Then he shall offer <b>for his sin that he has sinned”</b> (Leviticus 4:3), indicating that he sinned alone, not with the general public. <b>How so?</b> If <b>he sinned by himself he brings</b> his sin-offering of a bull <b>by himself;</b> if <b>he sinned with the</b> general <b>public, he achieves atonement with the</b> general <b>public.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara elaborates: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of an anointed priest issuing a ruling for himself? <b>If we say</b> that it is a case <b>where</b> the High Priest <b>is a distinguished</b> scholar <b>and</b> the judges of the court <b>are not distinguished</b> scholars, it is <b>obvious that he achieves atonement by himself,</b> as <b>their ruling is nothing</b> at all, since they did not consult the generation’s most prominent scholar. <b>And</b> accordingly, <b>each and every one</b> who performed a transgression <b>needs to bring a ewe or female goat</b> as an individual sin-offering. <b>And</b> if it is a case <b>where</b> the judges <b>are distinguished</b> scholars <b>and he is not a distinguished</b> scholar, <b>why does he achieve atonement by himself? Isn’t his ruling nothing at all,</b> and his transgression is an unwitting performance of an action alone, rather than a transgression performed on the basis of a ruling?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC