
### Part 1
<b>that</b> one may <b>not</b> contend with them, <b>but</b> it is permitted <b>to harass them. While</b> concerning the offspring of <b>the younger daughter, who called</b> her son <b>ben Ami,</b> son of my people, avoiding any direct mention of the baby’s father, God <b>said to</b> Moses: <b>“Neither harass them, nor contend with them”</b> (Deuteronomy 2:19), <b>at all. Even</b> to <b>harass</b> them is <b>not</b> permitted.

### Part 2
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Avin says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa says: A person should always be first to</b> perform <b>a matter of a mitzva, as in reward for one night that</b> the <b>elder</b> daughter <b>preceded the younger</b> daughter, <b>she merited and preceded her to royalty</b> by <b>four generations.</b> Ruth the Moabite, ancestor of King David, descended from her son Moab, and she preceded Naamah the Ammonite, who was married to King Solomon, by four generations.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: “And if one soul from among the common people sins unwittingly in performing one of the mitzvot of God that may not be done and he is guilty” (Leviticus 4:27). The phrase <b>“from among the common people”</b> serves <b>to exclude the anointed</b> priest; the phrase <b>“from among the common people”</b> also serves <b>to exclude the king.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>But weren’t</b> these individuals already <b>excluded</b> from bringing a ewe or a female goat as a sin-offering, as <b>an anointed</b> priest is <b>subject to</b> atonement <b>with a bull,</b> and <b>a king</b> is <b>subject to</b> atonement <b>with a male goat?</b> Why then is an additional exclusionary derivation necessary? The <i>baraita</i> answers: The derivation is necessary, <b>as</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>an anointed priest brings a bull for absence</b> of awareness <b>of the matter</b> together <b>with the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action,</b> but that <b>he brings a ewe or a female goat,</b> as does a non-priest, <b>for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action alone.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “From among the common people,”</b> which serves <b>to exclude the anointed</b> priest, who is completely exempt from bringing a sin-offering for an unwitting transgression unless it was committed on the basis of his own erroneous ruling. The <i>baraita</i> concludes: The phrase <b>“from among the common people”</b> serves <b>to exclude the king.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges: <b>Granted,</b> in the case of <b>an anointed</b> priest it is clear why an additional exclusionary derivation is necessary. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a king, it is for the unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action that he brings</b> a goat as his offering. Why then is the additional derivation necessary?

### Part 6
<b>Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava: What are we dealing with here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where one</b> unwittingly <b>ate an olive-bulk of</b> forbidden <b>fat when he</b> was <b>a commoner, and he was</b> then <b>appointed</b> king, <b>and thereafter</b> his transgression <b>became known to him.</b> It could <b>enter your mind to say: Let him bring a ewe or a female goat</b> because he performed the transgression before he became king. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that he brings a male goat as he is now a king. The Gemara challenges: <b>This works out well according to Rabbi Shimon, who follows</b> the time of <b>knowledge,</b> and holds that one brings the offering on the basis of his status at the time when his transgression became known to him. <b>But according to the Rabbis, who follow</b> the time of the performance of the <b>sin, what can be said?</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rather, Rav Zevid said in the name of Rava: What are we dealing with here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where one</b> unwittingly <b>ate half an olive-bulk of</b> forbidden <b>fat when he</b> was <b>a commoner, and he was</b> then <b>appointed</b> king, <b>and he</b> then <b>finished</b> eating the olive-bulk of forbidden fat, <b>and thereafter it became known to him</b> that he had eaten forbidden fat. It could <b>enter your mind to say: Let</b> the two halves <b>combine and let him bring a ewe or a female goat.</b> Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that the status of a king is not like that of a commoner. Since a king brings a special offering, the half olive-bulk that he ate before becoming king does not combine with the half olive-bulk that he ate as a king.

### Part 8
<b>Rava raised a dilemma before Rav Naḥman:</b> With regard to <b>kingship, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Does it <b>interpose</b> between two parts of a transgression and prevent them from combining? <b>What are the circumstances?</b> It is a case <b>where one</b> unwittingly <b>ate half an olive-bulk of</b> forbidden <b>fat when he</b> was <b>a commoner, and he was</b> then <b>appointed</b> king, <b>and</b> then was <b>removed</b> from his position, <b>and</b> then <b>finished</b> eating the olive-bulk of forbidden fat. Perhaps <b>it is there,</b> in the previous case, <b>that</b> the two actions <b>do not combine, as he ate half when he</b> was <b>a commoner and half when he</b> was <b>king. But here, where he ate</b> both <b>this</b> half <b>and that</b> half <b>when he</b> was <b>a commoner,</b> they <b>combine. Or perhaps it is no different,</b> and once he was appointed king and his status changed, the two actions do not combine. <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Resolve</b> the dilemma <b>from that which Ulla says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> If <b>one ate</b> forbidden <b>fat and designated an offering</b> for his unwitting sin, <b>and he became an apostate, and</b> then <b>retracted</b> his apostasy, <b>since he was disqualified</b> from bringing the offering as an apostate <b>he shall</b> remain <b>disqualified</b> from bringing an offering for that sin. The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? An apostate is ineligible</b> as far as <b>bringing an offering</b> of any kind is concerned; <b>this</b> king <b>is eligible</b> with regard to <b>bringing an offering,</b> albeit of a different type.

### Part 10
<b>Rabbi Zeira raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> If <b>one ate</b> meat <b>when he was a commoner,</b> and there was <b>uncertainty</b> as to whether or not it was forbidden <b>fat, and</b> subsequently he <b>was appointed</b> king <b>and his uncertainty became known to him, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>According to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who follow</b> the time of the actual <b>transgression, do not raise the dilemma, as</b> in their opinion, he is liable to <b>bring a provisional guilt-offering. Rather, when you raise the dilemma</b> it is <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> who follows the time of awareness of the transgression.

### Part 11
Is the <i>halakha</i> that <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> his status <b>changed with regard to a definite</b> transgression, as, if he was liable to bring a sin-offering and his sin became known to him after his coronation, he is completely exempt, it may be derived that his status <b>changed with regard to an uncertain</b> transgression as well, and he is exempt from bringing a provisional guilt-offering? <b>Or perhaps when</b> his status <b>changed,</b> it was <b>with regard to a definite</b> transgression only, <b>as</b> in that case <b>his offering changed,</b> since a king brings a goat as a sin-offering instead of a ewe or a female goat. <b>But here,</b> in the case of an uncertain transgression, <b>as his offering does not change, say: Let him bring a provisional guilt-offering.</b> The Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 12
§ <b>The Sages taught:</b> The verse states: “And if one soul <b>from among the common people</b> sins unwittingly in performing one of the mitzvot of God that may not be done and he is guilty” (Leviticus 4:27). This serves <b>to exclude an apostate.</b> When an apostate sins unwittingly, he is exempt from liability to bring a sin-offering even if he repents for that sin, as even his unwitting action is considered intentional.

### Part 13
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Shimon bar Yosei says in the name of Rabbi Shimon:</b> It is unnecessary to derive this <i>halakha</i> from that phrase, as it says in the same verse: “If any one of the common people sins <b>unwittingly</b> in performing one of the mitzvot of God <b>that may not be done and he is guilty;</b> or if his sin, which he has sinned, be known to him” (Leviticus 4:27–28). From the words “be known to him” it is inferred that only <b>one who repents due to his awareness,</b> i.e., who would not have sinned had he known that the act was forbidden, <b>brings an offering for his unwitting</b> transgression and achieves atonement in this way. But one who does <b>not repent due to his awareness</b> that he sinned, e.g., an apostate, who would sin even after becoming aware that the act is forbidden, <b>does not bring an offering for his unwitting</b> action.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the practical difference <b>between</b> the opinions of the Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon concerning whether the <i>halakha</i> is derived from the earlier or later verse? <b>Rav Hamnuna said:</b> The difference <b>between them</b> is in the case of <b>an apostate with regard to eating</b> forbidden <b>fat;</b> they disagree as to whether or not <b>he brings an offering for</b> unwittingly consuming <b>blood.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds: Since he is an apostate with regard to eating</b> forbidden <b>fat, he is also</b> considered <b>an apostate with regard to</b> consuming <b>blood. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds: With regard to</b> consuming <b>blood, in any event, he is</b> one who <b>repents due to his awareness,</b> as he is not considered an apostate with regard to blood.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rava say that everyone agrees</b> that <b>an apostate with regard to eating</b> forbidden <b>fat is not</b> considered <b>an apostate with regard to</b> consuming <b>blood?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Rather, here</b> it is <b>with regard to</b> a person who <b>eats</b> forbidden fat and <b>an animal carcass due to appetite,</b> e.g., only when he does not have access to kosher meat. <b>And</b> forbidden fat <b>became confused for</b> that person <b>with</b> permitted <b>fat and he ate</b> the forbidden fat. It is in that case that the Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon <b>disagree.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds: Since he intentionally eats</b> forbidden fat <b>due to appetite, he is an apostate. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>holds: Since if he finds</b> food <b>that</b> is <b>permitted he does not eat</b> food <b>that</b> is <b>prohibited,</b> as he merely seeks to satiate his appetite, <b>he is not an apostate.</b>

### Part 16
<b>The Sages taught:</b> One who <b>ate</b> forbidden <b>fat is an apostate. And who is an apostate?</b> It is one who <b>ate animal carcasses or animals with wounds that will cause them to die within twelve months [<i>tereifot</i>], repugnant creatures or creeping animals, and</b> one who <b>drank wine</b> used for <b>a libation</b> in idol worship. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> This applies <b>even</b> to <b>one who wears</b> garments fashioned of <b>diverse kinds,</b> containing wool and linen. The Gemara analyzes this <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said:</b> One who <b>ate</b> forbidden <b>fat is an apostate. And who is an apostate?</b> It is one who <b>ate animal carcasses, etc.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is he saying?</b> Why, after answering the question, does the <i>tanna</i> ask who is an apostate and then provide a different answer?

### Part 17
<b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: This</b> is what <b>he is saying:</b> If <b>one ate</b> forbidden <b>fat due to appetite, he is an apostate.</b> If he ate it <b>to express insolence, this</b> person is <b>a heretic. And which is</b> the <b>apostate who is a presumptive heretic</b> merely on the basis of his actions? <b>You must say</b> that it is one who <b>eats an animal carcass or a <i>tereifa</i>, repugnant creatures or creeping animals, and</b> one who <b>drank wine</b> used for <b>a libation</b> in idol worship. Based on the fact that he violates serious transgressions for which one has no appetite such as repugnant creatures or creeping animals, it is clear that he is a heretic who denies the Torah in its entirety. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> This applies <b>even</b> to <b>one who wears</b> garments fashioned of <b>diverse kinds,</b> containing wool and linen.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the practical difference <b>between</b> the opinion of the Rabbis and that of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda? The Gemara answers: The difference between them is in the case of one who wears a garment of <b>diverse kinds,</b> containing wool and linen prohibited <b>by rabbinic law.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds:</b> One who violates a prohibition <b>by Torah law is an apostate;</b> one who violates a prohibition <b>by rabbinic law is not an apostate. And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yosei, <b>holds:</b> With regard to <b>diverse kinds, since his</b> violation of the <b>prohibition is well known,</b> as people see that he is wearing that garment, <b>even</b> though he violates a prohibition <b>by rabbinic law, he is an apostate.</b>

### Part 19
<b>Rav Aḥa and Ravina disagree with regard to</b> this matter. <b>One said:</b> If one violated a prohibition <b>due to appetite</b> or convenience he is <b>an apostate,</b> while one who eats <b>to express insolence</b> is <b>a heretic. And one said:</b> One who violates a prohibition <b>to express insolence</b> is <b>also an apostate. Rather, who is a heretic?</b> It is <b>anyone who engages in idol worship.</b> The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the first opinion from a <i>baraita</i>: If a person <b>ate one flea or one mosquito, this</b> person is <b>an apostate. But here,</b> isn’t it a case <b>where it is</b> a violation performed <b>to express insolence,</b> as one has no desire to eat these insects, <b>and</b> yet the <i>tanna</i> <b>calls him an apostate?</b> The Gemara answers: The reference <b>there,</b> in that <i>baraita</i>, is to the case of one who <b>eats</b> the flea due to appetite, <b>as he says: I shall taste the flavor of prohibition.</b> He seeks to eat a food that he has never eaten before.

### Part 20
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Who is</b> the <b><i>nasi</i>? This is a king,</b> as it is stated: “When a <i>nasi</i> sins, and performs any one of all the mitzvot of the Lord his God that shall not be performed, unwittingly, and he is guilty” (Leviticus 4:22), referring to one who has only the Lord his God over him and no other authority. <b>The Sages taught: The verse states: “<i>nasi</i>.”</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that the reference is to <b>the prince of a tribe, like Naḥshon, son of Amminadab.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And performed <b>any</b> one <b>of all the mitzvot of the Lord his God.” Later,</b> in the passage with regard to the king, the verse <b>states: “That he may learn to fear the Lord his God”</b> (Deuteronomy 17:19).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC