
### Part 1
The <i>baraita</i> teaches: <b>And they agree that he does not bring a provisional guilt-offering.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the provisional guilt-offering: <b>“And the priest shall atone for him for his unwitting act that he performed unwittingly”</b> (Leviticus 5:18). Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and the Rabbis disagree with regard to the interpretation of this verse, in accordance with their opinions. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds:</b> This is referring to <b>one whose sin-offering</b> for <b>all</b> transgressions is <b>for an unwitting</b> act. This serves to <b>exclude that</b> anointed priest, <b>as all of his sin-offerings are not for an unwitting</b> act alone; <b>rather,</b> he brings a sin-offering only if that unwitting act is performed on the basis <b>of absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter,</b> leading to an erroneous ruling.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Is it written</b> in the verse: For <b>all</b> his unwitting acts that he performed unwittingly? Only the phrase “for his unwitting act that he performed unwittingly” is written. The Gemara answers: <b>Yes,</b> it is as though the word: All, is written. <b>As if</b> it were <b>so</b> that the verse is not referring to all unwitting acts, <b>let</b> the Torah <b>write</b> only: <b>“For his unwitting act.” Why do I</b> need the additional phrase: <b>“That he performed unwittingly”? This teaches us that</b> there is no liability to bring a provisional guilt-offering <b>unless</b> liability to bring <b>all his sin-offerings is for unwitting</b> acts. This serves to <b>exclude an anointed</b> priest, <b>all of whose</b> liability to bring <b>a sin-offering for an unwitting</b> act alone <b>is only in</b> cases of <b>idol worship, but in</b> cases involving <b>the rest of</b> the <b>mitzvot</b> there is liability <b>only for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter,</b> leading to an erroneous ruling, together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> on the basis of that ruling.

### Part 3
<b>And the Rabbis</b> interpret the verse in accordance with their opinion that an anointed priest, even in cases of idol worship, brings a sin-offering only for absence of awareness of the matter, leading to an erroneous ruling, together with unwitting performance of an action on the basis of that ruling. They hold: This teaches us that there is liability to bring a provisional guilt-offering only for <b>one whose</b> liability to bring his <b>sin-offerings is for an unwitting</b> act. This serves to <b>exclude an anointed</b> priest, <b>whose</b> liability to bring <b>a sin-offering is not for an unwitting</b> act alone, <b>neither in</b> cases of <b>idol worship, nor in</b> cases involving <b>the rest of</b> the <b>mitzvot,</b> but <b>rather for absence</b> of awareness <b>of</b> the <b>matter,</b> leading to an erroneous ruling, together <b>with unwitting</b> performance <b>of an action</b> on the basis of that ruling.

### Part 4
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The court is not liable</b> to bring an offering for absence of awareness of the matter <b>unless they issue a ruling with regard to a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering. And likewise the anointed priest</b> is liable only for such a ruling. <b>Neither</b> is the court liable to bring a sin-offering <b>for idol worship unless</b> the judges <b>issue a ruling with regard to a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i>, and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the statement in the mishna that the court is liable only for a ruling with regard to a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i> and for whose unwitting violation one is liable to bring a sin-offering, the Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 6
The Gemara answers: It is derived <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The word <b>“that” is stated here</b> in the verse: “And the sin that they sinned” (Leviticus 4:14), with regard to the offering brought by the court for the transgression of the public based on their erroneous ruling, <b>and</b> the word <b>“that” is stated there</b> in the verse: “And you shall not take a woman to her sister, to be a rival to her, to uncover her nakedness, that is in her lifetime” (Leviticus 18:18), with regard to the prohibition against marrying two sisters. It is derived: <b>Just as there</b> it is <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too here,</b> the reference is to <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 7
<b>We found</b> a source for the court bringing an offering for a transgression of the general <b>public</b> based on their erroneous ruling. <b>From where do we</b> derive that this is the <i>halakha</i> for <b>an anointed</b> priest? The Gemara answers: It is derived from the verse: “If the anointed priest shall sin <b>so as to bring guilt upon the people”</b> (Leviticus 4:3), indicating that the status of <b>an anointed</b> priest <b>is like</b> that of the transgression of the general <b>public.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: From where is it derived that this is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>king?</b> The Gemara answers: The <i>tanna</i> <b>derives</b> a verbal analogy between the term <b>“commandments”</b> written with regard to a king and the term <b>“commandments”</b> written with regard to the general public. <b>It is written with regard to a king: “And he performed one of all the commandments of the Lord</b> his God that are not to be performed” (Leviticus 4:22), <b>and it is written with regard to</b> the general <b>public: “And performed one of all the commandments</b> of the Lord that are not to be performed” (Leviticus 4:13). <b>Just as</b> with regard to the general <b>public</b> there is liability only for <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too,</b> in the case of <b>a king</b> there is liability only for <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks further: From where is it derived that <b>an individual</b> is liable to bring a sin-offering only for a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>The verse</b> with regard to an individual <b>states: “And if one soul</b> from among the common people shall sin unwittingly” (Leviticus 4:27). The verse begins with the conjunction “and,” represented by the letter <i>vav</i>. This indicates that <b>one shall derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the <b>lower</b> verse, i.e., the verse written later in the passage, <b>from</b> that which is written in the <b>upper</b> verses, i.e., those written earlier. Just as in those verses earlier in the passage, addressing the public, priest, and king, there is liability only for a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, so too, in the case of the individual addressed in this verse, there is liability only for a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>.

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches: <b>Neither</b> is the court liable to bring a sin-offering <b>for idol worship unless</b> the judges <b>issue a ruling</b> with regard to a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, and for whose unwitting violation one is liable to bring a sin-offering. The Gemara asks: <b>In</b> the case of <b>idol worship, from where do we</b> derive this <i>halakha</i>? It is derived <b>as the Sages taught: Due to</b> the fact <b>that idol worship left</b> the category of unwitting transgressions <b>to be discussed by itself</b> (see Numbers, chapter 15), one <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> the court and the priest <b>would be liable even</b> if it is <b>not</b> for <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: Therefore, the term <b>“from the eyes of” is stated here,</b> with regard to idol worship (Numbers 15:24), <b>and “from the eyes of” is stated there,</b> with regard to an unwitting communal sin-offering for all other mitzvot (Leviticus 4:13). <b>Just as there</b> the court is liable only for <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too here,</b> the court is liable only for <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>We found</b> a source for the court bringing an offering for a transgression of the general <b>public</b> based on their erroneous ruling; but <b>from where do we</b> derive that this is the <i>halakha</i> for <b>an individual, a king,</b> and <b>an anointed</b> priest who engage in idol worship? It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “And if one soul</b> sins unwittingly, then he shall offer a female goat of the first year as a sin-offering” (Numbers 15:27). And with regard to <b>an individual, a king, and an anointed</b> priest, <b>they all are included in the category of “one soul.” And one shall derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to that which is written in the <b>lower</b> verse, i.e., the verses concerning an individual, a king, and an anointed priest, <b>from</b> that which is written in the <b>upper</b> verse, i.e., the verse concerning the transgression of the general public.

### Part 13
The Gemara challenges: <b>This works out well according to the one who derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> by using the term <b>“that” for a verbal analogy</b> to teach that the court is liable only for a ruling with regard to a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>, <b>in accordance with</b> that <b>which we stated. But according to the Rabbis, who derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> by using the term <b>“that” to</b> teach the <i>halakhot</i> of <b>those with whom relations are forbidden and rival wives</b> with regard to a <i>yevama</i> (see <i>Yevamot</i> 3b), <b>from where do they</b> derive the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a matter</b> for <b>whose intentional</b> violation one is liable to receive <b><i>karet</i> and</b> for <b>whose unwitting</b> violation one is liable to bring <b>a sin-offering</b> in the case of the transgression of the general public?

### Part 14
The Gemara answers: <b>They derive it from</b> that <b>which Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi taught to his son</b> based on the verse: <b>“There shall be one Torah for you for the one who acts unwittingly. And the soul that performs with an upraised hand,</b> he blasphemes the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off [<i>venikhreta</i>] from among his people” (Numbers 15:29–30). The Sages understood the phrase “with an upraised hand” to be referring to idol worship (see <i>Sanhedrin</i> 99a). <b>The entire Torah is juxtaposed to idol worship: Just as idol worship</b> is a prohibition for <b>which one is liable for its intentional</b> violation to receive <b><i>karet</i> and for its unwitting</b> violation to bring <b>a sin-offering, so too here,</b> for the entire Torah <b>one is liable for its intentional</b> violation to receive <b><i>karet</i> and for its unwitting</b> violation to bring <b>a sin-offering.</b>

### Part 15
The Gemara challenges: <b>We found</b> a source for this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>an individual, a king, and an anointed priest, both with regard to idol worship and with regard to the rest of the mitzvot,</b> as all those are included in the category of “one soul” and are juxtaposed to idol worship. But <b>from where do we</b> derive that the general <b>public</b> is liable to bring a sin-offering only for a matter for whose intentional violation one is liable to receive <i>karet</i>? The Gemara answers: <b>One derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to that which is written in the <b>upper</b> verse, i.e., the verse concerning the general public, <b>from</b> that which is written in the <b>lower</b> verse, i.e., the verse concerning an individual.

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who derives this matter from the term “that,” <b>what does he do with this</b> verse, from <b>which Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> taught a <i>halakha</i> to his son? The Gemara answers: <b>He derives</b> a <i>halakha</i>, using the verse <b>to</b> teach <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Due to</b> the fact <b>that we found that the verse distinguished</b> with regard to idol worship <b>between</b> the <b>many,</b> who constitute the majority of a city, <b>and individuals,</b> as the <b>many</b> are executed <b>through</b> beheading with <b>a sword and their property is lost,</b> as the court destroys it, while <b>individuals</b> are executed <b>through stoning and their property is spared,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought <b>that</b> in the case of unwitting idol worship <b>we would distinguish between</b> the <b>offerings</b> that <b>they</b> are liable to bring. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “There shall be one Torah for you</b> for the one who acts unwittingly. And the soul that performs with an upraised hand, he blasphemes the Lord” (Numbers 15:29–30).

### Part 17
<b>Rav Ḥilkiya of Hagronya objects to it: The reason</b> that both individuals and the general public are liable to bring the same offering for unwitting idol worship is <b>that the verse did not distinguish</b> between them. <b>But had the verse distinguished</b> between them, <b>I would say: Let us distinguish</b> between individuals and the general public, and the general public would bring a different offering for their unwitting idol worship. <b>What</b> different offering <b>shall they bring?</b>

### Part 18
If one would say: <b>Let them bring a bull,</b> that is difficult, as <b>it is for</b> unwitting violation of <b>the rest of the mitzvot that</b> the general <b>public brings</b> a bull. If one would say: <b>Let them bring a bull for a burnt-offering and a goat for a sin-offering,</b> that is difficult, as <b>it is for</b> unwitting <b>idol worship that</b> the general <b>public brings</b> those offerings in the case of an absence of awareness leading to an erroneous ruling by the court. If one would say: <b>Let them bring a goat,</b> that is difficult, as <b>it is for</b> unwitting violation of <b>the rest of the mitzvot that a king brings</b> a goat. If one will say: <b>Let them bring a female goat,</b> that is difficult, as <b>that is the offering for an individual, too.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara rejects this: <b>Why</b> do you say that the verse that equates the offerings of the individuals and the public is <b>not necessary?</b> Were it not for the verse, it might <b>enter your mind to say:</b> The general <b>public brings a bull for a burnt-offering and a goat for a sin-offering, but this</b> majority of a city that unwittingly engaged in idol worship <b>shall bring the opposite: A bull for a sin-offering and a goat for a burnt-offering. Alternatively,</b> perhaps the majority of a city that unwittingly engaged in idol worship <b>must</b> bring an offering, <b>but it has no remedy,</b> because there is no unique offering that it can bring. Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that there is no distinction between many people and individuals in this case.

### Part 20
§ <b>In any event, everyone agrees</b> that <b>where these verses are written, it is with regard to idol worship that they are written.</b> The Gemara asks: As the verse does not mention idol worship explicitly, <b>from where</b> is this <b>inferred? Rava said, and some say</b> it was <b>Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi</b> who said, <b>and some say</b> that the statement is <b>unattributed,</b> that <b>the verse states: “And when you act unwittingly, and do not perform all these commandments [<i>kol hamitzvot</i>]</b> that the Lord spoke to Moses” (Numbers 15:22). <b>Which is</b> the <b>mitzva that is the equivalent of all the mitzvot? You must say: It is</b> the prohibition against <b>idol worship.</b>

### Part 21
<b>The school of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>taught</b> that <b>the verse states: “That the Lord spoke to Moses”</b> (Numbers 15:22), <b>and it is written: “That the Lord has commanded you by the hand of Moses”</b> (Numbers 15:23). <b>Which is</b> the <b>mitzva that</b> was introduced <b>in the speech</b> of <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He,</b> heard by the Jewish people, <b>and</b> which <b>He commanded</b> in the Torah <b>by means of Moses? You must say: This is idol worship, as Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> concerning the first two commandments: <b>“I</b> am the Lord your God” (Exodus 20:2), <b>and: “You shall have no</b> other gods before Me” (Exodus 20:3): <b>We,</b> the Jewish people, <b>heard them from the mouth of the Almighty.</b>

### Part 22
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC