
### Part 1
<b>only</b> the prohibition <b>that one may not</b> directly <b>cause a blemish. From where</b> is it derived <b>that one may not bring</b> pressed <b>figs or dough and place it on the</b> animal’s <b>ear so that a dog will come and eat it,</b> thereby biting off part of the animal’s ear and leaving it blemished? <b>The verse states:</b> “There shall not be <b>any blemish</b> in it” (Leviticus 22:21), indicating that the same prohibition applies <b>both</b> when the <b>blemish</b> is caused directly <b>and</b> when it is <b>any blemish,</b> even one caused indirectly.

### Part 2
After demonstrating that the <i>tanna’im</i> in the <i>baraita</i> discussing the firstborn offering disagree with regard to the exposition of certain verses, the Gemara clarifies that the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>here,</b> in the <i>baraita</i> discussing <i>teruma</i> whose status concerning impurity is uncertain, also <b>disagree with regard to</b> the exposition of <b>verses. As Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says, and Reish Lakish likewise says, and Rav Naḥman likewise says</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says:</b> It is stated in a verse addressed to Aaron and his sons: <b>“And I, behold, I have given you the charge of My <i>terumot</i> [<i>terumotai</i>]”</b> (Numbers 18:8), with “<i>terumotai</i>” written in plural.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who holds that the barrel of <i>teruma</i> must be safeguarded from ritual impurity, <b>holds that the verse is speaking of two <i>terumot</i>: Both <i>teruma</i> that is</b> definitely <b>ritually pure and <i>teruma</i> that is in abeyance,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> whose status with regard to impurity is uncertain. <b>And</b> based on the plural “My <i>terumot</i>,” it is understood that <b>the Merciful One states: Make a protection for it,</b> i.e., safeguard even <i>teruma</i> whose status concerning impurity is uncertain. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua,</b> who holds that one may expose to ritual impurity the <i>teruma</i> contents in the barrel, holds that the term <i>terumotai</i> is <b>written</b> so that it can be read as <b><i>terumati</i>,</b> meaning: My <i>teruma</i>, in the singular. Therefore, the requirement to safeguard <i>teruma</i> applies only to that <i>teruma</i> whose status is definitely pure.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that Rabbi Eliezer holds</b> that <b>the vocalization</b> of the Torah <b>is authoritative,</b> i.e., one derives <i>halakhot</i> based on the pronunciation of the words, although it diverges from the spelling? <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i> discussing a Hebrew maidservant’s return to her father’s house. The verse states, with regard to her master: “He shall have no power to sell her to a foreign people, <b>seeing that he has dealt deceitfully with her [<i>bevigdo bah</i>]”</b> (Exodus 21:8). The term “<i>bevigdo</i>” shares a root with a word for garment, <i>beged</i>. Therefore, the verse indicates that <b>once</b> the master <b>has spread his garment over her,</b> thereby designating her as his wife, if the maidservant is subsequently divorced or widowed, her father <b>may no longer sell her.</b> This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Akiva,</b> who maintains that the vocalization of the Torah is authoritative, and he interprets <i>bevigdo</i> as related to <i>bigdo</i>, his garment.

### Part 5
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> The word <i>bevigdo</i> is written without a <i>yod</i> and therefore is written in a manner that it can be read: <i>Bevagdo</i>. Accordingly, <i>bevigdo bah</i> means that <b>since</b> the father <b>dealt deceitfully [<i>bagad</i>] with her</b> by selling her once, <b>he may not sell her again.</b> Evidently, Rabbi Eliezer maintains that the manner in which the verses in the Torah are written is authoritative, and one derives <i>halakhot</i> based on the spelling of the words. This contradicts his derivation with regard to <i>teruma</i>, which is based on the pronunciation of the words.

### Part 6
<b>Rather, here,</b> the <i>tanna’im</i> <b>disagree with regard to this:</b> The verse states: “And I, behold, I have given you the charge of My <i>terumot</i>” (Numbers 18:8). <b>Rabbi Yehoshua holds</b> that the term “you” teaches that only <i>teruma</i> <b>that is fit for you</b> to eat, i.e., <i>teruma</i> that is definitely ritually pure, you must <b>safeguard. But</b> <i>teruma</i> <b>that is not fit for you,</b> i.e., <i>teruma</i> whose status with regard to impurity is uncertain, <b>you</b> do <b>not</b> need to <b>safeguard. And Rabbi Eliezer</b> holds that <b>this</b> <i>teruma</i>, whose status with regard to impurity is uncertain, is <b>also</b> considered <b>fit</b> for you, because <b>perhaps Elijah will come and deem it ritually pure.</b>

### Part 7
§ The Gemara again discusses letting the blood of a firstborn offering. <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon. Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak objects to this:</b> To <b>which</b> opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> is Shmuel referring? <b>If we say</b> he is referring to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in the mishna,</b> that the blood may be let despite the resulting blemish, because the purpose of the treatment is solely medical, that cannot be correct. After all, <b>hasn’t Shmuel taught us until now</b> that <b>an unintentional act,</b> i.e., a permitted action from which a prohibited result inadvertently ensues, is <b>permitted?</b>

### Part 8
<b>But doesn’t Rav Ḥiyya bar Ashi say</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who maintains that an unintentional act is prohibited, <b>and Rav Ḥanin bar Ashi says</b> that <b>Shmuel</b> says: The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon,</b> that an unintentional act is permitted. <b>And Rav Ḥiyya bar Avin teaches</b> these rulings directly, <b>without</b> citing additional <b>men</b> in their transmission. He simply states that <b>Rav says</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, and Shmuel says</b> that the <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon.</b> Evidently, Shmuel could not be referring to the opinion of Rabbi Shimon in the mishna, as if so, he would be repeating himself.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> Shmuel is referring to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon in the <i>baraita</i></b> (33b), that not only may one let the blood of the dying firstborn animal despite the resulting blemish, but it is even permitted to eat the animal’s meat on account of the blemish. <b>And</b> the Gemara notes that <b>Rav Sheisha, son of Rav Idi, teaches this explicitly: Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> as stated <b>in the <i>baraita</i>.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slits [<i>hatzorem</i>] the ear of a firstborn</b> offering, <b>that</b> person <b>may never slaughter</b> that animal. This is <b>the statement of Rabbi Eliezer. And the Rabbis say:</b> If <b>another blemish</b> later <b>develops in</b> the firstborn, <b>he may slaughter</b> the animal <b>on</b> account of that second blemish.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>But does Rabbi Eliezer penalize</b> for a transgression <b>forever? And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Nega’im</i> 7:5): In the case of <b>one who had a snow-white leprous mark [<i>baheret</i>]</b> on his body,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC