
### Part 1
<b>Just as</b> property is acquired from <b>your counterpart through</b> only <b>one</b> act of acquisition, i.e., pulling, <b>so too,</b> property is acquired from <b>a gentile through</b> only <b>one</b> act of acquisition, i.e., payment of money.

### Part 2
The Sages <b>said: And according to</b> the opinion of <b>Ameimar, who says</b> that <b>pulling effects acquisition in</b> the case of <b>a gentile, this works out well if he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan, who says: By Torah law, money effects acquisition,</b> but <b>pulling</b> does <b>not.</b> If Ameimar accepts Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion, then it can be derived from the phrase <b>“of your counterpart”</b> that transactions <b>with your counterpart,</b> i.e., a Jew, are effected <b>through</b> payment of <b>money,</b> whereas transactions <b>with a gentile</b> are effected <b>by pulling.</b>

### Part 3
<b>But if</b> Ameimar <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Reish Lakish, who says:</b> The act of acquisition of <b>pulling is explicit in the Torah,</b> then the <i>halakha</i> is that transactions <b>with your counterpart</b> are effected <b>by pulling, and</b> transactions <b>with a gentile</b> are also effected <b>by pulling.</b> Accordingly, <b>why do I</b> need the phrase <b>“of your counterpart”?</b>

### Part 4
The Sages <b>said</b> in explanation: The phrase “of your counterpart” does not teach a <i>halakha</i> with regard to the method of acquisition. Rather, it is referring to the latter part of the verse: “And if you make a sale to your counterpart, or buy of your counterpart’s hand, a man shall not exploit his brother” (Leviticus 25:14). The verse is derived as follows: <b>You</b> must <b>return</b> the sum of <b>exploitation to your counterpart, but you do not</b> need to <b>return</b> the sum of <b>exploitation to a gentile.</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion: The exemption from returning the sum of exploitation <b>to a gentile is derived from</b> the latter part of the verse alone: <b>“A man shall not exploit his brother.”</b> A gentile is not included in the category of “his brother.” Accordingly, the phrase “of your counterpart” remains extraneous.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>One</b> phrase is required <b>to</b> exclude <b>a gentile, and one</b> serves <b>to</b> exclude <b>consecrated</b> property. <b>And</b> both derivations <b>are necessary, as, had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>one</b> exclusionary phrase, <b>I would say: It is</b> with regard to transactions <b>with a gentile that one is not</b> subject to the prohibition of <b>exploitation; but</b> with regard to transactions involving <b>consecrated</b> property, <b>one is</b> subject to the prohibition of <b>exploitation.</b> Therefore, the other derivation <b>teaches us</b> that one is not subject to the prohibition of exploitation with regard to transactions involving consecrated property either.

### Part 6
The Gemara remarks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that <b>his robbery,</b> i.e., robbing a gentile, is <b>prohibited,</b> as <b>this is</b> the reason <b>that a verse is necessary to permit</b> keeping the sum of the <b>exploitation</b> obtained from a gentile. <b>But if</b> Ameimar <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the one who says</b> that <b>his robbery is permitted, is it necessary</b> to state that one may keep the sum of the <b>exploitation</b> obtained from a gentile? The Gemara accepts this reasoning: The Sages <b>said: If</b> Ameimar <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the one who says</b> that <b>his robbery is permitted, perforce he holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi</b> Yoḥanan that money effects acquisition by Torah law, and therefore the difficulty does not arise.

### Part 7
§ The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> to the opinion that property is acquired from a gentile by monetary payment. It is taught in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>one who buys broken vessels [<i>gerutaot</i>]</b> made of gold or silver <b>from the gentiles and finds among them</b> an object of <b>idol worship, if he pulled</b> the object of idol worship, thereby performing an act of acquisition, <b>before he gave</b> the <b>money</b> to the gentile, <b>he may return</b> the object of idol worship to the gentile. But <b>if he pulled</b> it <b>after he gave</b> the <b>money</b> to the gentile, he may not return it. Since the idol’s status was not revoked, he must <b>take</b> it and cast it <b>into the Dead Sea.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara explains the difficulty: <b>And if you say</b> that payment of <b>money acquires</b> items from gentiles, <b>why do I</b> need <b>pulling</b> in order to effect the Jew’s acquisition of the idol? The Gemara answers: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the gentile <b>accepted upon himself to</b> have this transaction <b>adjudicated by Jewish law.</b> The Gemara raises an objection: <b>If so, why do I</b> need the payment of <b>money</b> in order to effect the Jew’s acquisition of the idol? Pulling alone should be enough, in accordance with <i>halakha</i>. The Gemara explains that <b>this is what</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>means: Even though</b> the Jew <b>gave money</b> to the gentile, the <i>halakha</i> still depends on the act of pulling: <b>If he pulled</b> the broken vessels, <b>yes,</b> he has acquired them, <b>and if not,</b> he has <b>not</b> acquired them.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>If so,</b> then <b>the first clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i> is <b>difficult,</b> as it states: If he pulled the object of idol worship before he gave the money to the gentile, he may return the object of idol worship to the gentile. Evidently, pulling alone does not effect acquisition. <b>Abaye said</b> in explanation: The <i>halakha</i> in <b>the first clause</b> is ruled as it is <b>because there is a mistaken transaction,</b> as the Jew did not wish to purchase the idol. <b>Rava said to</b> Abaye: You maintain that the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the first clause</b> is ruled as it is <b>because there is a mistaken transaction.</b> Is that to say that in <b>the latter clause there is no mistaken transaction?</b> After all, the Jew does not wish to purchase the idol in either case.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rava said:</b> The purchase in <b>the first clause and</b> the purchase in <b>the latter clause</b> are both <b>a mistaken transaction, but</b> in the case presented in <b>the first clause, where</b> the Jew <b>did not pay</b> him the <b>dinars, it does not appear as</b> though there is an object of <b>idol worship in the possession of a Jew,</b> and so he may return it. By contrast, in <b>the latter clause, where</b> the Jew <b>did pay him the dinars, it appears as</b> though there is an object of <b>idol worship in the possession of a Jew,</b> and therefore he must cast away the object rather than return it.

### Part 11
<b>And Abaye</b> could have <b>said to you: The first clause</b> involves <b>a mistaken transaction, as he did not know</b> that the idol was included, <b>as he did not give him the dinars</b> and therefore had not yet inspected the property being purchased. Conversely, <b>the latter clause is not</b> a case of <b>a mistaken transaction, as since he</b> already <b>gave the dinars</b> to the seller, <b>when he</b> came to <b>pull it, he should have inspected</b> the property <b>and then pulled it.</b> Since the Jew did not bother to inspect the property even after paying, the transaction is valid.

### Part 12
The Gemara cites two more interpretations of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rav Ashi says:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is in fact discussing a case where the transaction was subject to gentile law, according to which only monetary payment effects acquisition, and as for the aforementioned difficulty raised to the opinion of Rabbi Oshaya from the latter clause: If so, why do I need pulling in order to effect the Jew’s acquisition of the idol; pulling is not in fact required. Rather, <b>from</b> the fact that in <b>the first clause, pulling does not effect acquisition,</b> in <b>the latter clause too, pulling does not effect acquisition. But since the first clause taught</b> the word: <b>Pulled,</b> in order to teach that this method is ineffective, <b>the latter clause also taught</b> the word: <b>Pulled,</b> despite the fact that its mention is unnecessary.

### Part 13
<b>Ravina said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is discussing a case where it was agreed that the transaction would be subject to Jewish law. <b>From</b> the fact that in <b>the latter clause, pulling effects acquisition,</b> in <b>the first clause too, pulling effects acquisition. And</b> as for the difficulty with regard to <b>the first clause,</b> which states that the Jew may return the item even though he already pulled it, <b>this</b> is what the <i>baraita</i> <b>is saying: If</b> the buyer <b>did not give</b> the money to the gentile <b>and</b> also <b>did not pull</b> the item, <b>he returns</b> the item to the seller. The Gemara adds: <b>What</b> does the term: <b>Returns,</b> mean in this context? It means that the Jew <b>returns,</b> i.e., reneges, <b>on</b> his <b>verbal</b> commitment. In other words, he is not required to complete the purchase despite the fact he initially agreed to do so.

### Part 14
The Gemara elaborates: It was necessary for the <i>tanna</i> to teach this explicitly, as <b>he holds:</b> Reneging on <b>a verbal</b> commitment that was unaccompanied by an act of acquisition <b>constitutes an act of bad faith</b> between two parties. <b>And</b> he holds that <b>this statement</b> applies only to a case where <b>a Jew</b> purchases an item <b>from</b> another <b>Jew, as they</b> are assumed to <b>uphold their verbal</b> commitments. <b>But</b> in a case of <b>a Jew</b> who purchases an item <b>from gentiles, as they</b> are <b>not</b> assumed <b>to uphold their verbal</b> commitments, reneging on one’s word does <b>not</b> constitute an act of bad faith between the parties, since neither party relies upon the commitment of the other in the first place.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC