
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there between</b> a priest disqualified from performing the Temple service due to a full-fledged <b>blemish</b> that disqualifies both people and animals, and a priest disqualified from performing the Temple service because <b>he is not equal among the seed of Aaron?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>There is</b> a difference between them <b>with regard to profaning</b> the Temple <b>service.</b> A priest with a full-fledged <b>blemish</b> who performs rites in the Temple <b>profanes</b> the <b>service</b> he has performed, <b>as it is written: “He has a blemish; that he not profane</b> My Sanctuaries” (Leviticus 21:23). A priest <b>who is not equal among the seed of Aaron</b> does <b>not profane</b> the <b>service</b> he performs.

### Part 2
The Gemara further asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there between</b> a priest disqualified from performing the Temple service because <b>he is not equal among the seed of Aaron,</b> e.g., one whose head is pointed, <b>and</b> a priest disqualified from performing the Temple service <b>due to the</b> mere <b>appearance of</b> a blemish, such as one whose eyelashes have fallen out, as stated in the <i>mishnayot</i> further on in this chapter? The Gemara responds: <b>There is</b> a difference <b>between them</b> with regard to the violation of the prohibition, which is stated as <b>a positive mitzva,</b> i.e., that priests who are equal shall serve in the Temple. A priest who is not equal among the seed of Aaron who performs the Temple service transgresses this prohibition. By contrast, a priest who is disqualified due to the appearance of a blemish is disqualified by rabbinic law, and he does not transgress a Torah prohibition by performing the Temple service.

### Part 3
§ The Gemara clarifies the blemishes that the mishna lists as disqualifying a priest: <b>One whose</b> head <b>is pointed [<i>kilon</i>],</b> this is one <b>whose head resembles the cover of a barrel,</b> narrow above and wide below. <b>One whose</b> head <b>is turnip-like,</b> this is one <b>whose head resembles the top of a turnip,</b> wide above and narrow below. The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> another detail relating to this blemish: <b>And his neck stands in the middle of his head,</b> i.e., his head protrudes equally in all directions around his neck, whereas a typical person’s neck is situated at the back of his head.

### Part 4
<b>One whose</b> head <b>is hammer-like [<i>makkavan</i>],</b> this is one <b>whose head resembles a hammer,</b> with his forehead protruding. <b>And</b> one <b>whose</b> head is <b>indented [<i>shakut</i>],</b> this is one with a depression <b>in the front of his</b> head. <b>And</b> one <b>wherein the back of his head protrudes [<i>sekifat</i>]</b> is someone for whom it appears a piece <b>from the back of his</b> head has been removed, <b>as people say: A piece has been taken [<i>shakil pisa</i>].</b> <i>Sekifat</i> is understood to be an abbreviation of that term. The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>And</b> a priest <b>whose neck is short, or</b> one whose neck <b>is narrow,</b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service as well. A priest with <b>a short</b> neck is one <b>whose</b> neck <b>is hidden</b> and is not visible between his shoulders. A priest with <b>a narrow</b> neck is one <b>whose</b> neck <b>is long and narrow.</b>

### Part 5
The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> with regard to <b>those with humped</b> backs, <b>Rabbi Yehuda</b> deems them fit for service and the Rabbis deem them disqualified. The Gemara elaborates: In a case <b>where there is a bone in</b> his hump, <b>everyone agrees that</b> the priest is <b>disqualified</b> for Temple service. <b>They disagree when there is no bone.</b> One <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>this</b> person <b>is not equal among the seed of Aaron</b> and is therefore disqualified from performing the Temple service; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that <b>it is merely a piece of flesh</b> and is not considered a blemish.

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that <b>the <i>kere’aḥ</i>,</b> i.e., anyone who does not have a row of hair encircling his head from ear to ear, <b>is disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service. <b>Rava says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that a <i>kere’aḥ</i> is disqualified <b>only if he does not have</b> a row of hair <b>in the back</b> of <b>his</b> head <b>but he has</b> a row of hair <b>in the front. But</b> if <b>he has</b> a row of hair both in the front and <b>in the back,</b> he is <b>fit</b> for performing the Temple service. <b>And all the more so, when he has</b> hair <b>in the back but he does not have in the front</b> he is fit for performing the Temple service, as this is typical of older men.

### Part 7
<b>And there are those who teach</b> the statement of Rava <b>with regard to the latter clause</b> of the mishna: <b>And if he has</b> a row of hair, <b>that</b> person is <b>fit</b> for performing the Temple service. <b>Rava says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that such a person is fit <b>only when he has</b> a row of hair <b>in the back but he does not have in the front. But</b> if <b>he has</b> a row of hair <b>both in the back and in the front,</b> he is <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service. <b>And all the more so,</b> one <b>who has</b> a row of hair <b>in the front and does not have in the back, or</b> one <b>who does not have</b> any hair <b>at all,</b> is <b>disqualified.</b>

### Part 8
§ <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: The bald</b> priests, <b>and the</b> priests who are <b>dwarves, and the</b> priests with <b>leaky</b> eyes, are <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service, <b>since they are not equal among the seed of Aaron.</b> The Gemara asks: Why is it necessary for Rabbi Yoḥanan to state this? With regard to <b>bald</b> priests, <b>we learn</b> in the mishna that they are disqualified. Similarly, with regard to priests who are <b>dwarves, we learn</b> in a mishna (45b) that they are disqualified.

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: <b>It was necessary for him to teach us</b> this statement with regard to priests with <b>leaky</b> eyes, as the <i>halakha</i> with regard to them does not appear in any mishna. <b>And</b> furthermore, it was necessary for him to reiterate the <i>halakha</i> with regard to bald priests and dwarves <b>lest you say</b> they are disqualified only by rabbinic law, <b>due to the appearance</b> of a blemish. Rabbi Yoḥanan therefore teaches that they are disqualified by Torah law, as they are not equal among the seed of Aaron.

### Part 10
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But anywhere that</b> a priest is deemed disqualified <b>due to the appearance</b> of a blemish, the <b><i>tanna</i> teaches</b> this explicitly, e.g., in the mishna on this <i>amud</i>: <b>And one whose eyelashes have fallen out is disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service, <b>due to the appearance</b> of a blemish. The Gemara responds: Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> explicitly in <b>one</b> instance that a priest is disqualified due to the appearance of a blemish <b>but the same is true with regard to all of</b> those listed after the first clause of the mishna, starting from the case of priests with humped backs. Therefore, Rabbi Yoḥanan teaches that this is not the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 11
The Gemara persists: <b>But anywhere that there is</b> a priest disqualified due to the appearance of a blemish, the <i>tanna</i> <b>repeats and teaches</b> explicitly that this is the reason. As the <i>tanna</i> <b>repeats and teaches</b> (44a): <b>And one whose teeth fell out is disqualified due to the appearance</b> of a blemish. <b>Rather,</b> the reason Rabbi Yoḥanan reiterates the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a bald priest and a dwarf is <b>to exclude that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The bald</b> priests, <b>the dwarves, and the</b> priests with <b>leaky</b> eyes <b>are fit</b> for performing the Temple service by Torah law, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>said</b> they are <b>disqualified only due to the appearance</b> of a blemish. Rabbi Yoḥanan therefore teaches that they are disqualified by Torah law, as they are not equal among the seed of Aaron.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes: <b>Who is this <i>tanna</i></b> who says that such priests are fit by Torah law? <b>It is Rabbi Yehuda, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> When the verse states: “And Aaron’s sons, <b>the priests,</b> shall lay the pieces” (Leviticus 1:8), this serves <b>to include the bald</b> priests in the performance of the Temple service.

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If a priest <b>has no eyebrows, or</b> if <b>he has only one eyebrow, that is the <i>gibben</i> that is stated in the Torah</b> in the list of blemished priests (see Leviticus 21:20). <b>Rabbi Dosa says:</b> A <i>gibben</i> is one <b>whose eyebrows</b> are so long that they <b>lie</b> flat and cover his eyes. <b>Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus says:</b> A <i>gibben</i> is one <b>who has two backs and two spines.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the <i>gibben</i> stated in the Torah is one who lacks eyebrows. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> does <b><i>gibben</i> mean</b> one <b>who does not have</b> eyebrows? <b>And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: When it is stated that a priest who is <b>a <i>gibben</i></b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service (see Leviticus 21:20), this is referring to one <b>who has many eyebrows.</b> With regard to one <b>who has no eyebrows or who has only one eyebrow, from where</b> is it derived that he is disqualified as well? <b>The</b> same <b>verse states: “Or a <i>gibben</i>.”</b> Clearly, the disqualification of one lacking eyebrows is not derived from the mention of a <i>gibben</i>, but from the term “or.” <b>Rava said</b> the mishna should be understood as follows: One who has no eyebrows is disqualified, and <b>this is</b> derived from <b>the exposition</b> of the phrase <b>“or a <i>gibben</i>.”</b>

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Dosa says</b> a <i>gibben</i> is one whose eyebrows are so long that they lie flat and cover his eyes, and Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus says that a <i>gibben</i> is one who has two backs and two spines. The Gemara asks: Is this <b>to say that</b> a person with two backs and two spines is capable of <b>living? But it was stated</b> that the Sages discussed the case of <b>one who miscarries an entity that has two backs and two spines, and Rav said</b> that <b>in</b> the case of <b>a woman</b> who miscarries such an entity, it <b>is not</b> considered <b>an offspring,</b> as it cannot survive, and therefore she does not have the ritual impurity caused by childbirth, and <b>in</b> the case of <b>an animal</b> who miscarries, the entity is <b>prohibited for consumption.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara responds: <b>Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya already raised this contradiction to Rav,</b> his grandfather, <b>and</b> Rav <b>said to him:</b> Are <b>you</b> really <b>Shimi?</b> Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus is not referring literally to someone with two backs and two spines, <b>but to</b> a person <b>whose spine is crooked,</b> causing it to appear as though he has two spines. Such a person can survive but is disqualified from performing the Temple service.

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The <i>ḥarum</i> is disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service. <b>What is a <i>ḥarum</i>?</b> It is <b>one who</b> can <b>paint both of his eyes as one,</b> with one brushstroke, because he has a sunken nose. If <b>both of one’s eyes</b> are <b>above or both of his eyes</b> are <b>below;</b> or if <b>one of his eyes</b> is <b>above and one of his eyes</b> is <b>below;</b> or if both eyes are in the proper place but <b>he sees</b> both <b>the room</b> on the ground floor <b>and the upper story as one,</b> at the same time; and likewise those unable to <b>look at the sun; and one whose eyes are different; and one whose eyes tear constantly,</b> these are disqualified from performing the Temple service. <b>And one whose eyelashes have fallen out</b> is <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service <b>due to the appearance</b> of a blemish. Unlike the others listed in this mishna, who are disqualified by Torah law, one with this condition is not disqualified by Torah law. Rather, the Sages issued a decree prohibiting a priest with such a condition to perform the Temple service.

### Part 18
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When it is stated that <b>a <i>ḥarum</i></b> is considered a blemished priest (Leviticus 21:18), this is referring to a priest <b>whose nose is sunk.</b> If <b>his nose retreats,</b> i.e., it is very short and contracted upward, or if <b>his nose</b> is <b>blocked,</b> or if <b>his nose</b> is so long that it <b>droops, from where</b> is it derived that he is considered blemished? <b>The</b> same <b>verse states: “Or a <i>ḥarum</i>.”</b> The term “or” serves to include all blemishes of the nose. <b>Rabbi Yosei says: A <i>ḥarum</i> is only one who</b> can <b>paint both of his eyes as one. They said to him: You have gone</b> too <b>far</b> in limiting your definition of a <i>ḥarum</i>.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC