
### Part 1
With regard to <b>any</b> animal <b>whose replacements</b> are <b>in the possession of the priest,</b> its owner <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of giving <b>the</b> priestly <b>gifts, and Rabbi Meir deems</b> him <b>obligated</b> to give the gifts. Evidently, in a case where the <b>replacement is in the possession of the priest, yes,</b> Rabbi Yosei rules that the owner is exempt from giving the gifts, but if the <b>replacement is not in the possession of the priest,</b> he is <b>not</b> exempt.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains that even so, Rabbi Elazar’s statement is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that <b>Rabbi Yosei</b> was not expressing his own opinion but <b>stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with the statement of Rabbi Meir,</b> i.e., he said to him: <b>In my</b> opinion, the Israelite is exempt from giving the priestly gifts <b>even</b> if the <b>replacement is not in the possession of the priest, as, if you deem him obligated in the gifts,</b> he might think that the animal is completely non-sacred and <b>come to</b> use it for <b>shearing and labor.</b> But even <b>according to your</b> reasoning, <b>at least concede to me</b> in a case <b>where the replacement is in the possession of the priest, that</b> the Sages <b>rendered one who did not acquire</b> the animal <b>like one who acquired</b> the animal. <b>And Rabbi Meir said to</b> Rabbi Yosei: <b>No,</b> I do not concede in that case. Accordingly, Rabbi Elazar is teaching that Rabbi Yosei does, in fact, maintain that the reason for the Israelite’s exemption is that the replacement is in the possession of the priest.

### Part 3
<b>And Rav Pappa says</b> with regard to the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yosei: <b>Everyone concedes</b> in the case <b>of</b> an animal whose status as <b>tithe</b> is <b>uncertain that</b> its owner <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of <b>the</b> priestly <b>gifts.</b> The Gemara asks: When Rav Pappa says that <b>everyone concedes,</b> to <b>whom</b> is he referring? Is he referring to <b>Rabbi Meir?</b> That would seem <b>obvious.</b> After all, <b>Rabbi Meir deemed</b> one <b>obligated</b> to give the gifts <b>only there,</b> in the case <b>of</b> an animal whose status as <b>firstborn</b> is <b>uncertain, since</b> the priest <b>comes upon</b> the Israelite <b>from two sides. But</b> with regard to an animal whose status as <b>tithe</b> is <b>uncertain</b> Rabbi Meir does <b>not</b> rule that one is obligated, as that reasoning does not apply. Why, then, is Rav Pappa’s statement necessary?

### Part 4
The Gemara explains that the statement of Rav Pappa is necessary <b>lest you say</b> that the <b>reason that Rabbi Meir</b> deems him obligated in the gifts is so <b>that the</b> halakhic <b>category of the gifts should not be forgotten;</b> if so, the same would apply <b>even</b> in the case of an animal whose status as <b>tithe</b> is <b>uncertain.</b> Rav Pappa therefore <b>teaches us</b> otherwise.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And how can you say this? But doesn’t the latter clause teach: As Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> animal <b>whose replacements are in the possession of a priest,</b> its owner <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of giving <b>the</b> priestly <b>gifts, and Rabbi Meir deems</b> him <b>obligated</b> to give the gifts. Evidently, the basis for the dispute between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yosei is not whether an obligation is imposed so that the halakhic category of the priestly gifts should not be forgotten, but whether the Sages rendered one who did not acquire the animal like one who acquired the animal, which means that an animal whose replacement is in the priest’s possession is not subject to the mitzva of the gifts.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains that Rav Pappa’s statement is necessary <b>lest you say: Rabbi Meir deems</b> one <b>obligated</b> to give the gifts even in the case of an animal whose status as <b>tithe</b> is <b>uncertain,</b> in order that the halakhic category of the gifts should not be forgotten. <b>And</b> as for the fact <b>that</b> the mishna presents their <b>disagreement with regard to replacement</b> animals, this serves <b>to convey to you the far-reaching nature</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yosei, who deems</b> one <b>exempt</b> from the mitzva of the gifts <b>even</b> in a case <b>where</b> the priest <b>comes upon</b> the Israelite <b>from two sides.</b> Rav Pappa therefore <b>teaches us</b> that in fact Rabbi Meir exempts one from the mitzva of the priestly gifts in the case of an animal whose tithed status is uncertain.

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>one of</b> the two born together <b>died, Rabbi Tarfon says:</b> The priest and the owner <b>divide</b> the remaining lamb. The Gemara asks: <b>Why</b> should they <b>divide</b> it? <b>Let us see:</b> According to Rabbi Tarfon, who holds that it is presumed that the healthier and better of the two emerged first, as explained earlier, <b>if</b> the <b>fatter</b> and better of the two <b>died</b> it should be assumed <b>that it</b> was the one that belonged <b>to the priest, and this</b> one <b>that is</b> left belongs <b>to the owner. And if the leaner</b> of the two <b>died,</b> it should be assumed that the animal <b>of the owner died, and this</b> one <b>that is</b> left belongs <b>to the priest.</b> Rabbi <b>Ami said:</b> In fact, <b>Rabbi Tarfon retracted</b> his previous ruling that the priest takes the better of the two, and instead ruled that the priest and owner divide the value of the offspring in all cases. The mishna was not emended to reflect the updated ruling.

### Part 8
§ The mishna teaches: In a case where two animals were born together and one of them died, <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The living offspring remains in the possession of the owner, as <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant. Rabbi Ḥiyya stated a parable</b> that clarifies the opinion <b>of Rabbi Tarfon,</b> who says that the priest and the owner divide the remaining lamb: <b>To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to two</b> people <b>who</b> each <b>deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a shepherd</b> and one of the two sheep died, and it is unclear to whom it belonged. In <b>that</b> case, the <b>shepherd places</b> the remaining sheep <b>between them and withdraws,</b> leaving them to divide the value of the sheep between them. Likewise, the mishna is discussing a case where the live offspring is not in the possession of either the owner or the priest, and therefore it is divided between them.

### Part 9
<b>And</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya also stated <b>a parable</b> that clarifies the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva: To what is this matter comparable?</b> It is comparable <b>to one who deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a homeowner,</b> who had sheep of his own, and it is unknown whose sheep died. In <b>that</b> case, <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b> Since the remaining sheep is currently in the possession of the homeowner, the one who deposited the animal must prove that the living sheep belongs to him. Likewise, the mishna is discussing a case where the live offspring is in the possession of the owner, and therefore the burden of proof rests upon the priest.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if Rabbi Tarfon and Rabbi Akiva are addressing different circumstances, then <b>with regard to what</b> matter <b>do they disagree?</b> Does <b>Rabbi Akiva disagree</b> with the conclusion in the parable mentioned with regard to Rabbi Tarfon’s opinion, <b>of two</b> people <b>who</b> each <b>deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a shepherd, that</b> the <b>shepherd places</b> the remaining sheep between them <b>and withdraws? And</b> similarly, does <b>Rabbi Tarfon disagree</b> with the conclusion in the case <b>of one who deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a homeowner</b> that the homeowner keeps the remaining sheep? Certainly not. Rather, <b>Rava says, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Pappa</b> who says: <b>Everyone concedes</b> in the case <b>of two who deposited</b> sheep <b>with a shepherd that</b> the <b>shepherd places</b> it <b>between them and withdraws, and</b> everyone concedes in the case <b>of one who deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a homeowner that the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b>

### Part 11
Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Tarfon <b>disagree only</b> where the offspring were born <b>in the courtyard of the homeowner, and</b> the <b>shepherd is a priest</b> to whom the homeowner usually gives his firstborn animals. <b>Rabbi Tarfon holds:</b> The homeowner <b>transfers to</b> the priest a portion <b>of his courtyard</b> so that the priest should acquire the firstborn offspring located there, because it is <b>suitable for him that</b> the <b>mitzva</b> of giving the firstborn to a priest <b>should be performed.</b> Therefore, the priest is considered to hold partial jurisdiction of the courtyard. <b>And</b> consequently, <b>this is</b> comparable <b>to two</b> people <b>who</b> each <b>deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a shepherd</b> and one of the two sheep died, <b>where</b> the <b>shepherd places</b> the remaining sheep <b>between them and withdraws,</b> leaving them to divide the value of the sheep between themselves.

### Part 12
<b>And Rabbi Akiva holds: Since there is a loss</b> to the owner in this case of uncertainty, <b>he does not transfer anything</b> to the priest. <b>And</b> as the courtyard belongs exclusively to the Israelite, this case <b>is</b> comparable <b>to one who deposited</b> a sheep <b>with a homeowner</b> who had sheep of his own, and it is unknown whose sheep died. The <i>halakha</i> in <b>that</b> case is that <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If <b>one’s two ewes had not</b> previously <b>given birth and they gave birth to two males, both of them</b> are given <b>to the priest,</b> as each is its mother’s firstborn. If one gave birth to <b>a male and</b> the other to <b>a female, the male</b> is given <b>to the priest,</b> as it is its mother’s firstborn. If they gave birth to <b>two males and a female, one</b> of the males is kept <b>by him and one</b> is given <b>to the priest. Rabbi Tarfon says: The priest chooses the better</b> of the two. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: They assess</b> the value of the lambs <b>between them,</b> and the priest takes the leaner of the two. <b>And the second</b> lamb must <b>graze until it becomes blemished,</b> at which point the owner may slaughter and eat it.

### Part 14
<b>And</b> when the owner slaughters the animal, he is <b>obligated to</b> have <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood, i.e., the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw, taken from it. <b>Rabbi Yosei deems</b> him <b>exempt</b> from giving the gifts. If <b>one of</b> the two born together <b>died, Rabbi Tarfon says:</b> The priest and the owner <b>divide</b> the value of the remaining lamb. <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> Since there is uncertainty to whom it belongs, it remains in the possession of the owner, as <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b> If they gave birth to <b>two females and a male or</b> to <b>two males and two females, the priest has nothing here,</b> as perhaps both ewes gave birth to females first.

### Part 15
If <b>one</b> of his ewes <b>had</b> previously <b>given birth and one had not</b> previously <b>given birth, and they gave birth to two males, one</b> of the males is kept <b>by him and one</b> is given <b>to the priest. Rabbi Tarfon says: The priest chooses the better</b> of the two. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: They assess</b> the value of the lambs <b>between them</b> and the priest takes the leaner of the two. <b>And the second</b> lamb must <b>graze until it becomes blemished,</b> at which point he may slaughter and eat it.

### Part 16
<b>And</b> when he slaughters the animal he <b>is obligated to</b> have <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood taken from it. <b>Rabbi Yosei deems</b> him <b>exempt</b> him from giving those gifts, <b>as Rabbi Yosei says:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> animal <b>whose replacements are in the possession of a priest,</b> its owner <b>is exempt from</b> the mitzva of giving <b>the</b> priestly <b>gifts. And Rabbi Meir deems</b> him <b>obligated</b> to give the gifts. If <b>one of</b> the animals <b>died, Rabbi Tarfon says:</b> The priest and the owner <b>divide</b> the value of the remaining lamb. <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> Since there is uncertainty to whom it belongs, it remains in the possession of the owner, as <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b> If <b>a male and a female</b> offspring were born together, everyone agrees that <b>the priest has nothing here,</b> as perhaps the one that had already given birth bore the male, and the one that had not given birth bore the female, in which case neither of the animals would have firstborn status.

### Part 17
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> This mishna and the previous mishna (17a–b) listed three cases in which Rabbi Akiva rules that the priest receives the leaner of two potentially firstborn offspring, whereas Rabbi Tarfon maintains that he receives the better of the two. The Gemara notes: It was <b>necessary</b> to teach each of these three cases, <b>as, had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> only <b>the first</b> case, that of a single ewe that gave birth to two male offspring, one might have thought that <b>Rabbi Akiva stated</b> his opinion only <b>in that</b> case, <b>as</b> the <b>two</b> offspring came <b>from one</b> womb, and there is no reason to assume that the better offspring was born first.

### Part 18
<b>But</b> in the second case, that of <b>his two ewes</b> which <b>had not</b> previously <b>given birth</b> and which collectively gave birth to two males and a female, <b>where two</b> offspring came <b>from one</b> mother <b>and one</b> offspring came <b>from one</b> other mother, one might <b>say</b> that Rabbi Akiva <b>concedes to</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Tarfon,</b> as it can be claimed <b>that</b> the <b>superior</b> animal is <b>this</b> one that came from the mother <b>that gave birth to a single</b> offspring.

### Part 19
<b>And had</b> the mishna <b>taught</b> only <b>that</b> second case, one might have thought that <b>Rabbi Akiva stated</b> his opinion only <b>in that</b> case, <b>as both</b> mothers <b>had not</b> previously <b>given birth. But</b> in a case where <b>one had</b> previously <b>given birth and</b> the other <b>one had not</b> previously <b>given birth, and</b> collectively they <b>gave birth to two male</b> offspring, one might <b>say</b> that Rabbi Akiva <b>concedes to</b> the opinion of Rabbi Tarfon

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC