
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mitzva of <b>animal tithe is in effect</b> both <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>in the presence of,</b> i.e., in the time of, <b>the Temple and not in the presence of the Temple.</b> It is in effect <b>with regard to non-sacred</b> animals <b>but not with regard to sacrificial</b> animals. <b>And it is in effect with regard to the herd and the flock, but they are not tithed from one for the other;</b> and it is in effect <b>with regard to sheep and goats, and they are tithed from one for the other.</b>

### Part 2
And it is in effect <b>with regard to</b> animals from <b>the new</b> flock <b>and with regard to</b> animals from <b>the old</b> flock, <b>but they are not tithed from one for the other. As by right, it should be</b> inferred: <b>If</b> in the case of animals from the <b>new</b> flock <b>and the old</b> flock, <b>which do not</b> carry the prohibition of mating <b>diverse kinds</b> when mated <b>with each other</b> because they are one species, <b>are</b> nevertheless <b>not tithed from one for the other,</b> then with regard to <b>sheep and goats, which do</b> carry the prohibition of mating <b>diverse kinds</b> when mated <b>with each other, is it not right that they will not be tithed from one for the other?</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states:</b> “And all the tithe of the herd <b>or the flock,</b> whatever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be sacred to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:32), indicating that with regard to animal tithe, <b>all</b> animals that are included in the term <b>flock</b> are <b>one</b> species.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the mitzva of animal tithe is in effect both in Eretz Yisrael and outside of Eretz Yisrael. The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say that the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Akiva says:</b> One <b>might</b> have thought that <b>a person</b> must <b>bring up</b> his <b>animal tithe from outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael <b>and sacrifice it</b> in the Temple. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “And you shall bring there your burnt offerings, and your offerings, and your tithes,</b> and the offering of your hand, and your vows, and your gift offerings, and the firstborn of your herd and of your flock” (Deuteronomy 12:6).

### Part 4
Rabbi Akiva explains: The plural form “tithes” indicates that <b>the verse is speaking of two tithes; one</b> is the <b>animal tithe, and</b> the other <b>one</b> is the second <b>tithe of grain,</b> i.e., produce. Since these two tithes are included in the same word, it is derived from here that <b>from the place where you bring up</b> the <b>tithe of grain,</b> i.e., Eretz Yisrael, as the obligation to separate tithe of grain applies only there, <b>you</b> also <b>bring up</b> the <b>animal tithe; but from a place where you do not bring up</b> the <b>tithe of grain,</b> i.e., outside of Eretz Yisrael, <b>you do not bring up</b> the <b>animal tithe</b> either. This <i>baraita</i>, which states the opinion of Rabbi Akiva, apparently contradicts the ruling of the mishna.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>You</b> may <b>even say</b> that the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> as the <i>baraita</i> and the mishna are referring to different cases. The <i>baraita</i> <b>there</b> is referring to the requirement to bring the animal tithe to Jerusalem for it <b>to be sacrificed</b> on the altar. By contrast, the mishna <b>here</b> is speaking of the status of every tenth animal; these animals are <b>to be</b> separated and <b>consecrated.</b> The Gemara adds that the language of the <i>baraita</i> <b>is also precise,</b> as it <b>adduces a derivation</b> from the phrase <b>“and you shall bring there.” Conclude from</b> this citation that the <i>baraita</i> is referring specifically to the requirement to bring the animal tithe and sacrifice it in Jerusalem.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>If so, since</b> animal tithe outside of Eretz Yisrael <b>is not sacrificed</b> on the altar, <b>why is it consecrated?</b> What is the significance of its sanctity? The Gemara answers that it is consecrated <b>to</b> the extent that it may <b>be eaten by its owner</b> only <b>when</b> it develops <b>a blemish.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches that the animal tithe is in effect both <b>in the presence of the Temple and not in the presence of the Temple.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>If so,</b> then <b>even nowadays</b> the <i>halakha</i> of the animal tithe should be in effect. Why then do people not remove every tenth animal from their flock or herd? The Gemara answers: The reason is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Huna, as Rav Huna says:</b> This is a rabbinic <b>decree due to an orphan,</b> i.e., a baby animal whose mother died before it was born, lest it be included with the other animals to be tithed; the obligation of animal tithe does not apply to it.

### Part 8
The Gemara challenges: <b>If so,</b> then even <b>originally,</b> when the Temple stood, the practice should have <b>also</b> been <b>not</b> to separate animal tithe in case an orphaned animal was included in the counting. <b>Rather,</b> the Gemara explains that there was no concern for an orphaned animal when the Temple stood, as it was <b>possible</b> to remove this concern <b>by</b> issuing <b>an announcement</b> to everyone that an orphaned animal is exempt from animal tithe. The Gemara suggests: <b>Here too,</b> it is <b>possible</b> to remove the concern <b>by</b> means of <b>an announcement</b> that an orphaned animal is exempt from animal tithe.

### Part 9
<b>Rather, Rabba says:</b> The reason animal tithe is no longer separated is <b>due to</b> concern that <b>a mishap</b> might occur. <b>And from where do you say that we are concerned for a mishap</b> after the destruction of the Temple? <b>As we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may neither consecrate</b> items, <b>nor valuate</b> an item’s worth based on its appraisal, <b>nor dedicate</b> items for sacred use (see Leviticus, chapter 27) and dedicate its monetary worth to the Temple treasury, <b>in the present</b> time, when the Temple is no longer standing.

### Part 10
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And if one did consecrate, or valuate, or dedicate</b> items for sacred use, the presence of these items might lead to the mishap of the violation of the prohibition against using consecrated property. Therefore, if one dedicated <b>an animal it should be destroyed.</b> If he dedicated <b>produce, garments, or vessels</b> made from materials that decompose, he should store them until <b>they decompose.</b> And if he dedicated <b>money or metal vessels, he should take them</b> and cast them <b>into the Dead Sea.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> in the case of an animal, <b>what</b> constitutes <b>uprooting? He locks the door before it, and it dies on its own</b> from hunger. This <i>baraita</i> indicates that animals that cannot be sacrificed nowadays must be left to die so that they are not used improperly.

### Part 11
The Gemara challenges: <b>If so,</b> then <b>a firstborn should also not be consecrated,</b> as this too could lead to a mishap. The Gemara responds: Does the <b>matter</b> of the consecration of <b>a firstborn depend on us?</b> The animal is automatically <b>consecrated upon</b> its exit from <b>the womb.</b> The Gemara answers that <b>this</b> is what the questioner <b>is saying: Let us sell the ears</b> of all firstborn animals <b>to gentiles</b> before their births, so <b>that they are not consecrated from the outset.</b> A firstborn animal that is jointly owned by a Jew and a gentile does not become consecrated as a firstborn.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC