
### Part 1
by <b>Aḥai the Distinguished [<i>beribbi</i>]:</b> If <b>one saw</b> an animal with the appearance of <b>a pig that</b> was <b>trailing after a ewe, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara asks: <b>What is the dilemma he is raising? If we say</b> he is inquiring <b>with regard to</b> the <b>firstborn</b> status of the future offspring, <b>and he is</b> therefore essentially <b>asking if the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel or if the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> then <b>let the dilemma be raised</b> with respect to the more common case of <b>a lamb,</b> rather than the irregular case of a pig-like animal.

### Part 2
The Gemara answers: Actually, <b>when</b> Aḥai the Distinguished <b>raised the dilemma</b> it was with respect to the ramifications of each opinion: He inquired <b>with regard to</b> the future offspring’s <b>firstborn</b> status, <b>and</b> this aspect of the dilemma was raised under the assumption that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of the Rabbis.</b> He also inquired <b>with regard to</b> whether or not the pig-like animal is permitted for <b>consumption, and</b> this aspect of the dilemma was raised under the assumption that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara elaborates: He inquired <b>with regard to</b> the offspring’s <b>firstborn</b> status, <b>and</b> this question applies <b>even according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that an animal might <b>be merciful</b> toward other young animals. The Gemara explains the dilemma: One can say that <b>when</b> an animal <b>is merciful</b> this applies only toward an animal <b>that</b> is of <b>its</b> own <b>species,</b> but to a young animal <b>that is not</b> of <b>its</b> own <b>species</b> a mother animal certainly does <b>not</b> show mercy. Therefore, the fact that it nursed proves that it is its offspring. <b>Or perhaps</b> an animal might <b>also be merciful</b> toward an offspring <b>that is not</b> of <b>its</b> own <b>species.</b> If it is merciful only to its own species, the ewe is exempt from having its future offspring counted a firstborn; if its mercy extends to other species then it is not exempt.

### Part 4
And Aḥai the Distinguished also inquired <b>with regard to</b> whether the pig-like animal is permitted for <b>consumption, and</b> this question applies <b>even according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel: If you say</b> he <b>holds</b> that <b>an animal that has given birth</b> might <b>be merciful</b> and nurse another mother’s offspring, perhaps that is so only with regard to an animal <b>that</b> is of <b>its</b> own <b>species,</b> but to an animal <b>that is not</b> of <b>its</b> own <b>species</b> it is <b>not</b> merciful, which means the pig-like animal is kosher. <b>Or perhaps</b> a mother might <b>also be merciful</b> toward an offspring <b>that is not</b> of <b>its</b> own <b>species,</b> in which case the pig-like animal might not be kosher and therefore may not be eaten. After explaining the dilemma of Aḥai the Distinguished, the Gemara concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam says:</b> Since it is prohibited by Torah law to shear a firstborn, as it states: “And you shall not shear the firstborn of your flock” (Deuteronomy 15:19), <b>one who is slaughtering a firstborn,</b> and must clear hair or wool from the area of the neck in order to facilitate proper slaughter, <b>clears space</b> by uprooting the hair <b>with a cleaver [<i>bekofitz</i>] from here and from there,</b> on either side of the neck, although he thereby <b>plucks</b> out <b>the hair.</b> He may clear space in this manner <b>provided that he does not move</b> the plucked hair <b>from its place;</b> it must remain intermingled with the rest of the hair so it will appear that he did not shear the animal. <b>And likewise, one plucks the hair</b> to enable one of the Sages <b>to examine the place of a blemish</b> and thereby determine whether it is permitted to slaughter the firstborn outside the Temple.

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam.</b> The Sages <b>raised a dilemma before Rav Huna: What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in <b>the parallel</b> case of one who wishes to slaughter a non-sacred animal <b>on a Festival?</b> The resolution depends on <b>the reason</b> for the ruling <b>of Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam:</b> Does he permit clearing hair with a cleaver <b>because he holds</b> that <b>plucking is not</b> the same as <b>shearing, and</b> as opposed to plucking the hair of a firstborn, <b>it is prohibited</b> to pluck hair <b>on the Festival, as this is</b> considered <b>uprooting an item from its</b> place of <b>growth?</b>

### Part 7
<b>Or perhaps in general Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam holds</b> that <b>plucking is</b> considered a form of <b>shearing. And this is the reason that it is permitted</b> to clear space with a cleaver in the case of the firstborn, <b>as it is an unintentional act,</b> i.e., an action performed for a permitted purpose from which a prohibited labor may inadvertently ensue, since he does not intend to pluck out the hair; <b>and on a Festival an unintentional act is permitted.</b>

### Part 8
Rav Huna <b>said to them: Go</b> and <b>ask</b> Rav’s disciple, <b>Rav Ḥananel,</b> and <b>if</b> Rav in fact <b>said the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam, I will explain to you</b> the resolution of your dilemma. <b>They went</b> and <b>asked</b> Rav Ḥananel, and <b>he said to them</b> that <b>this is what Rav says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei ben HaMeshullam. They came before Rav Huna,</b> and <b>he said to them:</b> In <b>the parallel</b> case of one who wishes to slaughter a non-sacred animal <b>on a Festival,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to pluck the hair in order to facilitate proper slaughter. <b>It was also stated</b> that <b>Rav Ḥananya bar Shelamya says in the name of Rav:</b> In <b>the parallel</b> case of one who wishes to slaughter a non-sacred animal <b>on a Festival,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC