
### Part 1
The Gemara adds: <b>And</b> in fact <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon:</b> An animal <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived <b>enters the pen to be tithed. And</b> these animals <b>are like a firstborn: Just as a firstborn</b> is <b>consecrated before its time and</b> is <b>sacrificed after its time, so too,</b> an animal <b>whose time has not yet</b> arrived is <b>consecrated before its time and sacrificed after its time.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> rather <b>than deriving</b> the <i>halakha</i> of tithed animals <b>from the firstborn let one derive</b> it <b>from sacrificial</b> animals, which cannot be consecrated before their time arrives. The Gemara answers that <b>it is reasonable</b> to claim <b>it would be</b> appropriate <b>for one to derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of tithed animals <b>from the firstborn, as</b> they have the following four aspects in common: First, unlike sacrificial animals, one cannot <b>redeem</b> a firstborn or a tithed animal even if it develops a blemish. Second, <b>a blemish</b> does not prevent them from being imbued with sanctity. Third, an animal that was rendered <b>a substitute</b> for a firstborn or a tithed animal is not sacrificed. Finally, they are <b>consumed</b> without having been redeemed, whereas other sacrificial animals must be redeemed first.

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>On the contrary, it would be</b> appropriate <b>for one to derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of tithed animals <b>from sacrificial</b> animals, <b>as</b> they have the following in common: First, unlike firstborn animals, both tithed and consecrated animals are not limited to <b>males.</b> Second, both are sanctified by human action rather than intrinsically <b>consecrated.</b> Additionally, they are not included among the <b>gifts</b> to the priest. Finally, both begin life as <b>regular</b> animals rather than as animals with the unique status of being born first. The Gemara accepts this objection: <b>Rather, Rabbi Shimon derives</b> the <i>halakha</i> from a verbal analogy between the term: “You shall <b>pass”</b> (Exodus 13:12), written with regard to the firstborn, and the term: “Whatsoever <b>passes</b> under the rod” (Leviticus 27:32), stated with regard to tithed animals.

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that a murky discharge is evidence of an offspring and exempts any future offspring from being counted a firstborn. The Gemara asks: <b>What is considered a murky discharge</b> that exempts future offspring from firstborn status? <b>Rava says: As the shepherds say: A murky [<i>detzalta</i>]</b> discharge from the womb is an indicator of a fetus that <b>the animal suppressed</b> in its womb. <b>And Shmuel says:</b> It is <b>bubbles of blood.</b> The Gemara adds: <b>And one must show</b> the discharge <b>to a Sage [<i>ḥakham</i>]</b> in order to determine its status. The Gemara asks: <b>A Sage? From where would he know</b> how to determine its nature? <b>Rav Pappa says:</b> The reference is to <b>a knowledgeable [<i>ḥakham</i>] shepherd,</b> who is familiar with the different types of discharge an animal can produce.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ḥisda says: They said the formation of a fetus in a woman</b> takes <b>forty days. Rav Ḥisda</b> therefore <b>asks: In an animal, how many</b> days does it take for the fetus to form? <b>Rav Pappa said to Abaye: Isn’t this</b> question resolved by that <b>which Ze’eiri said, as Ze’eiri said: A murky discharge</b> occurs <b>no less than thirty days</b> after conception? The Gemara explains: No; <b>that was stated with regard to</b> the thirty days after expulsion of a murky discharge, during which a female does not <b>show receptivity to</b> a male and does not become pregnant. The Gemara leaves Rav Ḥisda’s inquiry unresolved.

### Part 6
§ <b>We found</b> that the mishna discusses the <i>halakha</i> of one <b>who purchases</b> an animal <b>from a gentile.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>one who purchases</b> an animal <b>from a Jew</b> and it is unknown whether the animal had previously given birth? <b>Rav says:</b> Its offspring is <b>a definite firstborn, as if it is so that it had</b> previously <b>given birth to a firstborn,</b> the owner <b>would have boasted to</b> the buyer about the fact that he would not have to give its offspring to a priest.

### Part 7
<b>And Shmuel says:</b> The <b>firstborn</b> status of its offspring is <b>uncertain,</b> as even if it had previously given birth the seller <b>thinks</b> the buyer <b>wants it for slaughter,</b> and therefore he does not bother informing him of its status. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Its offspring is <b>certainly a non-sacred</b> animal. <b>What is the reason? If it is so that it had not</b> previously <b>given birth, since there is a prohibition</b> involved, it can be assumed that the seller <b>would have notified</b> the buyer of the animal’s status.

### Part 8
The Gemara notes: It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Yoḥanan, who says</b> the offspring is <b>non-sacred:</b> With regard to the prohibition against slaughtering a mother and its offspring in the same day, <b>if</b> the seller <b>did not inform</b> the buyer that the mother or offspring of the animal he is purchasing was sold earlier that day, the buyer may <b>go and slaughter the animal and he</b> need <b>not refrain</b> from doing so. <b>Shall we say this</b> <i>baraita</i> is <b>a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinions of <b>Rav and Shmuel?</b> The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>There,</b> with regard to slaughtering a mother and its offspring, <b>the matter is dependent upon the seller,</b> as it is his responsibility to notify the buyer. <b>Here,</b> in the case of a firstborn, <b>the matter is dependent upon the buyer,</b> and it is his responsibility to inquire about the animal’s status.

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Ya’akov says:</b> In the case of <b>a large animal that expelled a mass of</b> congealed <b>blood, that</b> mass <b>must be buried.</b> The reason is that perhaps there was a male fetus there which was consecrated as a firstborn when it emerged, <b>and</b> the animal <b>is exempt from</b> having any future offspring counted <b>a firstborn.</b>

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches:</b> That mass of congealed blood <b>does not impart</b> ritual <b>impurity, neither through</b> physical <b>contact nor through carrying</b> it. The Gemara asks: <b>But since does not impart impurity, neither through contact nor through carrying,</b> which indicates that it is not considered a fetus, <b>why</b> must it be <b>buried?</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC