
### Part 1
<b>be redeemed” that the Merciful One writes, why do I</b> need it? <b>If it is not</b> referring <b>to</b> the <b>matter of dedications,</b> as can be inferred from the <i>baraita</i>, <b>apply it to the matter of</b> the animal <b>tithe</b> offering, teaching that it may not be sold. The Gemara raises a difficulty: One can <b>say</b> that instead of applying it to the animal tithe offering, <b>apply it to the matter of a firstborn</b> offering. The Gemara rejects this possibility: The prohibition against selling extends to the animal <b>tithe</b> offering, concerning which the expression of <b>redemption</b> is written, <b>just like</b> dedications, which is not so concerning the firstborn offering.

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Ashi says</b> that the prohibition against selling the animal tithe offering is not derived from dedications, but rather from the case of the animal tithe offering itself. The phrase <b>“It may not be redeemed,”</b> written <b>with regard to</b> the animal <b>tithe</b> offering, is to be understood as meaning: <b>It may not be sold. Rav Ashi</b> further <b>says: From where do I say this? As it is written: “Then both it and that for which it is substituted shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed”</b> (Leviticus 27:33).

### Part 3
Rav Ashi elaborates: <b>When</b> does the animal tithe offering <b>render</b> a non-sacred animal for which it is exchanged consecrated as <b>a substitute?</b> Only <b>when</b> the animal tithe offering is <b>alive.</b> Similarly, <b>when may</b> the animal tithe offering <b>not be redeemed</b> by its owner? Only <b>when</b> it is <b>alive,</b> which indicates that <b>it may be redeemed after</b> its <b>slaughter.</b> But when redeeming a sanctified animal, <b>it requires standing and valuation,</b> i.e., it has to be set standing before a priest for him to evaluate it and only then is it redeemed (see Leviticus 27:11–12). How, then, can the animal tithe offering be redeemed after having been slaughtered?

### Part 4
Rav Ashi continues: <b>Rather, conclude from</b> this verse that the phrase <b>“it may not be redeemed”</b> is not referring to redemption. Rather, it <b>is</b> actually to be understood as: <b>It may not be sold.</b> Accordingly, the prohibition against selling the animal tithe offering is in effect only while it is alive, as is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to a substitute; but once it is slaughtered, it may be sold.

### Part 5
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that animals <b>consecrated</b> to be sacrificed on the <b>altar</b> that were disqualified due to a blemish <b>were included in</b> the requirement of <b>standing and valuation. But according to the one who says</b> that animals <b>consecrated to</b> be sacrificed on the <b>altar</b> that were disqualified due to a blemish <b>were not included in</b> the requirement of <b>standing and valuation, what is there to say?</b> According to this opinion, the phrase “It may not be redeemed” can be interpreted literally, in contrast to Rav Ashi’s claim.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>This is what we said,</b> i.e., this is what we meant. The phrase “It may not be redeemed” cannot be understood literally, as <b>is there</b> ever an instance <b>where</b> an animal <b>may not be redeemed when alive, and</b> yet it <b>may be redeemed after</b> its <b>slaughter?</b> Since such a scenario is impossible, the verse must be referring to the prohibition against selling. The Gemara asks: But <b>why</b> can it <b>not</b> be said that an animal may be redeemed only after its slaughter? One can claim that <b>when</b> the animal is <b>alive, since its sanctity is strong,</b> it is logical to say that it <b>may not be redeemed.</b> Conversely, <b>after</b> its <b>slaughter, when its sanctity is weak,</b> it is logical to claim that <b>it may be redeemed.</b> If so, the phrase can be understood literally.

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this contention: <b>But isn’t</b> the opposite claim, that a slaughtered animal tithe offering may not be redeemed, based on <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>If, when</b> the animal tithe offering is <b>alive and</b> its sanctity <b>is strong</b> enough <b>to transfer</b> that sanctity to <b>its redemption</b> money, just as it renders a non-sacred animal consecrated as a substitute, nevertheless <b>it may not be redeemed,</b> then <b>after</b> its <b>slaughter, when</b> its sanctity <b>is not strong</b> enough <b>to transfer</b> that sanctity to <b>its redemption</b> money, as at this stage it cannot render a non-sacred animal consecrated as a substitute, should it be able to <b>be redeemed?</b> In other words, the fact that substitution can be effected only with a living animal indicates that a strong sanctity is more easily transferable to another item than a weak sanctity. <b>Rather, conclude from this</b> that the phrase <b>“It may not be redeemed” is</b> actually to be understood as meaning that <b>it may not be sold.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>But</b> if so, <b>let the Merciful One write</b> explicitly: <b>It may not be sold.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Had the Merciful One written: It may not be sold, I would say</b> that the animal tithe offering only <b>may not be sold, as one</b> who does so <b>performs an act</b> of <b>a non-sacred</b> item, by treating the consecrated animal in the same manner as a non-sacred animal and transferring its value to non-sacred money. <b>But</b> I would say that <b>it may be redeemed, as</b> in this manner <b>its value becomes consecrated. Therefore,</b> in order to counter this notion, <b>the Merciful One writes: “It may not be redeemed,”</b> which teaches both <b>that</b> the animal tithe offering <b>may not be sold and</b> that it <b>may not be redeemed.</b>

### Part 9
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Beit Shammai say: An Israelite cannot be counted with the priest to</b> partake of a blemished <b>firstborn. And Beit Hillel deem</b> it <b>permitted</b> for him to partake of it, <b>and</b> they deem it permitted <b>even</b> for <b>a gentile</b> to partake of a blemished firstborn.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that Beit Hillel deem it permitted even for a gentile to partake of a blemished firstborn offering. The Gemara says: <b>Whose</b> opinion is expressed in <b>the mishna? It is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of a blemished <b>firstborn</b> offering, <b>only a group</b> constituted <b>entirely of priests may be counted to</b> partake of <b>it;</b> this is <b>the statement of Beit Shammai. And Beit Hillel say:</b> The group may <b>even</b> be constituted of <b>non-priests. Rabbi Akiva</b> says that Beit Hillel <b>deem</b> it <b>permitted even</b> for <b>a gentile</b> to partake of a blemished firstborn. Evidently, Beit Hillel’s opinion in the mishna is in accordance with Rabbi Akiva’s explanation in this <i>baraita</i>.

### Part 11
The Gemara explains: <b>What is the reason of Beit Shammai? As it is written</b> in a verse discussing the firstborn offering, addressed to Aaron and his sons: “But the firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat you shall not redeem; they are holy …<b>and their flesh shall be yours,</b> as the wave breast and as the right thigh, it shall be yours” (Numbers 18:17–18). <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the breast and the thigh, <b>priests may</b> partake of it but <b>an Israelite,</b> i.e., a non-priest, may <b>not,</b> as the verse states: “You shall eat in a pure place; you, and your sons, and your daughters with you” (Leviticus 10:14), <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the firstborn offering, only <b>priests may</b> partake of it, but <b>an Israelite</b> may <b>not.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC