
### Part 1
The Gemara cites an alternative exposition. <b>Some say</b> that the phrase: <b>“You may slaughter and eat,”</b> teaches that <b>you have permission to eat them only from the time of slaughter onward.</b> Similarly, no benefit may be derived from them until after their slaughter. The Gemara notes: <b>But</b> according to this interpretation, <b>so too,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>said</b> that <b>one may redeem sacrificial</b> animals in order <b>to feed them to dogs,</b> as this prohibition is not derived from the term “you may eat.”

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches with regard to sacrificial animals: <b>And their offspring and their milk are prohibited after their redemption.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of the offspring’s birth? <b>If we say that</b> the offspring <b>was</b> both <b>conceived and born after</b> its mother’s <b>redemption,</b> then <b>why</b> would it be prohibited? After all, <b>they are</b> like <b>the offspring</b> of <b>a gazelle or a hart,</b> i.e., they are completely non-sacred. <b>Rather,</b> it must be referring to a case <b>where</b> the offspring <b>was conceived prior to</b> its mother’s <b>redemption and born after</b> its mother’s <b>redemption.</b> One can infer: <b>But</b> if they were born <b>before their</b> mothers’ <b>redemption,</b> not only are they not prohibited, <b>they are also imbued with</b> inherent <b>sanctity.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter,</b> that the offspring of a sacrificial animal is imbued with inherent sanctity, derived? It is derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> with regard to the verse: “And if his offering be a sacrifice of peace offerings: If he sacrifice of the cattle, whether male or female, he shall sacrifice it without blemish before the Lord” (Leviticus 3:1), that the words “male” and “female” are extraneous, as the term “cattle” includes both. Consequently, <b>“male”</b> serves <b>to include the offspring</b> of a peace offering; <b>“or female”</b> serves <b>to include the</b> female animal that is designated as <b>a substitute</b> for a peace offering.

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And I have</b> derived this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> with regard to <b>the offspring of unblemished</b> animals <b>and the substitute of unblemished</b> animals. <b>From where</b> do I derive that the same <i>halakha</i> applies to <b>the offspring of blemished</b> animals <b>and the substitute of blemished</b> animals? <b>When</b> the verse <b>states: “Whether male,”</b> this serves <b>to include the offspring of blemished</b> animals, in a case where its consecration preceded its blemish, and when the verse states: <b>“Or female,”</b> it serves <b>to include the substitute of blemished</b> animals.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: With regard to <b>those offspring that</b> were born <b>after their</b> mother’s <b>redemption, what will be with them,</b> since they can be neither sacrificed nor redeemed? Before providing an answer, the Gemara notes: If they were born <b>before their</b> mother’s <b>redemption,</b> the Sages <b>disagree with regard to</b> the <i>halakha</i>. <b>There is one who says: They are</b> entirely <b>consecrated,</b> to the extent that they may <b>be sacrificed, and there is one who says: They are consecrated to graze</b> until a blemish befalls them so that they can be redeemed, but they may not be sacrificed.

### Part 6
The Gemara returns to the previous inquiry: With regard to those <b>that</b> were born <b>after their</b> mother’s <b>redemption, what will be with them? Rav Huna says: One gathers them into a chamber, and they die</b> of starvation. The reason is <b>that what</b> are we <b>to do? Shall we sacrifice them?</b> They cannot be sacrificed, as <b>they received</b> their status <b>from</b> the <b>deferred sanctity</b> of the redeemed mother, and are therefore unfit for the altar. <b>Shall we redeem them?</b> They cannot be redeemed, as their sanctity <b>is not strong</b> enough <b>to be transferable</b> to money for <b>their redemption.</b>

### Part 7
<b>They said in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina:</b> Immediately <b>before their redemption, one dedicates them for the sake of the same offering</b> for which their mother was consecrated. The Gemara asks: Immediately <b>before their redemption?</b> Is that <b>to say that they are fit to be redeemed?</b> It was established that they cannot be redeemed. <b>Rather, say:</b> Immediately <b>before their mother’s redemption, one dedicates them for the sake of the same offering.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> that the offspring are not simply left as they are? <b>Rabbi Levi says:</b> It is a rabbinic <b>decree, lest one raise flocks and flocks of them.</b> In other words, if the offspring are left alive in their forbidden status, there is a concern that one might eventually derive benefit from them and thereby violate a Torah prohibition.

### Part 8
<b>Ravina raised a dilemma before Rav Sheshet:</b> According to Rabbi Ḥanina, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the following matter: <b>Can one dedicate</b> the unborn offspring <b>as any offering he desires?</b> Rav Sheshet <b>said to him: He may not dedicate them</b> as any offering other than that for which the mother was consecrated. Ravina asked: <b>What is the reason?</b> Rav Sheshet <b>said to him:</b> It is <b>derived</b> by a verbal analogy between the phrase: <b>“Within</b> all <b>your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:15), and: <b>“Within your gates”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:22), written <b>with regard to a firstborn. Just as one cannot dedicate a firstborn as any offering he desires, as it is written: “But the firstborn among animals, which is born as a firstborn to the Lord, no man shall sanctify it”</b> (Leviticus 27:26), <b>so too, one cannot dedicate these</b> offspring <b>as any offering he desires.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: <b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Sheshet: Sacrificial</b> animals <b>whose permanent blemish preceded their consecration and</b> that <b>were redeemed, are obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b>a firstborn, and</b> obligated <b>in the gifts. Whether before their redemption or after their redemption, one who shears</b> them <b>or utilizes them for labor does not incur the forty</b> lashes. Similarly, <b>whether before their redemption or after their redemption, they do not render</b> an animal that was <b>a substitute</b> for them sacred.

### Part 10
<b>And before their redemption,</b> one who benefits from <b>them</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, <b>and after their redemption,</b> one who benefits from <b>them is not</b> liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. <b>And their offspring are non-sacred</b> if they were born after their mother’s redemption; <b>and they may be redeemed</b> while they are <b>unblemished</b> if they were born before their mother’s redemption; <b>and one can dedicate</b> the offspring <b>as any offering he desires. The principle of the matter</b> is that animals whose permanent blemish preceded their consecration <b>are like non-sacred</b> animals <b>in all matters,</b> and <b>you have only the mitzva of value alone,</b> i.e., they must be valuated and redeemed with money, unlike non-sacred animals.

### Part 11
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>But</b> if <b>their consecration preceded their blemish, or</b> they had <b>a temporary blemish</b> prior <b>to their consecration and afterward developed a permanent blemish, and they were redeemed, they are exempt</b> from the mitzva of the <b>firstborn and from the gifts.</b> Furthermore, <b>whether before their redemption or after their redemption, one who shears</b> them <b>or utilizes them for labor incurs the forty</b> lashes. <b>And whether before their redemption or after their redemption, they render</b> an animal that was <b>a substitute</b> for them sacred.

### Part 12
The <i>baraita</i> concludes: <b>Before their redemption,</b> one who derives benefit from <b>them</b> is liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, <b>and after their redemption,</b> one who derives benefit from <b>them is not</b> liable for <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property. <b>And their offspring are sacred and may not be redeemed</b> while they are <b>unblemished, and one may not dedicate them as any offering he desires. The principle of the matter</b> is that redeemed animals whose consecration preceded their permanent blemish <b>are like</b> redeemed <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>in all matters, and you have only the permission of consumption alone,</b> i.e., once they have been redeemed they may be eaten. Like Rav Sheshet, this <i>tanna</i> rules that the offspring of animals whose consecration preceded their blemish may not be dedicated as any offering one desires.

### Part 13
It is accepted that whenever a <i>tanna</i> states: The principle of the matter, he is adding certain cases that one might have thought were excluded from the <i>halakha</i> in question. Accordingly, the Gemara notes that the phrase: <b>The principle of the matter, in the former clause</b> of the <i>baraita</i>, which states that that animals whose permanent blemish preceded their consecration are like non-sacred animals, serves <b>to add</b> the case of <b>one who slaughters</b> such an animal <b>outside</b> the Temple courtyard, teaching <b>that he is exempt.</b> The phrase: <b>The principle of the matter, in the latter clause,</b> which states that that redeemed animals whose consecration preceded their permanent blemish are like redeemed sacrificial animals in all matters,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC