
### Part 1
the mishna means: <b>Nor</b> may <b>consecrated items</b> be redeemed <b>with any of these</b> items mentioned above, i.e., Canaanite slaves, documents, and land.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches: If the father of a firstborn son <b>wrote</b> a promissory note <b>to the priest that he is obligated to</b> give <b>him five <i>sela</i></b> coins, the father is <b>obligated to give</b> them <b>to him</b> but his son is not redeemed. <b>Ulla says: By Torah law, his son is redeemed</b> when the father gives the money to the priest. If so, <b>what is the reason</b> the Sages said <b>his son is not redeemed?</b> It is a rabbinic <b>decree</b> that was enacted, <b>lest</b> people <b>say</b> that one may <b>redeem</b> a firstborn son <b>with</b> a promissory <b>note</b> that enables the priest to collect a debt from a third party. This is not effective, as the Torah requires redemption with actual money.

### Part 3
<b>A <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>in the presence of Rav Naḥman: His son is redeemed when</b> the father <b>gives</b> the money. <b>Rav Naḥman said to him: This</b> <i>baraita</i> is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> which was recorded as <b>unattributed. And some say: This</b> <i>baraita</i> is <b>the statement of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon,</b> which was recorded as <b>unattributed. But the Rabbis say his son is not redeemed.</b> The Gemara concludes: <b>And the <i>halakha</i></b> is that <b>his son is not redeemed.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna further teaches: <b>Therefore, if the priest wished to give</b> back the five <i>sela</i> coins <b>to him as a gift</b> he is <b>permitted</b> to do so. The Gemara comments: <b>We learn</b> in the mishna <b>that which the Sages taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: If the father <b>gave</b> the redemption money for his son <b>to ten priests all at once,</b> i.e., he placed five <i>sela</i> coins in front of a group of ten priests, he has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. If he gave it to them <b>one after the other,</b> he has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation. If a priest <b>took</b> the redemption money <b>and returned it to</b> the father, the father has <b>fulfilled</b> his obligation.

### Part 5
<b>And this was the practice of Rabbi Tarfon, as he would take</b> the redemption money <b>and return it. And when the Sages heard of</b> this <b>matter they said: This</b> individual <b>has fulfilled this <i>halakha</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: Has he fulfilled only <b>this <i>halakha</i> and nothing more?</b> Certainly, Rabbi Tarfon fulfilled many <i>halakhot</i>. <b>Rather,</b> they meant: <b>This</b> individual <b>fulfilled even this <i>halakha</i>.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Ḥanina,</b> a priest, <b>was accustomed</b> to <b>take</b> the redemption money <b>and return it.</b> On one occasion, <b>he saw that a certain man</b> from whom he had received the redemption money for his son <b>was passing to and fro before him,</b> to hint to Rabbi Ḥanina that he should return the money. Rabbi Ḥanina <b>said to him:</b> Evidently, <b>you did not conclusively</b> resolve to <b>give</b> the money. This is <b>a bad matter,</b> and <b>therefore his son is not redeemed.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>one who designates</b> five <i>sela</i> coins for <b>redemption of his son and he lost</b> the money before he gave it to the priest, the father <b>bears</b> financial <b>responsibility for its</b> loss. The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> It is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between <b>“valuation” and “valuation,” from</b> the passage discussing <b>valuations.</b> With regard to a firstborn son it states: “From a month old you shall redeem, according to your valuation” (Numbers 18:16), and it is written with regard to valuations: “And he shall give your valuation on that day” (Leviticus 27:23). Just as one bears financial responsibility to pay for valuations, the same applies to redemption money.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Dimi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan</b> says: The verse states concerning the redemption of the firstborn: <b>“And every firstborn of your sons you shall redeem, and none shall appear before Me empty”</b> (Exodus 34:20). <b>And</b> therefore this <i>halakha</i> is <b>derived</b> through a verbal analogy between <b>“empty”</b> and <b>“empty,” from</b> the passage discussing <b>the burnt offering of appearance,</b> which every pilgrim must bring on a Festival. With regard to the burnt offering of appearance it states: “And none shall appear before Me empty” (Exodus 23:15). <b>Just as</b> in the case of the <b>burnt offering of appearance one bears</b> financial <b>responsibility</b> for the loss of the offering, <b>so too,</b> with regard to the <b>redemption of the firstborn one bears</b> financial <b>responsibility</b> for its loss as well.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Pappa objects to this:</b> Is it necessary here to cite one <b>verse in</b> support of another <b>verse?</b> The mishna itself cites the verse that is the source of the <i>halakha</i> that the father bears financial responsibility for the redemption money. <b>Rather, Rav Pappa says:</b> The reason for <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i> is <b>the reason that</b> the mishna itself <b>teaches:</b> “Everything that opens the womb in man and animal <b>shall be yours; yet you shall redeem</b> the firstborn of man” (Numbers 18:15).

### Part 10
<b>And when</b> the comment <b>of Reish Lakish was stated,</b> it <b>was stated with regard to the first clause</b> of the mishna (49a), which teaches: If the firstborn son <b>dies after thirty days</b> have passed, <b>even if</b> the father <b>did not</b> yet <b>give</b> five <i>sela</i> coins to the priest <b>he must give</b> them then. <b>From where do we</b> derive this? <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> It is <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy between <b>“valuation”</b> and <b>“valuation,” from</b> the passage discussing <b>valuations.</b> Just as in a case where one says: It is incumbent upon me to donate so-and-so’s valuation, he must do so even if that individual dies, so too, concerning the redemption of the firstborn the father must pay even though his son died.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Dimi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yonatan</b> says: It is written with regard to the redemption of the firstborn: <b>“And all the firstborn of your sons you shall redeem, and none shall appear before Me empty”</b> (Exodus 34:20), and it likewise states with regard to the burnt offering of appearance: “And none shall appear before Me empty” (Exodus 23:15). <b>Just as there,</b> in the case of the burnt offering of appearance, if one died after becoming obligated to bring the offering <b>the heirs are obligated</b> to bring his offering, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the redemption of the firstborn, if the obligation already took effect, and the son and the father then died, <b>the heirs are obligated</b> to give five <i>sela</i> coins to a priest.

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>The firstborn</b> son <b>takes a double</b> portion, i.e., twice the portion taken by the other sons, <b>when</b> inheriting <b>the property of the father, but he does not take twice</b> the portion <b>when</b> inheriting <b>the property of the mother. And neither does he take</b> twice the portion <b>in</b> any <b>enhancement</b> of the value of the property after the death of the father, <b>nor</b> does he take twice the portion <b>in</b> property <b>due</b> the father, <b>as</b> he does <b>in</b> property the father <b>possessed.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC