
### Part 1
<b>ben Yehuda comes to say: A <i>tumtum</i> is</b> not of uncertain status, but a distinct <b>entity, and it is not sacred</b> at all. The Gemara responds: <b>No, everyone</b> agrees <b>with regard to</b> the statement that <b>a <i>tumtum</i> is</b> a distinct <b>entity</b> that <b>there is no doubt</b> that this is incorrect. <b>Where</b> there is <b>doubt is</b> with regard to whether it is <b>a male or a female.</b>

### Part 2
In addition, in a case where the <i>tumtum</i> <b>urinates from the place of the male</b> sex organ, then <b>everyone agrees that it is a male. When they disagree</b> is in the case <b>of</b> a <i>tumtum</i> that <b>urinates from the place of the female</b> sex organ. One <b>Sage,</b> the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>we are concerned</b> that <b>perhaps its male</b> sex organ <b>was inverted toward its female</b> sex organ; therefore, it is of uncertain status. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that <b>we are not concerned</b> about this possibility; rather, it is definitely a female. And Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda maintains <b>in accordance with that which Rabbi Elazar ruled: With regard to</b> a firstborn <b>animal</b> that <b>urinates from the place</b> where <b>the female</b> sex organ is found, it is <b>non-sacred,</b> as it is certainly a female.

### Part 3
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan wondered</b> about this ruling of Rabbi Elazar: <b>Who</b> is the Sage <b>who is not concerned about</b> the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> in the mishna <b>and about</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yishmael,</b> who maintain that a <i>tumtum</i> is a case of uncertainty? The Gemara asks: <b>And let Rabbi Yoḥanan also say: Who</b> is this <b>who is not concerned about</b> the opinion of <b>the latter Rabbis</b> in the mishna, <b>as Rav Ḥisda says:</b> This <b>dispute</b> refers <b>to a hermaphrodite; but with regard to a <i>tumtum</i>, everyone agrees</b> that <b>it is an uncertain</b> case.

### Part 4
The Gemara explains that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan does not hold</b> in accordance with that statement <b>of Rav Ḥisda;</b> rather, he maintains that according to the latter Rabbis a <i>tumtum</i> is a distinct entity. The Gemara asks: <b>If Rabbi Yoḥanan does not hold</b> in accordance with Rav Ḥisda, why did he wonder about Rabbi Elazar’s ruling? <b>Let him say that</b> Rabbi Elazar <b>said</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the latter Rabbis.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>That is indeed what he is saying: Who</b> is the Sage <b>who leaves</b> aside the opinion of <b>two</b> Sages, the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yishmael, <b>and acts in accordance with one</b> opinion, the latter Rabbis?

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And Rabbi Elazar, in accordance with whose</b> opinion does <b>he hold?</b> The Gemara answers that he holds <b>in accordance with that which Reish Lakish says:</b> The Sages <b>said that</b> the halakhic status of <b>a <i>tumtum</i> is an uncertain</b> case <b>only with regard to a person, since the male</b> sex organ <b>and the female</b> sex organ <b>are in one place,</b> i.e., a man and a woman urinate from the same area of the body. Since that area is concealed in the case of a <i>tumtum</i>, its status is uncertain. <b>But</b> with regard to a <i>tumtum</i> <b>animal,</b> there is no uncertainty whether it is a male or a female, as the genitals of a male and a female are not found in the same place. Rather, if it <b>urinates from the place</b> of <b>the male</b> sex organ, it is <b>a male;</b> if it <b>urinates from the place of the female</b> sex organ, it is <b>a female.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rav Oshaya objects to this: And let us be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps its male</b> sex organ <b>was turned round to</b> the place of <b>its female</b> sex organ. Abaye <b>said to him: In accordance with whose</b> opinion do you raise this objection? Is it <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who is concerned about the minority</b> of cases? The <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Meir, and therefore one should follow the majority of animals, to whom this does not occur.

### Part 7
<b>Abaye bar Avin and Rav Ḥananya bar Avin both say: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that Rav Oshaya’s objection is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who are not concerned about a minority. The reason is that <b>since</b> in this case, the animal <b>has changed</b> in that it is different from typical animals, as it is a <i>tumtum</i>, perhaps it is also <b>changed</b> with regard to its male sex organ being inverted toward the female sex organ. If so, the Sages disagree with regard to this principle: <b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that since it has changed, it has <b>changed, and there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that the claim that since it has changed, it has <b>changed</b> is <b>not</b> accepted.

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that the question of whether an animal that has changed in one respect has <b>changed</b> in a different respect, <b>or</b> whether it has <b>not changed,</b> is the subject of a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> who betrothed</b> a woman, the <b>betrothal is</b> considered <b>a betrothal,</b> due to uncertainty, as the <i>tumtum</i> might be a male; and similarly, if the <i>tumtum</i> <b>was betrothed</b> by a man, the <b>betrothal is</b> deemed <b>a betrothal</b> due to uncertainty, as the <i>tumtum</i> might be a female.

### Part 9
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And</b> if the brother of the <i>tumtum</i> died childless, and there is no other brother who can perform levirate marriage with the widow, the <i>tumtum</i> <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i>,</b> i.e., his brother’s widow removes his shoe, as the <i>tumtum</i> might be a male, and she would require <i>ḥalitza</i> to release her from the levirate bond. <b>And</b> if the <i>tumtum</i> died, one of the brothers of the <i>tumtum</i> <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with the wife of</b> the <i>tumtum</i>, <b>or enters into levirate marriage with the wife of</b> the <i>tumtum</i>, in case the <i>tumtum</i> was a male. <b>And it is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: <b>The wife of a <i>tumtum</i> performs <i>ḥalitza</i> and does not enter into levirate marriage.</b>

### Part 10
With regard to these two <i>baraitot</i>, the Sages <b>assumed that everyone</b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva, who says: A eunuch</b> whose condition is caused <b>naturally,</b> i.e., one who was entirely lacking in sexual capacity from birth, <b>does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> and does not enter into levirate marriage</b> with his sister-in-law, as he is not included in the mitzva of levirate marriage. Likewise, if he died his brothers do not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> with his wife, and they may not enter into levirate marriage with her, as she is forbidden to them as a brother’s wife who does not require levirate marriage.

### Part 11
Based on this assumption, the Gemara suggests: <b>What, is it not</b> that the two <i>baraitot</i> <b>disagree about this, that the one who says</b> that a <i>tumtum</i> <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i> and</b> one of the brothers <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i> with the wife of</b> the <i>tumtum</i> <b>or enters into levirate marriage with the wife of</b> the <i>tumtum</i> holds that <b>we do not say</b> that <b>since</b> this <i>tumtum</i> has <b>changed</b> from an average person, he might also have <b>changed</b> in that he is a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally, and therefore the brothers would be prohibited from entering into levirate marriage with the wife? Rather, if the <i>tumtum</i> is a male, it is assumed that he is capable of fathering children, and consequently his wife requires levirate marriage.

### Part 12
<b>And the one who says</b> that the wife of a <i>tumtum</i> <b>performs <i>ḥalitza</i> and does not enter into levirate marriage</b> maintains that <b>we say</b> that <b>since</b> this person has <b>changed,</b> he has <b>changed,</b> i.e., the possibility that he might be a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally is considered, and therefore his wife may not enter into levirate marriage.

### Part 13
The Gemara responds: <b>No; everyone</b> agrees that <b>we say</b> that <b>since</b> this person has <b>changed,</b> he has <b>changed,</b> and there is a concern that he might be a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally. Rather, the difference between the rulings is that <b>this</b> <i>baraita</i>, which permits the wife of the <i>tumtum</i> to enter levirate marriage, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who disagrees with Rabbi Akiva and maintains that levirate marriage may be performed with the wife of a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally, <b>and that</b> <i>baraita</i>, which prohibits levirate marriage, is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Akiva,</b> that the brothers of a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally do not enter into levirate marriage with the wife of the <i>tumtum</i>.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And who is the <i>tanna</i></b> who holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva</b> that the wife of a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally does not require levirate marriage, and yet he maintains that the wife of a <i>tumtum</i> must perform <i>ḥalitza</i>? <b>If we say</b> it is <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> this cannot be, as in his opinion even if the genitals of a <i>tumtum</i> were revealed and he was found to be a male, <b>he deems him</b> like <b>a definite eunuch</b> whose condition is caused naturally, and therefore his wife does not require <i>ḥalitza</i> at all.

### Part 15
<b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 81a) that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>a <i>tumtum</i> who was torn</b> open so that his genitals were exposed, <b>and he was found</b> to be <b>a male,</b> he <b>must not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, because he is</b> treated <b>like a eunuch</b> whose condition is caused naturally. Just as this <i>tumtum</i> does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, so too, his widow does not require <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 16
<b>Rather, it is</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who maintains that if a <i>tumtum</i> was torn open and he was found to be a male, he is considered as a matter of uncertainty to be a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally, and consequently his wife requires <i>ḥalitza</i>. <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: A <i>tumtum</i> does not perform <i>ḥalitza</i></b> with the wife of his late, childless brother if there are other brothers to perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, as <b>perhaps</b> the skin covering his genitals <b>will be torn</b> open <b>and he will be found</b> to be <b>a eunuch</b> whose condition is caused <b>naturally,</b> and the widow would not be released from the levirate bond by his <i>ḥalitza</i>. According to this opinion, it is not certain that a <i>tumtum</i> would be found to be a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally.

### Part 17
With regard to the opinion of Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, the Gemara asks: Why does this individual not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> due only to the possibility that he will be found to be a eunuch whose condition is caused naturally? <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>every</b> <i>tumtum</i> <b>whose</b> skin <b>was torn is found</b> to be <b>a male</b> and is <b>not found</b> to be <b>a female?</b> The Gemara explains that Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, <b>said</b> his opinion in the formulation of: <b>Perhaps,</b> which includes multiple uncertainties: A <i>tumtum</i> must not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, as <b>perhaps he will be torn</b> open <b>and found</b> to be <b>a female,</b> who can certainly not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>.

### Part 18
<b>Alternatively,</b> if he is found to be <b>a male,</b> he may <b>also</b> not perform <i>ḥalitza</i>, since <b>perhaps he will be found</b> to be <b>a eunuch</b> whose condition is caused <b>naturally.</b> The Gemara asks: Since both Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, agree that a <i>tumtum</i> may not perform <i>ḥalitza</i> for his brother’s wife, <b>what is</b> the practical difference <b>between</b> their opinions? <b>Rava said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC