
### Part 1
is <b>suspect with regard to tithe. And who</b> are the Sages referred to here as <b>the Rabbis?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as in his locale they treated the prohibition of produce of the Sabbatical Year stringently. <b>And</b> the other <b>one says: One who is suspect with regard to tithe is suspect with regard to</b> produce of the <b>Sabbatical</b> Year. <b>And who</b> are the Sages referred to here as <b>the Rabbis?</b> It is <b>Rabbi Meir.</b>

### Part 2
<b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Demai</i> 2:4): With regard to <b>an <i>am ha’aretz</i>,</b> i.e., one who is unreliable with regard to ritual impurity and tithes, <b>who accepts upon himself</b> the commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status,</b> i.e., that he will be stringent in all matters observed by <i>ḥaverim</i>, including <i>teruma</i>, tithes, and <i>ḥalla</i>, and also undertake to eat only food that is ritually pure, and the Sages accepted him as trustworthy <b>but</b> subsequently he <b>was suspected with regard to one matter</b> in which others saw him act improperly, <b>he is suspected with regard to the entire Torah.</b> This is the <b>statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say: He is suspected only with regard to that particular matter.</b>

### Part 3
It is also taught in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Demai</i> 2:4): With regard to <b>a convert who accepted upon himself</b> upon his conversion <b>matters of Torah,</b> i.e., all of the mitzvot, <b>even if he is suspect with regard to one matter</b> alone, <b>he is suspect with regard to the entire Torah, and he is</b> considered <b>like a Jewish transgressor [<i>meshummad</i>],</b> who habitually transgresses the mitzvot. The Gemara explains that the practical <b>difference</b> resulting from the fact that he is considered like a Jewish transgressor is <b>that if he betroths</b> a woman, <b>his betrothal is</b> a valid <b>betrothal,</b> and they are married. Although he is suspect with regard to the entire Torah, he does not return to his prior gentile status.

### Part 4
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who comes to accept upon himself</b> the commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status except for one matter,</b> which he does not wish to observe, <b>he is not accepted,</b> and he is not trustworthy even with regard to those matters that he does wish to accept upon himself. Likewise, in the case of <b>a gentile who comes to</b> convert and takes upon himself to <b>accept the words of Torah except for one matter, he is not accepted</b> as a convert. <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says: Even</b> if he refuses to accept <b>one detail of rabbinic law,</b> he is not accepted.

### Part 5
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>And similarly,</b> in the case of <b>a Levite who comes to accept the matters of a Levite, or a priest who comes to accept the matters of priesthood, except for one matter, he is not accepted. As it is stated:</b> “He among the sons of Aaron, <b>that sacrifices the blood of the peace offerings,</b> and the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion” (Leviticus 7:33). This means that with regard to <b>the</b> Temple <b>service, which is handed</b> over <b>to the sons of Aaron, any priest who does not admit to it</b> in its entirety <b>has no share in the priesthood.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara continues on a similar topic. <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who comes to accept upon himself</b> a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status, if we have seen that he practices</b> such matters <b>in private, within his home, he is accepted, and afterward he is taught</b> the precise details of being a <i>ḥaver</i>. <b>But if</b> we have <b>not</b> seen him act as a <i>ḥaver</i> in his home, <b>he is taught</b> first <b>and afterward accepted. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: Whether</b> in <b>this</b> case <b>or that</b> case, <b>he is</b> first <b>accepted, and he</b> then <b>continues to learn in</b> the <b>usual manner,</b> i.e., as a <i>ḥaver</i> he learns from others how to behave.

### Part 7
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: An <i>am ha’aretz</i> who wishes to become a <i>ḥaver</i> <b>is accepted</b> first <b>with regard to hands,</b> i.e., he is presumed to be stringent concerning the ritual purity of his hands by making sure to wash his hands before handling pure items, <b>and afterward he is accepted</b> as trustworthy <b>for purity</b> in general. <b>And if he says: I</b> wish to <b>accept</b> purity <b>only with regard to hands, he is accepted</b> for this. If he wishes to <b>accept</b> upon himself the stringencies of a <i>ḥaver</i> <b>with regard to ritual purity but he does not accept</b> upon himself the stringencies <b>with regard to hands,</b> i.e., to wash his hands, which is a simple act, <b>he is not accepted even for purity</b> in general.

### Part 8
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Until when is he accepted,</b> i.e., how much time must elapse before he is considered trustworthy as a <i>ḥaver</i>? <b>Beit Shammai say: With regard to liquids, thirty days. With regard to</b> impurity of <b>clothing,</b> about which <i>ḥaverim</i> would be careful as well, <b>twelve months. And Beit Hillel say: Both</b> with regard to <b>this,</b> liquids, <b>and that,</b> clothing, he must maintain the practice <b>for twelve months</b> before he is fully accepted as a <i>ḥaver</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If so, this is</b> one <b>of</b> the rare cases of <b>the leniencies of Beit Shammai and of the stringencies of Beit Hillel,</b> and yet it is not included in tractate <i>Eduyyot</i>, which lists all of the cases where Beit Shammai are more lenient than Beit Hillel. <b>Rather,</b> the text of the <i>baraita</i> must be emended so that it reads: <b>Beit Hillel say: Both</b> with regard to <b>this,</b> liquids <b>and that,</b> clothing, he must maintain the practice <b>for thirty</b> days before he is fully accepted as a <i>ḥaver</i>.

### Part 10
§ The Gemara provides <b>a mnemonic</b> to remember the topics from here until the end of the chapter: <b><i>Ḥaver</i>; student; sky-blue dye [<i>tekhelet</i>]; tax; return;</b> tax <b>collector; by himself.</b>

### Part 11
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who comes to accept upon himself</b> a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status must accept</b> it <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>. But his children and</b> the <b>members of his household are not required to accept</b> the status of <i>ḥaver</i> separately <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: Even his children and</b> the <b>members of his household must accept</b> the status of <i>ḥaver</i> <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>, because a <i>ḥaver</i>, who accepted it</b> himself in the presence of three others, <b>is not comparable to the son of a <i>ḥaver</i>,</b> who <b>accepted</b> that status only due to his father but did not accept it himself explicitly, and their accepting the status not in the presence of three people is insufficient.

### Part 12
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One who comes to accept upon himself</b> a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status must accept</b> it <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>, and even a Torah scholar</b> who wishes to become a <i>ḥaver</i> <b>must accept</b> the status of <i>ḥaver</i> <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>.</b> But <b>an elder who sits</b> and studies Torah <b>in a yeshiva is not required to accept</b> the status of <i>ḥaver</i> <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>, as he already accepted it upon himself from the moment he sat</b> and dedicated himself to study Torah in yeshiva. <b>Abba Shaul says: Even a Torah scholar is not required to accept</b> the status of <i>ḥaver</i> <b>in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>; and not only</b> does he have the status of <i>ḥaver</i> without an explicit declaration in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>, <b>but others</b> can <b>accept</b> that they wish to become a <i>ḥaver</i> <b>in his presence.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: This mishna,</b> i.e., the ruling that a Torah scholar must declare his intent to become a <i>ḥaver</i> in the presence of three <i>ḥaverim</i>, <b>was taught in the days of the son of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus.</b> At that time, <b>Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei were uncertain about</b> a certain <b>matter of ritual purity. The Sages sent</b> a delegation of their students <b>to the son of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus</b> and told them to <b>go</b> and <b>tell him to examine</b> this matter. The students <b>found him while he was carrying</b> items that were ritually <b>pure.</b> The son of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus <b>seated Sages from his own</b> yeshiva <b>next to</b> the students who came to ask the question, because he did not trust these students to keep his items pure. <b>And he stood and examined</b> the matter.

### Part 14
The students returned and <b>came and told Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Yosei</b> that the son of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus had treated them as though they had the status of <i>amei ha’aretz</i>. <b>Rabbi Yehuda said to them</b> in anger: <b>This one’s father,</b> i.e., Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus, <b>degraded Torah scholars</b> by not trusting them with matters of ritual purity. And <b>he too,</b> the son of Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus, <b>degrades Torah scholars.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rabbi Yosei said to him: Let the honor of the elder,</b> i.e., both the father and son, <b>be left in its place.</b> He did not act in this manner to degrade Torah scholars. <b>Rather, from the day the Temple was destroyed, the priests were accustomed to act with a higher standard for themselves,</b> and they decided <b>that they will not pass ritually pure</b> items <b>to any</b> other <b>person.</b> Therefore, the son of Rabbi Ḥanina, as a priest, acted appropriately.

### Part 16
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a <i>ḥaver</i> that died, his wife and children and members of his household retain their presumptive</b> status <b>until they are suspected</b> of engaging in inappropriate deeds. <b>And similarly,</b> in the case of <b>a courtyard in which one sells sky-blue dye, it retains its presumptive</b> status as a place in which fit sky-blue dye is sold <b>until it is disqualified</b> due to the merchant’s unscrupulous behavior.

### Part 17
<b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The</b> former <b>wife an <i>am ha’aretz</i> who</b> later <b>marries a <i>ḥaver</i>, and likewise the daughter of an <i>am ha’aretz</i> who marries a <i>ḥaver</i>, and likewise the slave of an <i>am ha’aretz</i> who is sold to a <i>ḥaver</i>, must all accept</b> upon themselves a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status. But</b> with regard to <b>the</b> former <b>wife of a <i>ḥaver</i> who</b> later <b>marries an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, and likewise the daughter of a <i>ḥaver</i> who marries an <i>am ha’aretz</i>, and likewise the slave of a <i>ḥaver</i> who was sold to an <i>am ha’aretz</i>,</b> these people <b>need not accept</b> upon themselves a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status <i>ab initio</i>,</b> as each of them is already accustomed to behave as a <i>ḥaver</i>.

### Part 18
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Meir says: They too must accept</b> upon themselves a commitment to observe <b>the matters</b> associated with <b><i>ḥaver</i> status <i>ab initio</i>. And similarly, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar would</b> illustrate this point and <b>say in the name of Rabbi Meir:</b> There was <b>an incident involving a certain woman who married a <i>ḥaver</i> and would tie [<i>koma’at</i>] for him phylacteries on his hand,</b> and she later <b>married a tax collector and would tie for him tax seals on his hand,</b> which shows that her new husband had a great influence on her level of piety.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC