
### Part 1
§ The mishna teaches that if one has <b>an extra</b> appendage <b>on his hands and on his feet,</b> six on each for a total of twenty-four, Rabbi Yehuda deems him fit while the Rabbis disqualify him. <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: And both derived</b> their opinions <b>from one verse,</b> as it is stated with regard to David’s war against the Philistines: <b>“And there was again war</b> at Gath” (II Samuel 21:20), <b>and it is</b> also <b>written</b> in that same verse: <b>“And there was a champion, who had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes,</b> twenty-four in number.” One <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that the verse <b>speaks of negative</b> qualities of the champion, and therefore it may be derived from here that extra appendages are blemishes; and one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda, <b>holds</b> that the verse <b>speaks in his praise,</b> which means that extra appendages are not blemishes at all.

### Part 2
With regard to that verse, <b>Rabba says: Why do I</b> need that <b>which is written</b> in the verse: “On every hand <b>six</b> fingers, <b>and</b> on every foot <b>six</b> toes, <b>twenty-four in number”?</b> Isn’t it obvious that one who has six appendages on each limb will have twenty-four in total? Rabba explains: All of these details <b>are necessary, as, had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>six and six, I would say</b> there were <b>six of his hand and six of his foot,</b> i.e., he had only twelve appendages. Therefore, the Merciful One <b>wrote “twenty-four.” And had</b> the Merciful One <b>written</b> only <b>“twenty-four,” I would say</b> he had <b>five</b> fingers <b>on this side and seven</b> fingers <b>on that side.</b> Therefore, the verse <b>wrote six and six.</b> The verse concludes with the term <b>“in number” to</b> indicate that these fingers <b>were counted</b> in a single row <b>on the back of the hand.</b>

### Part 3
With regard to the dispute concerning whether or not extra appendages are a blemish, it <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> There was <b>an incident involving one man who came before Rabbi Tarfon,</b> and he had <b>extra</b> appendages <b>on his hands and on his feet, six and six,</b> for a total of <b>twenty-four</b> appendages. Rabbi Tarfon <b>said to him: There should increase among the Jewish people</b> those that are <b>like you,</b> i.e., strong men. Clearly, extra appendages are not a blemish but a praiseworthy condition. <b>Rabbi Yosei said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda: You seek to bring <b>a proof from there? This</b> is what Rabbi Tarfon actually <b>said to him:</b> All <b><i>mamzerim</i> and Gibeonites should be like you,</b> i.e., physically weak, so that <b>they should decrease from the Jewish people.</b>

### Part 4
§ The mishna teaches that in the case of a priest <b>who has control of both of his hands,</b> i.e., he is ambidextrous, Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi deems him disqualified and the Rabbis deem him fit. With regard to this dispute <b>the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: One whose <b>left</b> side is dominant, <b>whether</b> his left <b>hand or</b> his left <b>foot,</b> is <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service. Furthermore, in the case of <b>one who has control of both of his hands, Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>deems</b> him <b>disqualified and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>fit.</b> The Gemara explains this dispute: One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that he learned to control his left hand because <b>a weakness began in</b> his <b>right</b> hand. He is therefore disqualified, as his right hand is weak. <b>And</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds</b> that <b>a strength began in</b> his <b>left</b> hand that allowed him to control both hands. Nevertheless, his right hand remains strong.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> Concerning <b>the <i>kushi</i>, the <i>giḥor</i>, the <i>lavkan</i>, the <i>kipe’aḥ</i>, the dwarf, the deaf-mute, the imbecile, the drunk, and</b> those <b>with ritually pure marks,</b> their conditions <b>disqualify a person</b> from performing the Temple service <b>and are valid,</b> i.e., they do not disqualify with regard to being sacrificed, <b>in</b> the case of <b>an animal. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: An imbecile among animals is not optimal</b> for sacrifice. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: Even</b> with regard to those <b>with</b> flesh or skin that <b>hangs</b> from their body, that blemish <b>disqualifies in</b> the case of <b>a person and is valid in</b> the case of <b>an animal.</b>

### Part 6
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that a <i>kushi</i>, a <i>giḥor</i>, and a <i>lavkan</i> are disqualified. The Gemara explains: <b>A <i>kushi</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>black, a <i>giḥor</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>white,</b> and a <b><i>lavkan</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>red.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so? But</b> there was <b>a certain</b> person <b>who said to</b> others: <b>Who wants a <i>lukiyani</i></b> lamb, <b>and</b> the lamb <b>was found</b> to be <b>white. Rather, a <i>kushi</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>black; a <i>giḥor</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>red, as people say</b> about one whose skin is extremely red: <b><i>Giḥia</i> red;</b> and <b>a <i>lavkan</i></b> is one whose skin is extremely <b>white, as</b> in the case of <b>that person who said: Who wants a <i>lukiyani</i>, and it was found</b> to be <b>white.</b>

### Part 7
§ The mishna teaches that <b>a <i>kipe’aḥ</i></b> is disqualified. <b>Rav Zevid taught</b> that this is referring to one who is extremely <b>tall.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>Is that so,</b> that one who is tall is considered blemished? <b>But didn’t Rabbi Abbahu teach: From where</b> is it derived <b>that the Holy One, Blessed be He, is praised through</b> His destruction of <b>those of stature? As it is stated: “Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars”</b> (Amos 2:9). <b>Rav Pappa said</b> in response: The mishna is not referring to one who is tall and has a healthy build, but to one who is <b>long, emaciated,</b> and <b>ugly.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> A man who is <b>tall should not marry</b> a woman who is also <b>tall, lest</b> there <b>emerge from them</b> a child who is <b>extremely tall.</b> Similarly, a man who is <b>a dwarf should not marry</b> a woman who is also <b>a dwarf, lest</b> there <b>emerge from them</b> a child who is <b>exceptionally short.</b> A man whose skin is <b>pale should not marry</b> a woman whose skin is also <b>pale, lest</b> there <b>emerge from them</b> a child who is <b>extremely pale.</b> Likewise, a man whose skin is <b>dark should not marry</b> a woman whose skin is also <b>dark, lest</b> there <b>emerge from them</b> a child who is <b>extremely dark.</b>

### Part 9
§ The mishna teaches that <b>the deaf-mute, the imbecile, and the drunk</b> are disqualified. The Gemara challenges: Since one who is <b>drunk profanes the</b> Temple <b>service,</b> the blemish of drunkenness <b>should have been counted</b> in the previous chapter <b>together with</b> those who have <b>blemishes that profane the service.</b> By contrast, those listed in this mishna are disqualified only because they are not equal among the seed of Aaron, and the <i>halakha</i> is that rites performed by priests with such blemishes are not profaned after the fact (see 43b).

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: The mishna is referring to a case where one became drunk <b>through other intoxicating agents,</b> not through wine. In such a case, the rites are not profaned. <b>And</b> this is <b>not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who holds that even in such a case the rites are profaned, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: Rabbi Yehuda says that a priest who <b>ate</b> pressed <b>figs from Ke’ila or drank milk or honey,</b> thereby becoming intoxicated, and <b>entered the Sanctuary</b> to serve, is <b>liable</b> to receive lashes. This is because he transgressed the prohibition: “Drink no wine nor strong drink, you, nor your sons with you, when you go into the Tent of Meeting” (Leviticus 10:9). He understands that “strong drink” means any intoxicating agent. The verse indicates that one who performs the Temple service while drunk profanes the service, as it states immediately afterward: “And that you may put difference between the holy and the common.”

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>These</b> flaws <b>do not disqualify a person</b> from performing the Temple service, <b>but</b> they do <b>disqualify an animal</b> from being sacrificed: An animal whose mother or offspring were slaughtered that day, as slaughtering it would violate the prohibition against slaughtering the animal <b>itself and its offspring</b> on the same day; <b>a <i>tereifa</i>;</b> one <b>born by caesarean section;</b> one <b>with which a transgression</b> of bestiality <b>was performed; and one that killed a person.</b>

### Part 12
<b>And</b> a priest <b>who marries women by a transgression,</b> e.g., a divorcée or a woman who underwent <i>ḥalitza</i>, is <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service <b>until he vows</b> not to derive <b>benefit from her.</b> The vow ensures that he will divorce her promptly. <b>And</b> a priest <b>who becomes impure</b> through exposure <b>to corpses</b> is <b>disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service <b>until he accepts upon himself</b> a commitment <b>that he will no</b> longer <b>become impure</b> through exposure <b>to corpses.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches about <b>these</b> flaws that <b>do not disqualify a person</b> from performing the Temple service but do disqualify an animal from being sacrificed, one of which is: Itself and its offspring. The Gemara asks: To <b>what</b> possible case involving people is the mishna referring when it differentiates between people and animals <b>with regard to</b> the flaw of: <b>Itself and its offspring?</b>

### Part 14
<b>If we say</b> this is referring to <b>Aaron and his sons,</b> and it means that they may serve in the Temple on the same day, then <b>in the corresponding</b> situation the mishna must be referring to a male <b>goat and its offspring.</b> And <b>does</b> such a prohibition <b>apply? But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The prohibition against slaughtering an animal <b>itself and its offspring</b> on the same day <b>applies to female</b> animals, i.e., a mother and its offspring, <b>but it does not apply to males,</b> i.e., a father and its offspring. <b>Rather,</b> the mishna is referring to a female <b>goat and its offspring,</b> that they may not be slaughtered on the same day. If so, <b>in the corresponding</b> situation <b>here,</b> with regard to the priesthood, the mishna must be referring to <b>a female priest and her son.</b> But <b>is a female priest fit for</b> performing the Temple <b>service</b> at all? Clearly not.

### Part 15
The Gemara explains: <b>Actually,</b> the mishna is referring to <b>Aaron and his sons,</b> and <b>in the corresponding</b> situation <b>here,</b> it is referring to a male <b>goat and its offspring.</b> And as for the difficulty that the prohibition of: Itself and its offspring, applies only to the mother, <b>they said in the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Avin: That is to say,</b> the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Ḥananya, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The prohibition against slaughtering an animal <b>itself and its offspring</b> on the same day <b>applies to female</b> animals <b>but it does not apply to male</b> animals. <b>Ḥananya says: It applies to</b> both <b>male and female</b> animals.

### Part 16
§ The mishna teaches that a priest <b>who marries women</b> by a transgression is disqualified from performing the Temple service until he vows not to derive benefit from her. It is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a priest was performing a sacrificial rite and it was discovered that he married a woman who was forbidden to him, he does not stop performing the rite. Rather, <b>he vows</b> not to derive benefit from her <b>and</b> then continues to <b>perform</b> the rite. Once he has finished, <b>he descends</b> from the altar <b>and divorces</b> his wife.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: How can he be permitted to perform the Temple service before actually divorcing his wife? <b>But let us be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps he will go before a Sage</b> who will <b>dissolve his</b> vow. The Gemara responds: The <i>tanna</i> <b>holds</b> that when one seeks to dissolve a vow, he <b>must delineate</b> the conditions of <b>the vow</b> to the Sage. Accordingly, when the Sage hears that he uttered this vow because he married a woman who was forbidden to him, the Sage will not dissolve it.

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> one <b>must delineate</b> the conditions of <b>the vow. But according to the one who says</b> he does <b>not need to delineate</b> the conditions of <b>the vow, what can be said?</b> The Gemara responds <b>that we administer the vow</b> to the priest <b>in public.</b> Such a vow cannot be dissolved.

### Part 19
The Gemara persists: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> that <b>a vow that was taken in public has no</b> option of <b>nullification</b> by a halakhic authority, <b>but according to the one who says it has</b> the option of <b>nullification, what can be said?</b> The Gemara responds <b>that we administer the vow</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC