
### Part 1
Rather, <b>even if he does not paint both of his eyes as one,</b> any priest with an abnormally sunken nose is considered a <i>ḥarum</i>.

### Part 2
§ The mishna teaches that if both of one’s eyes are above or <b>both of his eyes</b> are <b>below,</b> he is disqualified from performing the Temple service. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> does the mishna mean when it mentions a priest wherein <b>both of his eyes</b> are <b>above</b> or <b>both of his eyes</b> are <b>below? If we say</b> that the phrase: <b>Both of his eyes</b> are <b>above,</b> means <b>that he</b> constantly <b>gazes upward,</b> and the phrase: <b>Both of his eyes</b> are <b>below,</b> means <b>that</b> he constantly <b>gazes downward,</b> then the case where <b>one of his eyes</b> is <b>above and one of his eyes</b> is <b>below</b> must similarly mean <b>that he gazes</b> with <b>one of his eyes downward and one of his eyes upward.</b> But if so, <b>this is</b> identical to the next case in the mishna, that one <b>sees</b> both <b>the room</b> on the ground floor <b>and the upper story as one.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> the phrase: <b>Both of his eyes</b> are <b>above,</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> his eyes <b>are situated above</b> their normal place, and the phrase: <b>Both of his eyes</b> are <b>below,</b> is referring to a case <b>where</b> his eyes <b>are situated below</b> their normal place. Similarly, the case where <b>one of his eyes</b> is <b>above and one of his eyes</b> is <b>below</b> is <b>where one of his eyes is situated above and one of his eyes</b> is situated <b>below. And</b> the mishna adds that in a case where his eyes <b>are situated in their</b> proper <b>arrangement as well, but he sees the room</b> on the ground floor <b>and the upper story as one,</b> he too is considered blemished.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states with regard to blemishes that disqualify priests: “Or a cataract or a <i>tevallul</i> in his eye” (Leviticus 21:20). Since it is obvious that a cataract or a <i>tevallul</i> can occur only in one’s eyes, why does the verse state: In his eye? The term <b>“in his eye”</b> indicates that <b>any</b> blemish <b>that is in his eye</b> disqualifies him from performing the Temple service. <b>From here</b> the Sages <b>stated:</b> If <b>both of his eyes</b> are <b>below</b> or <b>both of his eyes</b> are <b>above,</b> or if <b>one of his eyes</b> is <b>above and one of his eyes</b> is <b>below,</b> or if <b>he sees the room and the upper story as one, or</b> if <b>when he speaks with his friend another</b> person <b>says: He is looking at me,</b> he is blemished and is disqualified from performing the Temple service.

### Part 5
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: When it is stated that <b>a blind man [<i>iver</i>]</b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service (see Leviticus 21:18), this applies <b>whether</b> he is <b>blind in both of his eyes or blind in one of his eyes.</b> With regard to a priest who cannot see due to <b>pale spots</b> on the eye <b>or</b> due to <b>tears</b> streaming from the eye <b>that are constant, from where</b> is it derived that he is disqualified? <b>The</b> same <b>verse states: “A blind man [<i>ish iver</i>].”</b> The superfluous word “<i>ish</i>” serves to include these conditions as well.

### Part 6
<b>Rava says: Why do I</b> need <b>the Merciful One to write</b> the terms <b>“man,” “blind,” “cataract,” “<i>tevallul</i>,”</b> and <b>“in his eye”</b> (Leviticus 21:18, 20)? All these <b>are necessary, as had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>“blind,”</b> then one might say that a blind person is disqualified <b>because</b> his eyes <b>are not in</b> their sockets <b>at all,</b> i.e., they were enucleated. <b>But</b> in the case of a priest with <b>pale spots</b> on the eye <b>or tears</b> streaming from the eye <b>that are constant, where</b> his eyes <b>are</b> still <b>in</b> their sockets but he cannot see, perhaps he is <b>not</b> considered blemished. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One wrote “man”</b> to include these conditions as well.

### Part 7
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>“man,”</b> one might have thought that only total blindness disqualifies a priest, <b>because he cannot see at all. But</b> if his condition causes merely <b>impaired</b> vision, then he is <b>not</b> considered blemished. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One wrote “cataract”</b> to include conditions of impaired vision as well. <b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only that a priest with <b>a cataract</b> is disqualified, it might have been thought that such a priest is disqualified <b>because</b> his vision is <b>impaired. But</b> if his vision is not impaired but his eyes are <b>mixed,</b> i.e., the black and white parts of his eyes are mixed together, then he is <b>not</b> disqualified. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One wrote “<i>tevallul</i>.”</b>

### Part 8
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>“<i>tevallul</i>,”</b> one might say that this disqualifies a priest <b>because</b> his eyes are <b>mixed. But</b> the Torah does <b>not</b> disqualify a priest <b>due to a deviation</b> from normal appearance, e.g., especially large eyes, or eyes situated higher than normal. Therefore, <b>the Merciful One wrote “in his eye.”</b>

### Part 9
In summary, <b>Rava says: Therefore, all</b> blemishes of the eyes that disqualify a priest <b>on account of dimness,</b> i.e., blindness, <b>are derived from</b> the term <b>“man.”</b> All blemishes of the eyes that are related to vision <b>impairment</b> are derived <b>from “cataract.”</b> All blemishes that are related to parts of the eye being <b>intermingled</b> are derived <b>from “<i>tevallul</i>.”</b> Finally, the disqualification of <b>deviations</b> is derived <b>from “in his eye.”</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that those unable to <b>look at the sun [<i>sakhei shemesh</i>]</b> are disqualified from performing the Temple service. <b>Rav Yosef taught</b> that this is a reference to those who <b>hate the sun [<i>sanei shemesh</i>],</b> i.e., they are incapable of opening their eyes in sunlight. The mishna further states that <b>one whose eyes are different</b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service. In order to illustrate this blemish, <b>Rav Huna pointed</b> with his finger while saying: The term: Different eyes, is referring to an individual wherein <b>one</b> of his eyes is like <b>ours and one</b> of his eyes is like <b>theirs. And</b> since Rav Huna was pointing at Rav Yehuda, who had abnormal eyes, <b>Rav Yehuda took offense.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i> to Rav Huna’s interpretation of one whose eyes are different: When the Sages taught that <b>a <i>shekhavna</i></b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service, they were referring to one <b>whose eyebrows lie</b> flat [<b><i>shokhvim</i></b>] and cover his eyes. When they taught that <b>one whose eyes are different [<i>zagdum</i>]</b> is disqualified, they were referring to a case where <b>one</b> of his eyebrows is <b>black and one</b> is <b>white.</b> The Gemara responds: With regard to <b>any pair</b> of limbs <b>that are not identical to one another,</b> the <b><i>tanna</i></b> of this <i>baraita</i> <b>calls</b> them <b>different.</b>

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches that <b>one whose eyes tear constantly</b> is disqualified from performing the Temple service. The Gemara cites a <i>baraita</i> that defines such an individual: <b>His eyes,</b> i.e., his eyelids, <b>droop</b> and can open only partially, <b>or</b> his eyes are <b>round;</b> his eyes <b>tear,</b> or tears <b>stream</b> from his eyes, or tears <b>flow</b> intensely from them.

### Part 13
The Sages taught in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The <i>zadir</i>, and the <i>lupin</i>, and the <i>tamir</i></b> are disqualified from performing the Temple service. <b><i>Zadir</i></b> is a reference to one <b>whose eyes are strange. <i>Lupin</i></b> is a reference to one <b>with an abundance of eyelashes. <i>Tamir</i></b> is a reference <b>to one whose eyelashes are depleted.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does the <i>tanna</i> <b>teach these</b> cases together <b>with</b> full-fledged <b>blemishes? But didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna: <b>One whose eyelashes have fallen out is disqualified</b> from performing the Temple service <b>due to the appearance</b> of a blemish? Clearly, this is not considered an actual blemish. The Gemara answers that it is <b>not difficult. This</b> mishna is referring to a case <b>where the roots</b> of his eyelashes <b>remain,</b> whereas <b>that</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where the roots do not remain.</b>

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The mishna lists additional blemishes that disqualify a priest from performing the Temple service: If a priest’s <b>eyes are large like those of a calf or small like those of a goose;</b> if <b>his body is</b> disproportionately <b>large</b> relative <b>to his limbs or</b> disproportionately <b>small</b> relative <b>to his limbs;</b> if <b>his nose is</b> disproportionately <b>large</b> relative <b>to his limbs or</b> disproportionately <b>small</b> relative <b>to his limbs,</b> he is disqualified. And <b>the <i>tzomem</i> and the <i>tzome’a</i></b> are also disqualified. <b>What is a <i>tzome’a</i>?</b> It is <b>anyone whose ears are small. And</b> what is <b>the <i>tzomem</i>?</b> It is <b>anyone whose ears are similar to a sponge.</b> If <b>his upper lip protrudes beyond the lower</b> lip or his <b>lower</b> lip <b>protrudes beyond the upper</b> lip, <b>that is a blemish. And one whose teeth fell out is disqualified due to the appearance</b> of a blemish.

### Part 15
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav says: Moses, our teacher, was ten <i>ammot</i></b> tall, <b>as it is stated: “And he spread the tent over the Tabernacle”</b> (Exodus 40:19). <b>Who spread</b> the tent over the Tabernacle? <b>Moses, our teacher, spread it, and it is written</b> with regard to the height of the Tabernacle: <b>“Ten <i>ammot</i> shall be the length of a board”</b> (Exodus 26:16). Moses must have been at least as tall as the Tabernacle itself for him to have spread the tent over it.

### Part 16
<b>Rav Shimi bar Ḥiyya said to Rav: If so, you have rendered Moses, our teacher, a blemished</b> person, <b>as we learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>one’s body is</b> disproportionately <b>large</b> relative <b>to his limbs or</b> disproportionately <b>small</b> relative <b>to his limbs,</b> then he is blemished. A typical person is no more than three arm-lengths [<i>ammot</i>] tall, and yet Moses was apparently ten times taller than the length of his own arm. Rav <b>said to him: Shimi,</b> when I said that Moses was ten <i>ammot</i> tall, I <b>said</b> so <b>in</b> reference to the <b>cubit [<i>amma</i>] of a board</b> used in the building of the Tabernacle. The limbs of Moses were proportional to the rest of his body, but he was indeed ten cubits tall.

### Part 17
The mishna taught that if <b>one’s nose is</b> disproportionately <b>large</b> relative to his limbs or disproportionately small relative to his limbs, he is blemished. The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The measure of disproportion is the size <b>of</b> one’s <b>small finger.</b>

### Part 18
§ The mishna also taught that <b>the <i>tzomem</i> and the <i>tzome’a</i></b> are blemished. The Sages <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The <i>tzime’aḥ</i></b> is <b>also</b> disqualified from performing the Temple service. <b>The Sages did not know what a <i>tzime’aḥ</i></b> is. <b>They heard a certain Arab who was saying: Who wants a <i>tzime’aḥ</i>, and it was found</b> to be <b>a long-eared goat.</b>

### Part 19
The Gemara discusses the <i>halakha</i> of a <i>tzomem</i>, <i>tzome’a</i>, and <i>tzime’aḥ</i> with regard to animals. <b>Rav Ḥisda says: A female goat that has no horns and a female lamb that has horns are fit for</b> sacrificing <b>upon the altar,</b> i.e., they are not considered blemished, despite the fact that they differ from regular female goats and female lambs.

### Part 20
The Gemara notes that <b>this is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>There are matters that</b> appear <b>like blemishes but they are not</b> truly <b>like blemishes, and</b> one may therefore <b>slaughter</b> sacrificial animals <b>on</b> account of <b>them in the Temple,</b> i.e., they are fit for sacrifice despite these blemishes; <b>but</b> if they are firstborn animals, they are <b>not</b> permitted for slaughter <b>in the</b> rest of the <b>country</b> on account of these blemishes, as the unique physical characteristics of these animals are not true blemishes. <b>And these are</b> the blemishes: <b>A female goat that has no horns, and a female lamb that has horns, and the <i>tzime’aḥ</i>, and the <i>tzomem</i>, and the <i>tzome’a</i>.</b>

### Part 21
With regard to the horns of an animal, <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Ameimar says:</b> If <b>the horns</b> of an animal <b>were removed, and their bones,</b> i.e., the bones inside the horns, were removed <b>with them,</b> the animal <b>is unfit</b> for sacrifice. <b>But</b> even so, <b>one may not redeem</b> the animal <b>on account of</b> such blemishes, as they are not full-fledged blemishes. But if <b>the hooves were removed, and their bones,</b> i.e., the portion of the leg to which the hooves are attached, were removed <b>with them, they are unfit</b> for sacrifice <b>and they are</b> even <b>redeemed on account of</b> such blemishes, as they are full-fledged blemishes.

### Part 22
Rav Ḥisda stated that the removal of a horn and its bone is not considered a full-fledged blemish that enables the animal to be redeemed. The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: If <b>the horns or the hooves</b> of an animal <b>were removed, and their</b> respective <b>bones</b> were removed <b>with them, they are unfit and they are redeemed on account of them.</b> The Gemara explains that it is <b>not difficult. This</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where</b> the bone <b>was</b> entirely <b>uprooted,</b> which is a full-fledged blemish on account of which the animal may be redeemed. <b>That</b> statement of Rav Ḥisda is referring to a case <b>where</b> the bones <b>were cut</b> but were not uprooted entirely.

### Part 23
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> in a case <b>where</b> the bones of the animal <b>were cut,</b> is the animal even rendered <b>unfit? And</b> the Gemara <b>raises a contradiction</b> from a mishna (<i>Para</i> 2:2): With regard to a red <b>heifer whose horns and hooves are black,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>one should cut</b> away the black parts so that the heifer remains entirely red. Evidently, cutting away the horns of the heifer does not inflict a blemish upon it. <b>Ze’eiri interpreted</b> the mishna as referring to cutting the horn specifically <b>from above the bone</b> inside it. In such a case, the heifer is not disqualified. Cutting the bone itself does disqualify the animal.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC