
### Part 1
<b>And the other</b> ones, i.e., the Sages from the school of Rav, why don’t they derive the <i>halakha</i> that a firstborn is eaten for two days and one night from that verse? The Gemara answers that <b>if</b> it were derived <b>from there, it</b> would <b>be</b> possible <b>to say</b> that the verse is comparing the <i>halakha</i> of a firstborn to the <b>breast and thigh of a thanks offering,</b> which are eaten for only one day and night.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> one, Rav Yehuda, citing Rav, how does he respond to this? <b>The verse states:</b> “And their flesh shall be yours, as the breast of waving and as the right thigh, <b>it shall be yours”</b> (Numbers 18:18). <b>The verse adds another</b> mention of a form of the term <b>being</b> in the second phrase: “It shall be yours,” to teach <b>that</b> the priest has an additional day to eat <b>a firstborn</b> animal, i.e., that it is compared to the breast and thigh of a peace offering, not to that of a thanks offering.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> ones, the Sages from the school of Rav, how do they respond to this claim? The Gemara answers: With regard to the inference <b>from there, it is</b> possible <b>to say</b> that <b>this</b> phrase: <b>“It shall be yours,” teaches with regard to a blemished firstborn that</b> the owner must <b>give it to the priest.</b> This derivation is necessary, <b>as we have not found this</b> <i>halakha</i> that a blemished firstborn is given to a priest stated explicitly <b>anywhere in the entire Torah.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> one, Rav Yehuda, citing Rav, from where does he derive that a blemished firstborn is given to a priest? The verse <b>states: “And their flesh</b> shall be yours,” in the plural, i.e., <b>both an unblemished</b> firstborn <b>and a blemished</b> firstborn. The Gemara asks: <b>And the other</b> ones, the Sages from the school of Rav, how do they respond? The Gemara answers that they would claim that the term <b>“and their flesh”</b> is written in the plural not because it is referring to blemished animals, but because it <b>is said</b> in reference <b>to those firstborn</b> animals <b>of all the Israelites.</b>

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches: If <b>a blemish developed within its</b> first <b>year,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> for the owner <b>to maintain</b> the animal <b>for the entire twelve months;</b> if a blemish developed after twelve months have passed, it is permitted for the owner to maintain the animal for only thirty days. <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: With regard to <b>what</b> case <b>is</b> the mishna <b>speaking?</b> Does the mishna mean that if <b>a blemish developed within</b> the animal’s first <b>year,</b> the owner is <b>permitted to maintain</b> the animal <b>for the entire twelve months, and after</b> the animal’s first <b>year also</b> for another <b>thirty</b> days? <b>Or perhaps</b> the mishna is referring to two different situations, i.e., in a case <b>where the blemish developed within</b> the animal’s first <b>year</b> the owner is <b>permitted to maintain</b> the animal <b>for the entire twelve months, but nothing more; and</b> in a case <b>where it developed</b> a blemish <b>after</b> one <b>year, he is permitted to maintain it for only thirty</b> days.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a firstborn in the present</b> time, when there is no Temple and the animal cannot be brought as an offering, <b>until</b> it has developed a blemish that <b>can be shown to an expert,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> for the owner <b>to maintain</b> the animal <b>for two or three years. But once</b> the animal develops a blemish <b>that can be shown to an expert,</b> if <b>the blemish developed within its</b> first <b>year,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> for the owner <b>to maintain it for the entire twelve months.</b>

### Part 7
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>After</b> the animal’s first <b>year,</b> the owner <b>does not have permission to maintain it even</b> for <b>one day, or even one hour. But due to</b> the mitzva of <b>returning a lost item to the owners,</b> i.e., to give the owner time to find a priest and give him the animal, the Sages <b>said:</b> The owner <b>is permitted to maintain</b> the animal for <b>thirty days.</b> The Gemara assumes that in its latter clause the <i>baraita</i> is still addressing a blemish that developed in the first year. If so, the thirty days evidently apply in such a case.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But still, let the dilemma be raised</b> with regard to that <i>baraita</i> itself: Are the <b>thirty days</b> granted in a case where the animal develops a blemish <b>after its</b> first <b>year? Or perhaps</b> these thirty days are granted if it develops a blemish <b>before</b> the end of <b>its</b> first <b>year.</b> In other words, when the <i>baraita</i> states: After its first year, this can be interpreted as referring to an animal whose blemish developed only then, or to one that had a blemish earlier and subsequently reached the end of its first year.

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: If the animal <b>developed a blemish on the fifteenth day within its</b> first <b>year,</b> i.e., fifteen days before the end of its year, <b>one completes for it fifteen days after its year. Conclude from</b> this <i>baraita</i> that the owner may maintain a firstborn for an additional thirty days if it develops the blemish during its first year. The Gemara adds that <b>this supports</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Elazar, as Rabbi Elazar says:</b> With regard to an animal that developed a blemish toward the end of its year, <b>one gives</b> the owner <b>thirty days from the time that</b> the animal <b>developed a blemish.</b>

### Part 10
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: From where</b> is it derived with regard <b>to a firstborn</b> animal <b>that developed a blemish during its</b> first <b>year that one gives</b> the owner <b>thirty days after its year?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “You shall eat it before the Lord your God year by year</b> in the place that the Lord shall choose, you and your household” (Deuteronomy 15:20). It is derived from here that it may be eaten for one year and for another year. <b>Which are</b> the <b>days that are considered</b> to be a significant part of <b>a year? You must say these are thirty days,</b> which in certain respects are considered a complete year. This indicates that such a firstborn may be eaten for up to thirty days beyond the first twelve months.

### Part 11
According to this version of the discussion, the Gemara <b>raises an objection:</b> It is taught in a <i>baraita</i> that if the animal <b>developed a blemish on the fifteenth day within its year,</b> i.e., fifteen days before the end of its year, <b>one completes for it fifteen days after its year.</b> This indicates that with regard to <b>completing</b> a total of thirty days from the time the animal developed the blemish, <b>yes,</b> the owner may continue to maintain the animal in such a case. But if the blemish developed earlier, the <i>baraita</i> does <b>not give him</b> an extra thirty days beyond the conclusion of the year. The Gemara concludes: <b>The refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar</b> is indeed <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 12
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slaughters the firstborn</b> animal <b>and</b> only then <b>shows its blemish</b> to an expert to determine whether it is a blemish, and it was established by the expert that it is in fact a blemish that renders its slaughter permitted, <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> it <b>permitted</b> for a priest to derive benefit from the firstborn. <b>Rabbi Meir says: Since it was slaughtered not according to</b> the ruling of <b>an expert,</b> it is <b>prohibited.</b> In a case involving <b>one who is not an expert, and he examined the firstborn</b> animal <b>and it was slaughtered on the basis of his</b> ruling, <b>that</b> animal <b>must be buried,</b> and the non-expert <b>must pay</b> compensation to the priest <b>from his property.</b>

### Part 13
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says:</b> The dispute in the mishna between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yehuda does not apply in the case of a blemish <b>on the cornea of the eye.</b> In that situation <b>everyone agrees that</b> the animal <b>is prohibited, because</b> such blemishes in the eye <b>change</b> after the animal’s death, which means that there is no way of determining at that late stage whether it had been a permanent blemish or a temporary one. <b>They disagree only with regard to blemishes that</b> are <b>on the</b> animal’s <b>body,</b> which do not change after death. <b>As Rabbi Meir holds</b> that <b>we issue a decree</b> prohibiting the animal in the case of <b>blemishes that</b> are <b>on the</b> animal’s <b>body due to</b> the case of blemishes <b>on the cornea, and Rabbi Yehuda holds</b> that <b>we do not issue a decree</b> with regard to <b>blemishes that</b> are <b>on the</b> animal’s <b>body due to</b> the case of blemishes <b>on the cornea.</b>

### Part 14
<b>This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>one who slaughters a firstborn</b> animal <b>and</b> afterward <b>shows its blemishes</b> to an expert, <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> If the blemish is <b>on the cornea of the eye</b> the animal is <b>prohibited, because</b> such blemishes <b>change.</b> But <b>in</b> the case of <b>blemishes on its body</b> the animal is <b>permitted, because</b> these blemishes <b>do not change. Rabbi Meir says: Both this,</b> blemishes on the eye, <b>and that,</b> blemishes on the body, <b>are prohibited because they change.</b> The Gemara inquires: Could it <b>enter your mind</b> that blemishes on the body are prohibited <b>because they change? Do blemishes on the body change</b> after the death of the animal? <b>Rather,</b> the blemishes on the body are prohibited <b>due to</b> a decree based on the case of blemishes on the cornea, <b>which change.</b>

### Part 15
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC