
### Part 1
<b>Even the ninth</b> that was accidentall y designated as the tenth <b>is not sanctified</b> and may be eaten before it develops a blemish, <b>unless the name of the tenth is removed from</b> the tenth animal, i.e., if the owner erred also in that he called the tenth animal the ninth. <b>And logical</b> reasoning <b>leads</b> to this conclusion.

### Part 2
The Gemara explains the logical reasoning: The <i>halakha</i> is that if one designated the ninth animal as the tenth, and the tenth as the tenth, and the eleventh as the tenth, then the eleventh is not consecrated. This is because in any situation where the name of the tenth was not removed from the tenth animal, the eleventh, which was called the tenth, is not consecrated. <b>And if the eleventh</b> animal, <b>which becomes sanctified to be sacrificed</b> as a peace offering, as stated in the mishna on 60a, <b>is sanctified only if the name</b> of the <b>tenth is removed from</b> the tenth animal, then with regard to the <b>ninth</b> animal, <b>which does not become sanctified to be sacrificed</b> but is eaten once it develops a blemish, <b>is it not logical that if the name</b> of the <b>tenth is removed from</b> the actual tenth animal, then <b>yes,</b> the ninth animal has sanctity and may be eaten only once it develops a blemish, <b>but if not,</b> then it is <b>not</b> sanctified at all and may be eaten even without a blemish?

### Part 3
The Gemara rejects this logical derivation: <b>That</b> claim itself <b>provides</b> support for the contrary opinion. With regard to <b>the eleventh</b> animal, <b>which becomes sanctified</b> with a stringent sanctity <b>to be sacrificed</b> as a peace offering, <b>if the name</b> of the <b>tenth is removed from</b> the actual tenth animal, then <b>yes,</b> the eleventh becomes sanctified, but <b>if</b> the designation of being the tenth is <b>not</b> removed from the tenth, then the eleventh does <b>not</b> become sanctified. But with regard to the <b>ninth</b> animal, <b>which does not become sanctified</b> with the stringent sanctity <b>to be sacrificed,</b> one can say that <b>even though the name of</b> the <b>tenth</b> animal <b>is not removed from</b> the tenth animal, nevertheless the ninth becomes sanctified.

### Part 4
<b>Alternatively,</b> there is another distinction between the two cases. With regard to the <b>eleventh</b> animal, <b>which</b> is sanctified only after the <b>tenth</b> animal has been <b>selected,</b> as it has emerged from the pen, one can claim that <b>if the name</b> of the <b>tenth is removed from</b> the tenth animal, then <b>yes,</b> the eleventh becomes sanctified, but <b>if</b> the name of the tenth is <b>not</b> removed from the tenth animal, the eleventh does <b>not</b> become sanctified.

### Part 5
But with regard to the <b>ninth</b> animal, <b>which</b> becomes sanctified at a time <b>when</b> the <b>tenth</b> animal <b>has not yet been selected,</b> as the tenth animal has not yet left the pen, if the owner accidentally designated that ninth animal as the tenth it becomes sanctified, <b>and</b> in such a case this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though the name</b> of the <b>tenth</b> animal <b>is not removed from</b> the actual tenth animal. The Gemara adds that there is <b>nothing more</b> to add to that explanation, and the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Shimon is rejected.

### Part 6
<b>Rava says: A tally fit</b> to reach ten <b>exempts</b> the animals that have been counted from being tithed. The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> does <b>Rava</b> derive <b>this</b> <i>halakha</i>? <b>If we say</b> he derives it <b>from that which we learned</b> in the mishna, this is problematic. The Gemara cites the relevant statement of the mishna: If before one completed tithing his animals, <b>one of</b> those <b>counted jumped</b> back into the pen <b>among</b> the animals that were not yet counted, <b>all those</b> in the pen <b>are exempt</b> from being tithed, as each of them could be the animal that was already counted. The Gemara clarifies: With regard to this <i>halakha</i> concerning which the <b>counted</b> animals <b>themselves are exempt,</b> is it <b>not</b> because they were counted with <b>a tally fit</b> to reach ten?

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>But perhaps</b> this is referring to a case <b>where</b> the tenth animal also came out of the pen, and the owner <b>tithed</b> it <b>on behalf</b> of the others that were counted. If so, they are not exempt simply because they were counted with a tally fit to reach ten but because they were actually tithed.

### Part 8
The Gemara counters: <b>You cannot say</b> that the mishna is addressing a situation where one of the animals for which tithe had already been separated jumped back in, as the latter clause of the mishna <b>teaches:</b> If one <b>of</b> those animals that had been <b>tithed</b> jumped back into the pen <b>among</b> the animals that were not yet counted. This indicates that in the situation described in the first clause the animals had been counted but not yet tithed.

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects this claim: <b>But perhaps, what</b> is the meaning of the term: Animals that had been <b>tithed?</b> This is referring <b>specifically</b> to the tenth animal, which is the actual <b>tithe.</b> And accordingly, the language of the mishna <b>is also precise, as it teaches:</b> All the animals <b>must graze</b> until they become unfit for sacrifice, and thereafter they may be eaten in their blemished state by their owner. Concerning animal tithe, this <i>halakha</i> applies specifically to the tenth animal when it reentered the pen, and not to the other nine. Therefore, the Gemara has not yet found a source for Rava’s <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rava says the verse states:</b> “Whatever <b>passes</b> under the rod, the tenth shall be sacred to the Lord” (Leviticus 27:32). This indicates that only an animal that will pass under the rod must be tithed, <b>but not</b> an animal <b>that</b> has <b>already passed</b> under the rod. Rava elaborates: <b>What</b> it the meaning of: An animal <b>that</b> has <b>already passed? If</b> it means <b>that one has separated tithe for it, is it necessary</b> for a verse <b>to state</b> this? Of course an animal that has been tithed does not need to be tithed again. <b>Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where</b> the animals <b>have become exempt through a tally fit</b> to reach ten? <b>Conclude from this</b> that a tally fit to reach ten renders an animal exempt from being tithed.

### Part 11
It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava:</b> In a case where <b>one had ten lambs and he brought them into the pen and counted five, and</b> then <b>one of them died, if</b> one <b>of those</b> animals <b>that had been counted died, he</b> continues to <b>count and completes</b> the tithe <b>for them. But if</b> one <b>of</b> the animals <b>that had not been counted died,</b> those animals that had <b>been counted are exempt, and</b> those animals <b>that</b> had <b>not been counted combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering.</b>

### Part 12
§ <b>And Rava says:</b> In a case where <b>one had fourteen lambs and brought them into the pen, and six</b> of the lambs <b>emerged</b> first, <b>through this opening</b> on one side of the pen, <b>and four</b> lambs emerged afterward <b>through that opening</b> on the other side of the pen, <b>and four</b> lambs <b>remained there, if those four</b> that remained came out <b>by the opening</b> through which <b>the six</b> lambs <b>emerged, he takes</b> the last <b>one of them</b> as animal tithe. <b>And the remainder,</b> i.e., the four that emerged through the other opening, <b>combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering.</b>

### Part 13
<b>But if not,</b> i.e., if the last four remained in the pen or came out through the same opening through which the other four lambs emerged, then the <b>six</b> that emerged first <b>are exempt</b> from animal tithe, as they were part of a tally fit to reach ten; <b>and</b> the <b>four</b> that came out next, from the other opening, and the last <b>four, combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering.</b>

### Part 14
Rava continues: In a case where <b>four</b> of the fourteen lambs <b>emerged</b> first, <b>through this opening</b> on one side of the pen, <b>and six</b> lambs came out afterward <b>through that</b> other <b>opening, and four</b> lambs <b>remained there, if those four</b> that remained come out <b>by the opening</b> through which <b>the six</b> lambs <b>emerged,</b> the owner <b>takes</b> the last <b>one of them</b> as animal tithe, <b>and the remainder,</b> i.e., the four that went out of the other opening, <b>are exempt,</b> as they were part of a tally fit to reach ten. <b>But if not,</b> i.e., if the last four emerge via the same opening as the first four, the <b>four</b> that came out first <b>and</b> the <b>six</b> that emerged through the other opening <b>are exempt,</b> as there were enough lambs left to complete the ten when all these left. <b>And</b> the <b>four</b> that went out last <b>combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering.</b>

### Part 15
Rava continues: In a case where <b>four</b> of the fourteen lambs <b>emerged</b> first, <b>through this opening, and four</b> lambs came out afterward <b>through that</b> other <b>opening, and six</b> lambs <b>remained there, if those six</b> that remained come out <b>through</b> any <b>one opening, he takes one of them</b> as animal tithe, <b>and the remainder,</b> i.e., the four that went out of the other opening, <b>are exempt,</b> as they were part of a tally fit to reach ten. <b>But if not,</b> i.e., if the six remain in the pen, the <b>four</b> sheep that emerged on this side and the four that came out on that side <b>are exempt. And</b> the <b>six</b> that remain <b>combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering.</b>

### Part 16
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> Rava <b>teaching us?</b> Is he teaching <b>that</b> any animal that comes out of the pen as part of <b>a tally fit</b> to reach ten is <b>exempt? But didn’t Rava say</b> that already <b>once?</b> The Gemara answers: Rava’s statement is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that only if the animals emerge as part of <b>a tally</b> that is <b>definitely fit</b> to reach ten do <b>we say</b> they are exempt. But if they come out as part of <b>a tally</b> with regard to which it is <b>uncertain</b> whether it is <b>fit</b> to reach ten, such as in this case <b>where</b> the remaining animals <b>are fit to</b> come out <b>here and are fit to</b> come out <b>there,</b> and therefore the first animals might not be part of a counting that will reach ten, <b>we do not say</b> they are exempt. Therefore, Rava <b>teaches us</b> that even a tally that is uncertain to reach ten exempts the animals from tithe.

### Part 17
§ <b>And Rava says:</b> If one <b>had fifteen lambs, he may not say: I will separate ten and bring them into the pen, and I will take one of them</b> as animal tithe, <b>and the rest</b> will be <b>exempt. Rather,</b> he must <b>bring</b> them all <b>into the pen, and remove ten</b> of them by causing them to emerge from the opening, <b>and take one of them,</b> i.e., the one that emerges tenth, as animal tithe. <b>And the remainder combine</b> with animals born later, to be tithed <b>in another</b> designated time of <b>gathering. This is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one <b>had fifteen lambs,</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC