
### Part 1
<b>Why,</b> then, <b>is</b> it <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the verse: “Then your valuation shall be for <b>the male”</b> (Leviticus 27:3), includes one whose status as a male is certain <b>but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> as it is referring only to a hermaphrodite, which is a distinct entity.

### Part 2
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> the continuation of that <i>baraita</i>: One <b>might</b> have thought that these <b>shall not be</b> valuated according to <b>the valuation of a man, but</b> they <b>shall be</b> valuated according to <b>the valuation of a woman.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “The male,”</b> and in the following verse it states: “And <b>if</b> she is <b>a female,</b> then your valuation shall be thirty shekels” (Leviticus 27:4), indicating only one whose status as a male or female is certain, <b>but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite,</b> which are categorized as neither male nor female. The Gemara again answers: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> as it is referring only to a hermaphrodite.

### Part 3
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i> discussing the peace offering, with regard to which it states: <b>“Whether male or female”</b> (Leviticus 3:1). This indicates: Only <b>a definite male</b> or <b>a definite female, but not a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite.</b> Yet again the Gemara responds: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i>: It states with regard to a burnt offering from cattle: <b>“A male”</b> (Leviticus 1:3), from which it can be inferred: <b>But not a female. When it says below,</b> with regard to a burnt offering from sheep: <b>“A male”</b> (Leviticus 1:10), a second time, it is difficult to understand, <b>as</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state</b> this. <b>Why</b> must <b>the verse state</b> “a male” again? This serves <b>to exclude a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite,</b> which are disqualified as burnt offerings. The Gemara answers: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a <i>baraita</i> discussing the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual impurity imparted by a bird in the throat: Any bird that was not slaughtered in the proper manner, i.e., in its neck with a knife, has the status of a carcass. This carcass renders the one who eats it impure when it is in his throat. Bird offerings, which are killed by pinching the nape of the neck with a fingernail, are the exception to this principle, and they do not impart impurity. With regard to a bird <b>that is worshipped</b> as a deity, <b>or one set aside</b> for idol worship, <b>or one</b> given as <b>payment</b> to a prostitute, <b>or one</b> that was given as <b>the price</b> of a dog (see Deuteronomy 23:19), <b>and</b> similarly with regard to a bird that is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite,</b> if one killed any of them by pinching, they are ritually impure, as they are disqualified as offerings, and the pinching does not purify them. Therefore, <b>they all render</b> a person and the <b>garments</b> he is wearing <b>ritually impure</b> if an olive-bulk of them comes into contact <b>with the throat</b> while eating.

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> If one pinched the neck of <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite, it does not render</b> the person and <b>the garments</b> he is wearing <b>ritually impure</b> when they are <b>in the throat,</b> as they are in fact fit to be sacrificed. <b>As Rabbi Eliezer would say: Wherever it is stated</b> explicitly in the Torah: <b>“Male,” and: “Female,” you</b> should <b>exclude a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite from among them,</b> as their status is uncertain. This applies to animal offerings, with regard to which the Torah states “male” and “female.”

### Part 7
<b>But</b> in the case of <b>a bird</b> offering, <b>since “male” and “female” are not stated with regard to it,</b> but simply doves and pigeons are stated with regard to it, <b>you do not exclude a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite from among them,</b> as they are fit for the altar. Now if a <i>tumtum</i> is considered either definitely a male or a female, then why does the first <i>tanna</i> disqualify it from being sacrificed? The Gemara again replies: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: An animal with a condition that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>], and</b> prohibited <b>diverse kinds</b> of livestock, <b>and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section,</b> and an animal that is <b>a <i>tumtum</i> or a hermaphrodite do not become consecrated and do not render</b> another animal <b>consecrated</b> in their place.

### Part 9
<b>And Shmuel says</b> in explanation: <b>They do not become consecrated by substitution,</b> i.e., if one sought to substitute one of these animals for a sacrificial animal, it does not become sacred. <b>And</b> if one of these was born to a sacrificial animal, <b>they do not render</b> a non-sacred animal <b>consecrated</b> in a case where one wanted <b>to render</b> it <b>a substitute</b> for them. And if a <i>tumtum</i> is either a male or female, why would it not become consecrated and render another animal consecrated? The Gemara answers: <b>Omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a slightly different version of that <i>baraita</i>. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> There are <b>five</b> types of animals that <b>do not become consecrated and do not render</b> another animal <b>consecrated, and they are: A <i>tereifa</i>, and</b> prohibited <b>diverse kinds</b> of livestock, <b>and</b> an animal <b>born by caesarean section, and</b> an animal that is <b>a <i>tumtum</i>, and a hermaphrodite. And if you would say: Here too, omit from this</b> <i>baraita</i> <b>a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> then <b>there are</b> only <b>four</b> types of animals listed in the <i>baraita</i>. The Gemara answers: <b>Remove</b> the mention of <b>a <i>tumtum</i> and</b> in its place <b>insert an orphan,</b> i.e., an animal born after the death of its mother, which is also disqualified as a sacrifice.

### Part 11
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that this question of whether a <i>tumtum</i> is a distinct entity or is definitely either a male or female <b>is the subject of</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>.</b> As it is taught in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Ilai says in the name of Rabbi Yishmael: A hermaphrodite is a firstborn, and</b> it comes <b>with its blemish; and the Rabbis say: It is not imbued with sanctity. Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda says in the name of Rabbi Shimon:</b> The verse <b>states: “Males”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:19), <b>and wherever it is stated: Male,”</b> this serves <b>to exclude only a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite.</b> Since according to Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda it is necessary for a verse to exclude a <i>tumtum</i>, like a hermaphrodite, from the category of a male, evidently in his opinion a <i>tumtum</i> is not considered to be one whose status as a male is uncertain but a distinct entity.

### Part 12
The Gemara analyzes this <i>baraita</i>: <b>And if you would say:</b> Here too, <b>omit from</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> then the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Yehuda is</b> the same as that of <b>the Rabbis,</b> as they too maintain that a hermaphrodite is not sacred. <b>Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> that the difference <b>between them</b> is with regard to the status of <b>a <i>tumtum</i>, as the first <i>tanna</i>,</b> i.e., the Rabbis, <b>holds: It is not imbued with sanctity,</b> and they are referring specifically <b>to a hermaphrodite,</b> which was the subject of Rabbi Ilai’s statement, <b>but a <i>tumtum</i> is an uncertain</b> case, <b>and</b> therefore <b>it is sacred due to uncertainty. And Rabbi Shimon</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC