
### Part 1
The Gemara answers: It must be buried <b>in order to publicize that</b> the animal <b>is exempt from</b> having its future offspring counted <b>a firstborn.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara notes with regard to the ruling of the mishna that the animal is exempt from having any future offspring counted as firstborn: That is <b>to say that</b> the expelled mass <b>is a full-fledged offspring. But</b> if so, <b>why doesn’t it impart</b> ritual <b>impurity, neither through</b> physical <b>contact nor through carrying? Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is <b>due to</b> the halakhic <b>nullification</b> of a forbidden substance <b>in a majority</b> of permitted substances that the Sages <b>touched upon it,</b> in order to exclude it from impurity through contact or carrying. In other words, the fetus is in fact considered a full-fledged offspring, but it is does not impart impurity because it is nullified by the rest of the congealed mass.

### Part 3
The Gemara comments: <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan follows his</b> line of <b>reasoning</b> in this regard, <b>as Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov and Rabbi Shimon</b> both <b>said the same thing,</b> i.e., they both issued rulings based on the same principle. The relevant statement of <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov</b> is <b>that which we said</b> previously, i.e., that the expelled mass does not impart ritual impurity because the fetus is nullified by the majority.

### Part 4
And <b>what is</b> the statement of <b>Rabbi Shimon</b> to which Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring? It is <b>as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Nidda</i> 18a): If a woman miscarried and <b>the afterbirth</b> is <b>in the house, the house is impure.</b> The reason is <b>not that the afterbirth</b> itself has the status of an <b>offspring, but that there is no afterbirth without an offspring</b> within it, even if it is undetected. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> The <b>offspring disintegrated before it emerged</b> with the afterbirth. Consequently, the house is not rendered impure, because the disintegrated fetus is nullified by the majority.

### Part 5
§ The Gemara continues discussing the ritual impurity imparted by a fetus. <b>We learned</b> in a mishna <b>elsewhere</b> (<i>Oholot</i> 7:4): If a fetus dies in its mother’s womb, it imparts ritual impurity from when the womb opens. Yet <b>deceased fetuses do not</b> impart ritual impurity in this manner even during <b>the opening of the womb, until the head</b> of the fetus is <b>round like</b> the size of <b>a skein [<i>pika</i>]</b> of yarn. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> the meaning of: <b>Like a skein? Rav Huna said:</b> It means <b>like a skein of woolen</b> yarn. <b>Ḥiyya bar Rav said to Rav Huna: My teacher, explain</b> your statement: Were you referring to a skein <b>of warp</b> threads <b>or</b> a skein <b>of</b> the thicker <b>woof</b> threads?

### Part 6
Rav Huna <b>said to him:</b> It <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Oholot</i> 8:5): Deceased fetuses do not impart ritual impurity until the head of the fetus is the size of <b>a skein of warp</b> threads; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The head must be the size of a skein <b>of woof</b> threads. <b>Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok, says:</b> The fetus imparts ritual impurity <b>from</b> the time that <b><i>tefifiyot</i> are seen</b> near the opening of the womb. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> are <b><i>tefifiyot</i>? Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says in the name of Rabbi Eliezer, son of Rabbi Tzadok: This</b> is <b>how they would explain it in Jerusalem:</b> <i>Tefifiyot</i> are <b>like</b> the folds of skin that form when <b>a mule bends down to urinate, and</b> the area near the womb <b>appears</b> as <b>a skein</b> emerging <b>from within a skein.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Huna says: I heard two</b> different <i>halakhot</i> with regard to <b>skeins: One</b> involves a skein <b>of warp</b> threads <b>and</b> the other <b>one</b> involves a skein <b>of woof</b> threads, <b>and I do not have</b> the knowledge <b>to explain</b> to which matter these <i>halakhot</i> refer. <b>When Rav Dimi came</b> to Babylonia from Eretz Yisrael, he said that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> With regard to <b>skeins, I heard three</b> different <i>halakhot</i>: <b>One</b> involves a skein <b>of warp</b> threads, <b>and one</b> a skein <b>of woof</b> threads, <b>and one a large skein</b> used by <b>sack makers, and I do not have</b> the knowledge <b>to explain</b> to which matter these <i>halakhot</i> refer. <b>When Ravin came</b> to Babylonia from Eretz Yisrael, <b>he explained this in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan:</b> To impart ritual impurity, the head of a fetus in the womb <b>of a woman</b> must be the size <b>of</b> a skein <b>of warp</b> threads, and the head <b>of an animal</b> fetus must be the size <b>of</b> a skein <b>of woof</b> threads.

### Part 8
As for the <i>halakha</i> involving <b>a large skein</b> used by <b>sack makers,</b> it is <b>as we learned</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (<i>Tosefta</i>, <i>Kelim Bava Metzia</i> 7:1): For it to impart ritual impurity, <b>a clod</b> of earth <b>that comes from an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse [<i>beit haperas</i>],</b> or <b>from the land of the</b> gentile <b>nations,</b> must be of the <b>measure of a large skein</b> used <b>by sack makers,</b> the size of <b>which is like the seal of large sacks [<i>martzofin</i>]. And</b> an item of <b>this</b> size <b>is</b> also <b>found on the top side of the seal of a Bethlehem jug.</b>

### Part 9
§ <b>Reish Lakish says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda Nesia: One who purchases</b> fish <b>brine from one who is unreliable with regard to ritual impurity [<i>am ha’aretz</i>],</b> who must purify it due to the concern that it was rendered impure while in the seller’s possession, <b>brings it into contact with</b> the <b>water</b> of a ritual bath so that the water touches the brine, <b>and</b> it is thereby rendered <b>pure.</b>

### Part 10
Reish Lakish explains: The brine is pure <b>whichever</b> way <b>you</b> look at it: <b>If water is</b> the <b>majority</b> of the brine mixture, <b>once he brought</b> the brine <b>into contact</b> with the ritual bath, the water in the brine mixture <b>became pure</b> and the impurity of the brine is nullified by the majority of pure water. <b>And if the majority is</b> the <b>brine</b> excreted by the fish itself it is also pure, as <b>brine</b> alone <b>is not susceptible to ritual impurity.</b> Consequently, <b>what</b> impurity <b>is there?</b> Any impurity is <b>due</b> only <b>to that minority of water</b> in the mixture, and <b>that</b> water <b>is nullified by the majority</b> of brine.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that one should use that method of purification <b>only</b> if he wishes <b>to dip his bread in</b> the brine. <b>But for</b> cooking in <b>a pot</b> with other water this method is <b>not</b> effective, as the liquid of the <b>type</b> that was nullified, i.e., the water in the brine, <b>found its</b> own <b>type,</b> the water in the pot, <b>and is revived</b> in its impure state, as the water which was previously only a minority of the mixture is now the majority. <b>Rav Dimi was sitting and saying this <i>halakha</i>. Abaye said to</b> Rav Dimi: <b>But does nullified impurity return and revive</b> in its impure state? Rav Dimi <b>said to him: And you, do you not hold</b> that this is the <i>halakha</i>? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Teruma</i> 5:2): With regard to <b>a <i>se’a</i>of impure <i>teruma</i> that fell</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC