
### Part 1
<b>What, is it not</b> referring <b>to the fetus</b> when the <i>baraita</i> states that he is not permitted to sell it? The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> it is referring <b>to the animal</b> itself that he may not sell to the gentile, and that is why he is penalized.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach:</b> The Sages penalize him up to ten times <b>its value [<i>damav</i>],</b> in masculine form, indicating that it is referring to the fetus and not the mother? The Gemara responds: <b>Teach</b> the following wording in the <i>baraita</i>: The Sages penalize him up to ten times <b>its value [<i>dameha</i>],</b> in feminine form. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t it teach: He gives all of its value to the priest? And if</b> it is referring to <b>the animal</b> and not the firstborn, <b>what is the relevance of</b> the priest? The Gemara answers: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the Jew <b>gave</b> the gentile <b>a pregnant animal to fatten it</b> in order to divide the profits as well as the offspring. <b>Since we penalize him for</b> selling <b>the animal</b> in a prohibited manner, <b>we penalize him with regard to the fetus</b> as well.

### Part 3
<b>Rav Ashi says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> the sale to a gentile of <b>a damaged</b> animal <b>permitted, because it is incapable of being cured.</b> This statement indicates that if it is <b>capable of being cured,</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>deems</b> its sale <b>prohibited. And a fetus</b> is <b>also similar to</b> one who is <b>able to be cured,</b> as it ultimately will be capable of working. <b>Learn from it</b> that Rabbi Yehuda deems the sale of a fetus to a gentile prohibited.

### Part 4
<b>And there are those who teach</b> this discussion as referring <b>to</b> the statement in <b>the mishna:</b> With regard to <b>one who sells</b> the fetus of his donkey <b>to</b> a gentile, <b>although he is not permitted</b> to sell a large animal to a gentile, it is exempt from the obligations of firstborn status. The discussion then proceeded as follows: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>the mishna is not in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, as we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Avoda Zara</i> 14b): <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> the sale <b>of a damaged</b> animal <b>permitted</b> because it is incapable of performing labor. The <i>halakha</i> is presumably the same with regard to a fetus, which is also not capable of performing labor.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>You</b> may <b>even say</b> that it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as it is permitted to sell <b>a damaged</b> animal because <b>that is not its natural</b> state; it is defective and is therefore not included in the prohibition against selling large livestock. But with regard to <b>a fetus, since it is</b> in <b>its natural</b> state, and will become capable of working after growing up, perhaps it is not considered damaged, as it is not defective.

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that in the case of <b>one who receives an animal from a gentile</b> to care for and receives a portion of the offspring in exchange for his work, <b>and it gave birth</b> to a firstborn, <b>they assess its value, and</b> the Jew <b>gives half of its value to the priest</b> to redeem his portion, which is sanctified by the firstborn status. <b>And</b> in the case of <b>one who gives</b> the gentile an animal <b>in receivership even though he is not permitted</b> to do so, the Sages <b>penalize him</b> by requiring that he purchase the gentile’s portion of the animal for <b>up to ten</b> times <b>its value, and he gives all of its value to the priest. What, is it not</b> referring <b>to the fetus</b> when the <i>baraita</i> states that he is not permitted to sell it? The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> it is referring <b>to the animal</b> itself that he may not sell to the gentile, and that is why he is penalized.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teach:</b> The Sages penalize him up to ten times <b>its value [<i>damav</i>],</b> in masculine form, indicating that it is referring to the fetus and not the mother? The Gemara responds: <b>Teach</b> the following wording in the <i>baraita</i>: The Sages penalize him up to ten times <b>its value [<i>dameha</i>],</b> in feminine form. The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t it teach: He gives all of its value to the priest? And if</b> it is referring to <b>the animal</b> and not the firstborn, <b>what is the relevance of</b> the priest? The Gemara answers: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the Jew <b>gave</b> the gentile <b>a pregnant animal to fatten it</b> in order to divide the profits as well as the offspring. <b>Since we penalize him for</b> selling <b>the animal</b> in a prohibited manner, <b>we penalize him with regard to the fetus</b> as well.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Ashi says: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda deems</b> the sale to a gentile of <b>a damaged</b> animal <b>permitted, because it is incapable of being cured.</b> This statement indicates that if it is <b>capable of being cured,</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>deems</b> its sale <b>prohibited. And this</b> fetus is <b>also similar to</b> one who is <b>able to be cured,</b> as it ultimately will be capable of working. <b>Learn from it</b> that Rabbi Yehuda deems the sale of a fetus to a gentile prohibited.

### Part 9
§ <b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages concerning the prohibition against selling large livestock to a gentile: In the case of a Jew who <b>sold an animal</b> to a gentile only with regard to rights <b>to its fetuses,</b> but retained ownership of the animal itself, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i> concerning the permissibility of the sale? The Gemara clarifies: <b>Let the dilemma be raised according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> who permits the sale of a damaged animal, and <b>let the dilemma be raised according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who dispute that ruling.

### Part 10
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Let the dilemma be raised according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda,</b> as follows: Perhaps <b>Rabbi Yehuda permits only</b> the sale <b>of a damaged</b> animal, <b>as</b> people <b>will not come to confuse</b> this animal with a healthy animal, which is prohibited for sale to a gentile, as they are visibly different. <b>But</b> in the case of one who sells <b>an unblemished</b> animal with regard to the rights to its fetuses, <b>which</b> people may <b>come to confuse</b> with the case of selling the animal entirely and consider that sale permitted as well, Rabbi Yehuda <b>deems</b> the sale <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Or perhaps</b> Rabbi Yehuda would claim that in the case of <b>a damaged</b> animal, <b>which is separated from him</b> in its entirety in the sale, the sale is permitted, <b>and all the more so</b> with regard to the sale of <b>an unblemished</b> animal with regard to the rights to its fetuses, <b>where</b> the animal <b>is not</b> entirely <b>separated from him,</b> as he did not sell the actual animal, the sale is permitted.

### Part 12
Likewise, <b>the dilemma can be raised according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis:</b> Perhaps <b>the Rabbis deemed</b> the sale <b>prohibited only in</b> a case of <b>a damaged</b> animal, <b>as</b> the animal <b>is separated from him. But</b> in the case of <b>an unblemished</b> animal that is sold only with regard to the fetuses, <b>where it is not separated from him,</b> and there is no concern that people will mistakenly sell the entire animal to a gentile, <b>they deem</b> the sale <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Or perhaps</b> the Rabbis would claim that in the case of <b>a damaged</b> animal, <b>which</b> people <b>will not come to confuse</b> with the case of an unblemished animal, the Rabbis <b>deem</b> the sale <b>prohibited, and all the more so</b> they would prohibit selling <b>an unblemished</b> animal with regard to the rights to its fetuses, <b>which</b> people may <b>come to confuse</b> with the case of selling an unblemished animal in its entirety.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>And is the reason of</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis due to that</b> concern that people may confuse the sale of a damaged animal with the sale of an unblemished animal in its entirety? <b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that the Rabbis <b>said to Rabbi Yehuda: But</b> why do you hold that is it permitted to sell a damaged animal? <b>Don’t they breed it with</b> another animal, <b>and it gives birth</b> to offspring, which will then be owned by a gentile? <b>Apparently,</b> the reason the Rabbis prohibit the sale <b>is due to</b> the animal’s <b>fetuses.</b> If so, they should prohibit selling large livestock to a gentile with regard to the fetuses as well.

### Part 15
The Gemara answers: This is not truly the Rabbis’ opinion. Rather, <b>this is what they were saying to</b> Rabbi Yehuda: <b>Our reason</b> for prohibiting the sale of a damaged animal is <b>because</b> people might <b>come to confuse</b> this case <b>with</b> the sale of an unblemished <b>animal. But you, what is the reason</b> that <b>you permit</b> selling a damaged animal? It is <b>because</b> the animal is <b>incapable of being cured,</b> and you therefore consider it <b>similar to one who sold</b> an animal explicitly <b>for slaughter,</b> which is permitted.

### Part 16
<b>But</b> actually it is not similar to that case, as <b>don’t they breed</b> a damaged animal <b>with</b> another animal, <b>and it gives birth? And since they breed it and it gives birth,</b> the gentile will <b>delay</b> its slaughter. Others may then mistakenly believe that selling large livestock for purposes other than slaughter is permitted.

### Part 17
<b>And</b> Rabbi Yehuda <b>said to</b> the Rabbis in response: <b>When</b> a damaged animal actually <b>gives birth,</b> I will concern myself with this possibility. Practically, this concern may be disregarded, <b>as</b> such an animal <b>cannot breed with a male.</b> In any event, no proof may be brought from this <i>baraita</i> concerning the opinion of the Rabbis concerning selling an animal with regard to the rights to its fetuses.

### Part 18
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from the mishna, where it states: <b>And</b> in the case of <b>one who gives</b> his donkey <b>to</b> a gentile <b>in receivership,</b> meaning that he divides the offspring with him in exchange for caring for the animal, the donkey is exempt from the obligations of firstborn status. This case is identical to that of selling an animal with regard to the rights to its fetuses, <b>and</b> the mishna <b>does not teach: Although he is not permitted</b> to do so. Apparently such a sale is permitted.

### Part 19
The Gemara responds: <b>But according to your reasoning,</b> with regard to that which the mishna states: <b>One who enters into a partnership with</b> a gentile, <b>where it</b> also <b>does not teach:</b> Although he is not permitted to do so, <b>so too,</b> should it be derived <b>that</b> it is <b>permitted</b> to enter into such a partnership? <b>But doesn’t Shmuel’s father say: It is prohibited for a person to enter</b> into <b>a partnership with a gentile lest</b> their joint ventures lead them to quarrel and his gentile partner <b>will be obligated to take an oath to him and he will take an oath in the name of his</b> object of <b>idol worship; and the Torah states: “Neither let it be heard out of your mouth”</b> (Exodus 23:13), which includes causing a gentile to take an oath in the name of an idol.

### Part 20
<b>Rather,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> that <b>a sale</b> to a gentile is not permitted, <b>and the same is true for</b> the case of <b>a partnership. So too,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> that <b>a sale</b> to a gentile is prohibited, <b>and the same is true for</b> a case of <b>receivership.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And what is different</b> about the case of <b>selling that</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>cited</b> the prohibition specifically in that case? The Gemara answers <b>that</b> the <b>primary</b> prohibition <b>is</b> that of <b>selling</b> the animal to a gentile.

### Part 21
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution to the dilemma of whether selling an animal to a gentile with regard to the rights to its fetuses is permitted from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says</b> that in the case of <b>one who receives an animal from a gentile</b> to care for and receives a portion of the offspring in exchange for his work, <b>and it gave birth</b> to a firstborn, <b>they assess its value, and</b> the Jew <b>gives half of its value to the priest</b> to redeem his portion, which is considered to have the sanctity of a firstborn. <b>And</b> in the case of <b>one who gives</b> the gentile an animal <b>in receivership even though he is not permitted</b> to do so, the Sages <b>penalize him</b> by requiring that he purchase the gentile’s portion of the animal for <b>up to ten</b> times <b>its value, and he gives all of its value to the priest.</b>

### Part 22
<b>And the Rabbis say: As long as the ownership of the gentile is involved,</b> in that he possesses at least partial ownership of the mother or the fetus, the animal <b>is exempt from</b> its offspring being counted <b>a firstborn.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC