
### Part 1
<b>According to</b> Rabbi Yehoshua’s <b>tradition</b> of the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>we do not say</b> that an animal <b>gives birth after incomplete</b> months, and therefore if it gave birth within its first year it must have become pregnant within thirty days of the discharge, which means the discharge was not indicative of a fetus and does not exempt the next offspring from being counted a firstborn. <b>According to</b> Rabbi Yehoshua’s own <b>reasoning, we say</b> an animal <b>gives birth after incomplete</b> months, and consequently it is possible the animal became pregnant later than thirty days after the discharge and its term of pregnancy was shorter than normal. If so, the discharge does exempt the next offspring from firstborn status.

### Part 2
<b>And if you wish, say</b> that everyone accepts Ze’eiri’s statement and <b>we do not say</b> that an animal <b>gives birth</b> prematurely, <b>and here, they disagree</b> with regard to whether or not the halakhic status of <b>part of the day is like an entire</b> day: According <b>to</b> Rabbi Yehoshua’s <b>reasoning we say part of the day is like an entire</b> day, and therefore it is possible for the goat to have become pregnant on the thirtieth day after experiencing the discharge and to give birth precisely five months later, just before the year ends. According <b>to</b> his <b>tradition</b> of the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>we do not say part of the day is like an entire</b> day, which means that the earliest possible birth is on the first day of the second year.

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> taught that <b>Rabbi Akiva says: I have not arrived at this method</b> of determining firstborn status. <b>Rather,</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where it is known</b> the animal had previously given birth, the priest has nothing here. And in any case where it is known the animal had not previously given birth, its firstborn is given to the priest. And if it is uncertain, it may be eaten in its blemished state by the owner. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> difference <b>is there</b> in practice <b>between</b> the opinions of <b>Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua?</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Ḥanina of Sura says:</b> There is a difference <b>between them</b> in a case where the animal came into the Jew’s possession after it had already started to produce milk. They differ as to whether or not the production of <b>milk is</b> sufficient to <b>exempt</b> an animal from having its next offspring counted a firstborn. <b>Rabbi Akiva holds: Milk exempts</b> it, as we <b>follow the majority of animals, and the majority of animals do not produce milk unless they</b> have <b>given birth. And Rabbi Yehoshua holds:</b> Since <b>there is a minority</b> of animals <b>that</b> do <b>produce milk even though they</b> have <b>not given birth,</b> the animal that is born later is an uncertain firstborn.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And is Rabbi Yehoshua concerned for a minority? Didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 119a): If a woman’s husband passed away before she had given birth to any children and the husband had no known brothers who could perform levirate marriage, even though <b>she has a mother-in-law</b> who traveled overseas and may have conceivably given birth to a male who could later perform levirate marriage, <b>she does not</b> need <b>to be concerned</b> for that possibility and may marry another man without finding out if a male child had been born. But if the mother-in-law <b>left</b> while she was <b>full,</b> i.e., pregnant, the daughter-in-law must <b>be concerned</b> that a male might have been born. <b>Rabbi Yehoshua says: She does not</b> need <b>to be concerned.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And we say: What is the reasoning of Rabbi Yehoshua? He holds the majority of pregnant women give birth</b> to a child <b>and a minority miscarry. And</b> of <b>all</b> those <b>who give birth, half</b> bear <b>males and half</b> bear <b>females. Combine the minority of those who miscarry with the half</b> that give birth <b>to females, and</b> conclude that the <b>males are</b> in fact <b>a minority, and we are not concerned for a minority.</b> Evidently, Rabbi Yehoshua holds there is no need to be concerned for a minority.

### Part 7
<b>Rather, reverse</b> the two opinions in the mishna. <b>And</b> in fact <b>it is taught</b> in that manner in a <i>baraita</i>: The production of <b>milk exempts</b> an animal from having its offspring counted a firstborn; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Yehoshua. Rabbi Akiva says:</b> The production of <b>milk does not exempt</b> an animal from having its offspring counted a firstborn.

### Part 8
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In the case of <b>a kid that gave birth to female triplets and all her offspring each gave birth to female triplets, all of them,</b> i.e., the offspring and their offspring, <b>enter the pen to be tithed.</b> The animal tithe applies only if one owns at least ten or more animals born in the same year that are not male firstborns. <b>Rabbi Shimon says: I saw</b> a single kid <b>that</b> yielded enough offspring to be subject to the <b>tithe within its first year</b> of life. The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need the <i>baraita</i> <b>to teach</b> that <b>each</b> offspring gave birth to <b>three</b> other offspring? Let <b>one of them give birth to three, and</b> let <b>the other</b> two give birth to <b>two each,</b> so that there are a total of ten goats born within a single year, which are therefore subject to the tithe.

### Part 9
The Gemara answers: <b>Since there is one</b> goat in this case <b>that would not</b> produce <b>a sufficient</b> number of offspring <b>without</b> giving birth to <b>three,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>taught</b> a case where <b>all</b> three goats <b>gave birth to three</b> offspring <b>each,</b> for the sake of consistency. The Gemara asks: <b>But why do I</b> need <b>to teach</b> that any goat gave birth to <b>three</b> at once <b>at all? Let all</b> the second-generation goats <b>give birth to two</b> offspring, <b>and let her,</b> the mother of the three second-generation goats, <b>give birth again</b> to another goat <b>together with them.</b> The fact that the <i>baraita</i> did not teach this case indicates that a goat cannot give birth again within the same year.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC