
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Shmuel says:</b> In a case where <b>the head</b> of a fetus emerged and then went back into the womb, the offspring is not considered to have been born and <b>does not exempt</b> the next fetus from the obligation of redemption of the firstborn, e.g., if its twin brother was born first. Shmuel says this <i>halakha</i> specifically <b>in</b> a case of <b>miscarriage,</b> i.e., where the fetus whose head emerged was a stillborn and the one that was eventually born first is a viable offspring. But in a case where both are viable offspring, the emergence of the head is considered birth.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason</b> for Shmuel’s ruling? The verse states: <b>“All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life”</b> (Genesis 7:22), from which it is derived: <b>Anywhere that</b> one has <b>the breath of the spirit of life,</b> i.e., if it is viable, one goes <b>by its nostrils,</b> i.e., <b>its head is considered significant.</b> But with regard to <b>another</b> offspring, one that is not viable, <b>its head is not considered significant.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: What is a firstborn with regard to inheritance but not with regard to redemption from a priest? It is a son <b>who came after the miscarriage</b> of an underdeveloped fetus, even <b>where</b> the <b>head</b> of the underdeveloped fetus <b>emerged alive; and</b> a fully developed <b>nine-</b>month<b>-old</b> fetus <b>whose head emerged dead.</b> Although the mishna addresses a nine-month-old fetus as well, <b>in any event</b> it <b>teaches</b> with regard to a miscarriage that <b>its head</b> exempts the offspring born after it. The Gemara responds: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the term: <b>Its head?</b> It means its head and <b>most of</b> the body.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach: Most of it.</b> The Gemara answers: <b>By right,</b> the mishna <b>should have taught: Most of it, but</b> it did not do so, <b>since</b> in <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna it <b>needs to teach:</b> A fully developed <b>nine-</b>month<b>-old</b> fetus <b>whose head emerged dead.</b> It is inferred from there that the <b>reason</b> the subsequent son is the firstborn with regard to inheritance is <b>that</b> the <b>head</b> of this fetus emerged <b>dead, but</b> if it was a nine<b>-</b>month<b>-</b>old fetus whose <b>head</b> emerged <b>alive,</b> then the fetus <b>that comes after it is not a firstborn with regard to inheritance either.</b> Therefore, the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>taught</b> in <b>the first clause also</b> that <b>the head</b> of a miscarriage exempts the subsequent son, to maintain stylistic uniformity.

### Part 5
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to this interpretation, <b>what is</b> the mishna <b>teaching us?</b> Is it <b>that once</b> the offspring <b>reached out its head</b> from the womb <b>it is</b> considered <b>a birth? We learn</b> this in a mishna with regard to the fetus of an animal (<i>Ḥullin</i> 68a): If a fetus <b>reached out its head, although it returned</b> the head, the halakhic status of <b>that</b> fetus is <b>like</b> that of <b>a newborn,</b> whose consumption is permitted only by its own slaughter.

### Part 6
<b>And if you would say</b> that the mishna there <b>teaches us</b> this <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>animals, and</b> the mishna here <b>teaches us</b> that the same <i>halakha</i> applies <b>to a human,</b> this does not resolve the difficulty. The Gemara first explains why two rulings might be necessary with regard to people and animals: The reason is <b>that</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>a human cannot be derived from</b> that of <b>an animal, as</b> the animal <b>has no concealed opening,</b> i.e., the opening of an animal’s womb is not hidden. Consequently, one might have thought that only in the case of an animal is the emergence of the head considered a birth. By contrast, in humans, where the woman’s thighs conceal the opening of the womb and the emergence of the head alone is not noticeable, perhaps the emergence of the head is not considered a full-fledged birth.

### Part 7
Conversely, had this ruling been taught only with regard to humans, one would have said that the <i>halakha</i> of <b>animals cannot be derived from</b> that of <b>a human because the countenance of</b> a person’s <b>face is significant,</b> as people are created in the image of God. This is not so with regard to animals.

### Part 8
After clarifying why both rulings are necessary, the Gemara explains why this does not resolve the difficulty: <b>We learn that</b> ruling with regard to people <b>also,</b> in a mishna (<i>Nidda</i> 28a): If the fetus <b>emerged in</b> the <b>usual manner,</b> head first, it is considered born only <b>when most of its head emerges. And what is</b> considered <b>most of its head?</b> It is <b>from when its forehead emerges.</b> Accordingly, there was no need for the mishna here to state the <i>halakha</i> with regard to the head of a nine-month-old fetus, and the mention of a head with regard to a miscarriage contradicts the opinion of Shmuel. The Gemara comments: <b>The refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel</b> is indeed <b>a conclusive refutation.</b>

### Part 9
§ Concerning this matter, <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> The emergence of <b>a forehead</b> alone in the case of a person <b>exempts,</b> i.e., is considered a birth, <b>in all cases, except with regard to inheritance.</b> If a son reached out his head alone and then brought it back, after which his twin brother was born, the second brother is the firstborn with regard to inheritance. <b>What is the reason? The Merciful One states:</b> “For <b>he shall recognize</b> the firstborn, the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of all that he has” (Deuteronomy 21:17), and recognition is not attained by emergence of the forehead alone. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Even with regard to inheritance</b> the emergence of a forehead is sufficient.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: When Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says the emergence of a forehead alone in the case of a person exempts <b>in all cases, what</b> does this comprehensive phrase serve <b>to include?</b> The Gemara answers that it serves <b>to include that which the Sages taught:</b> With regard to <b>a female convert whose offspring reached out its forehead</b> alone <b>in her gentile state, and then she converted</b> and gave birth to the entire child, <b>one does not assign to her the days of ritual impurity and the days of ritual purity</b> of a Jewish woman who gave birth. <b>And</b> likewise <b>she does not bring the offering</b> that a woman is obligated to sacrifice after giving <b>birth,</b> as the child is considered to have been born while the mother was still a gentile.

### Part 11
The Gemara <b>raises an objection to</b> the opinion of Rabbi Yoḥanan from a <i>baraita</i>: When the verse states: <b>“He shall recognize”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:17), <b>this</b> is referring to <b>the recognition of the face. And what</b> exactly <b>is the recognition of the face?</b> It is recognizing <b>the countenance of the face with the nose.</b> This indicates that the forehead alone is insufficient. The Gemara answers: <b>Teach</b> the <i>baraita</i> as saying: <b>Up to,</b> but not including, <b>the nose.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 120a): <b>One can testify</b> that a man died, in order to permit his wife to remarry, <b>only</b> if he can attest <b>to</b> seeing <b>the countenance of the face with the nose,</b> as this allows one to identify the individual definitively. Once again, the Gemara answers that one should <b>teach: Up to,</b> but not including, <b>the nose.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another proof: If people saw <b>the forehead</b> of a dead person <b>without the countenance of the face,</b> or <b>the countenance of the face without the forehead, they cannot testify</b> that he died and render his wife permitted to remarry <b>until</b> they see <b>both</b> the countenance of the face and the forehead, <b>with the nose. And Abaye says, and some say</b> it was <b>Rav Kahana</b> who says: <b>What is the verse</b> from which it is derived? <b>“The recognition of their countenance does witness against them”</b> (Isaiah 3:9), and there is no recognition of a face without the nose. The Gemara answers: <b>Testimony</b> enabling <b>a woman</b> to remarry <b>is different, as the Sages were stringent with regard to it.</b> Therefore, they required greater proof than with regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of a firstborn.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And were the Sages stringent</b> with regard to this testimony? <b>But didn’t we learn</b> in a mishna (<i>Yevamot</i> 122a): The Sages <b>established</b> that they <b>would</b> allow a woman to <b>marry</b> again based on testimony that is generally not accepted, such as <b>testimony</b> based on <b>hearsay,</b> i.e., the testimony of one man which was heard from another man who saw her husband die, <b>from a woman’s testimony, from</b> a Canaanite <b>slave’s testimony, or from</b> a Canaanite <b>maidservant’s testimony?</b> The Gemara answers that <b>when the Sages were lenient</b> it was <b>with regard to the end</b> of the testimony, i.e., to accept testimony that a husband had died even from individuals just mentioned. But <b>the Sages were not lenient with regard to its beginning,</b> i.e., the basic clarification of whether the witnesses properly identified the dead person when they saw him.

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that Rabbi Yoḥanan can resolve the difficulty as follows:

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC