
### Part 1
serves <b>to include its milk</b> in the prohibition, i.e., it is prohibited to consume milk of disqualified consecrated animals that were redeemed.

### Part 2
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>The Master said</b> above: With regard to disqualified sacrificial animals whose consecration preceded their blemish, their offspring are sacred and <b>may not be redeemed</b> while they are <b>unblemished, and one may not dedicate them as any offering he desires.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>It is</b> only <b>unblemished</b> offspring <b>that one may not redeem,</b> which indicates that <b>one may redeem blemished</b> offspring. Likewise, <b>it is</b> only <b>for any offering he desires that he may not dedicate</b> the offspring, <b>but for the same offering</b> as the mother, <b>one may dedicate</b> the offspring.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>How can you find</b> a situation that includes both of these inferences? They apply in a case <b>where one dedicates</b> the unborn offspring <b>as the same offering</b> for which its mother was consecrated, <b>and</b> it <b>may</b> then <b>be redeemed after</b> having developed <b>a blemish.</b> The Gemara remarks: <b>Shall we say</b> that <b>this is a conclusive refutation of</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Huna,</b> who maintains that the offspring cannot be redeemed and rules that one must leave them to die?

### Part 4
<b>Rav Huna</b> could have <b>said to you:</b> The inferences upon which the refutation is based are false. Just as these unblemished offspring cannot be redeemed, <b>the same is true</b> with regard to blemished animals, <b>as even blemished</b> offspring <b>cannot be redeemed. And since the former clause taught</b> the phrase: <b>They may be redeemed unblemished, the latter clause also taught</b> the phrase: <b>They may not be redeemed unblemished. And since the former clause taught: As any offering he desires, the latter clause also taught: As any offering he desires.</b> According to Rav Huna, no inferences can be made from these rulings of the <i>baraita</i> because they were phrased in this manner for the sake of symmetry between its two sections, rather than to teach a specific <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 5
It is stated: <b>And one who slaughters them outside</b> the Temple courtyard is <b>exempt</b> from <i>karet</i>. The Gemara notes: <b>Rav Huna taught</b> this as: One who slaughters them outside the Temple courtyard <b>is liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i>, <b>and he interprets it</b> as referring to a case involving an animal with a minor blemish, such as <b>on the cornea of the eye. And</b> the mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Akiva, who says:</b> Although animals with a minor blemish may not be sacrificed <i>ab initio</i>, <b>if they ascended</b> the altar <b>they shall not descend</b> and are sacrificed. Since an animal with a minor blemish is potentially suitable for sacrifice, one who slaughters it outside the Temple courtyard is liable to receive <i>karet</i>.

### Part 6
The Gemara continues analyzing the <i>baraita</i>, which teaches: <b>Whether before its redemption or after its redemption,</b> an animal whose consecration preceded its blemish <b>renders</b> an animal that was <b>a substitute</b> for it sacred. <b>Rav Naḥman says</b> that <b>Rabba bar Avuh says: And its substitute</b> that was imbued with sanctity <b>after its redemption</b> must <b>die. What is the reason?</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What are we to do? Shall we sacrifice it?</b> It cannot be sacrificed, as <b>it received</b> its status <b>from</b> the <b>deferred sanctity</b> of the redeemed blemished animal and is therefore unfit for the altar. <b>Shall we redeem it?</b> It cannot be redeemed, as its sanctity <b>is not strong</b> enough <b>to be transferable</b> to the money for <b>its redemption. Therefore, it</b> must <b>die.</b>

### Part 7
<b>Rav Amram objects to this: But let</b> the substitute <b>be eaten in its blemished</b> state <b>by the owners.</b> After all, <b>what is</b> the difference <b>between this</b> substitute <b>and the substitute of a firstborn or</b> of an animal <b>tithe</b> offering, which may be eaten? The Gemara explains the question: <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Temura</i> 21a): With regard to <b>the substitute of a firstborn and</b> of an animal <b>tithe</b> offering, both <b>they,</b> the substitutes themselves, <b>and their offspring, and the offspring of their offspring, forever,</b> i.e., for all future generations, <b>are like</b> the <b>firstborn and</b> the animal <b>tithe</b> offering, respectively, <b>and</b> therefore <b>they are eaten in their blemished</b> state <b>by the owners.</b> Why is the blemished substitute of a firstborn or an animal tithe permitted whereas the substitute of a disqualified consecrated animal remains forbidden?

### Part 8
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rav Amram: <b>This one bears its mother’s name and that one bears its mother’s name,</b> i.e., each substitute is subject to the same <i>halakha</i> as the animal for which it was substituted. <b>This</b> animal <b>is entirely called a substitute of a firstborn or</b> an animal <b>tithe</b> offering: <b>Just as a firstborn and</b> an animal <b>tithe</b> offering <b>are eaten in their blemished</b> state <b>by the owners, so too, their substitute is eaten</b> even when it is blemished.

### Part 9
<b>And</b> likewise, <b>this</b> substitute for a redeemed animal whose consecration preceded its blemish <b>bears its mothers name,</b> i.e., <b>it is called the substitute of a sacrificial</b> animal: <b>Just as sacrificial</b> animals <b>are eaten only</b> once they have been rendered permitted <b>through redemption, so too, their substitutes are also eaten only through redemption. But</b> the sanctity of <b>this</b> particular substitute <b>is not strong</b> enough <b>to be transferable</b> to money for <b>its redemption,</b> and therefore it cannot be redeemed. Consequently, it may not be eaten.

### Part 10
The Gemara notes that <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Naḥman: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to the substitute of disqualified consecrated</b> animals <b>that it</b> must <b>die?</b> It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states:</b> “Nevertheless, these you shall not eat, <b>of them that</b> only <b>chew the cud,</b> or of them that only have a split hoof…it is <b>impure</b> to you” (Leviticus 11:4). The extraneous phrase “impure to you” indicates that there exists an animal which possesses the signs of a kosher animal but is nevertheless prohibited in consumption, and that is the substitute of a disqualified consecrated animal. The Gemara raises an objection: But isn’t <b>that</b> extraneous phrase <b>necessary for</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>the five sin offerings</b> that are left to <b>die,</b> which may not be eaten? The Gemara answers: No; <b>that</b> <i>halakha</i> <b>is derived</b> from the phrase: <b>“Of them that</b> only <b>have a split hoof</b>…is <b>impure.”</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara notes that <b>this is also taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> there are <b>five sin offerings</b> that are left to <b>die? The verse states: “Of them that have a split hoof</b>…is <b>impure</b> to you,” which indicates that there is a second category of animals that possess the signs of a kosher animal, but that are nevertheless prohibited in consumption. The Gemara raises an objection: But isn’t the category of the <b>five sin offerings</b> that are left to <b>die a <i>halakha</i> learned</b> as a tradition, not from a verse? <b>Rather, when</b> that <b>verse came,</b> it came <b>to</b> teach that the <b>substitute of a guilt offering</b> may not be sacrificed and is left to graze until it develops a blemish.

### Part 12
The Gemara raises a further objection: The <i>halakha</i> of <b>a substitute for a guilt offering is also a <i>halakha</i> learned</b> as a tradition, as stated in the principle: <b>In any</b> case <b>where a sin offering</b> is left to <b>die, a guilt offering</b> is left to <b>graze.</b> Since the substitute of a sin offering is left to die, it is established by tradition that the substitute of a guilt offering is left to graze, and therefore no verse is required to teach this <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 13
The Gemara answers: <b>Rather,</b> the verse is <b>actually</b> the source for a <i>halakha</i> that applies to the <b>five sin offerings</b> left to <b>die. And</b> both <b>a verse is necessary and</b> the <b><i>halakha</i></b> learned as a tradition <b>is</b> also <b>necessary</b> to determine the final course of action that one should take. The Gemara elaborates: <b>If</b> the concept of the five sin offerings had been derived <b>from the verse</b> alone, <b>I would say</b> that the five sin offerings are left <b>to graze.</b> Therefore, <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> learned through tradition <b>teaches us that</b> they are left <b>to die. And if</b> this ruling were based only <b>on the <i>halakha</i></b> learned as a tradition, <b>I would say:</b> In a case <b>where one happened to eat from</b> one of <b>these five sin offerings, there is a prohibition</b> that he violated, <b>but not a negative mitzva,</b> for which one is liable to receive lashes. The verse therefore <b>teaches us that there is a negative mitzva</b> here as well.

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the <i>halakha</i> of the five sin offerings left to die is in fact a <i>halakha</i> learned as a tradition, and therefore no verse is required for its own sake. Rather, the verse: “Of them that have a split hoof,” serves <b>to juxtapose an item that comes,</b> i.e., that is derived, <b>from</b> the mention of animals <b>who chew their cud,</b> referring to the substitutes of disqualified consecrated animals, <b>with an item that comes from</b> animals <b>who have a split hoof,</b> referring to the five sin offerings: <b>Just as there,</b> the sin offerings are left <b>to die, so too here,</b> the substitutes are left <b>to die.</b>

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>one who receives</b> animals as part of <b>a guaranteed investment from a gentile,</b> i.e., the Jew receives the animals to raise them and commits to pay a fixed price at a later date even if they die or their value decreases, and the offspring born in the interim are divided between the gentile and the Jew,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC