
### Part 1
<b>This</b> is what <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even</b> if only <b>a slight blemish</b> would result from the removal of the portion of the animal owned by the gentile, the animal still does not have firstborn status. <b>And</b> in addition, Rabbi Yoḥanan also commented on <b>that which we learned</b> in a mishna (16b): <b>A ewe that gave birth to a goat of sorts and a goat that gave birth to a ewe of sorts are exempt</b> from the mitzva of the <b>firstborn. And if</b> the offspring <b>has some of the characteristics</b> of its mother, it is <b>obligated,</b> i.e., subject to the obligations of firstborn status. Rabbi Yoḥanan commented: Nevertheless, it may not be sacrificed on the altar because this <b>is a permanent blemish.</b> Therefore, a priest is permitted <b>to slaughter it</b> outside of the Temple.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>Granted</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan’s first statement that the animal does not have firstborn status even if it has <b>a slight blemish</b> is necessary, as he <b>teaches us</b> that he holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rav Huna,</b> who said previously (2b) that even if the gentile owns only the ear of the firstborn it does not have firstborn status, <b>and</b> his statement is <b>to the exclusion of</b> the opinions of <b>Rav Ḥisda and Rava,</b> who said the gentile must own a portion of the fetus that would render it a carcass or a <i>tereifa</i> if it were removed.

### Part 3
<b>But</b> with regard to Rabbi Yoḥanan’s second statement that a goat of sorts that was born to a ewe but has some characteristics of the mother is considered to have <b>a permanent blemish, what is</b> it <b>teaching us?</b> Is it teaching <b>that since it</b> looks <b>different</b> from the normal appearance of a sheep this appearance <b>is</b> considered <b>a blemish? We</b> already <b>learned</b> this in the mishna (40a): <b>Or</b> with regard to a lamb <b>whose mouth is similar to that of a pig, that is a blemish</b> that enables slaughter of the firstborn.

### Part 4
<b>And if you would say</b> that <b>there,</b> where the animal’s mouth is similar to that of a pig, its appearance <b>was altered into a being in whose species there is no sanctity of the firstborn,</b> while <b>here,</b> where it looks like a goat, its appearance <b>was altered into a being in whose species</b> there is <b>sanctity of the firstborn,</b> and Rabbi Yoḥanan teaches that this animal too is considered to be blemished, <b>we</b> already <b>learned this, too,</b> in the subsequent mishna (40b): An animal with <b>one of its eyes large and one</b> small is also considered blemished.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> a <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> in explanation of the mishna: <b>A large</b> eye is referring to one as <b>large as that of a calf, and a small</b> eye is referring to one as <b>small as that of a goose. Granted,</b> in the case of an eye as <b>small as that of a goose</b> the reason it is considered a blemish is that <b>there is no sanctity of the firstborn among its species,</b> i.e., that of a bird. <b>But</b> in the case of an eye that is as <b>large as that of a calf there is sanctity of a firstborn among its species. Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> considered blemished <b>because we say</b> that <b>since it has changed</b> from the appearance of a sheep <b>it is</b> considered <b>a blemish?</b> Therefore, Rabbi Yoḥanan’s statement has still not introduced any novelty.

### Part 6
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> an eye as large as that of a calf is considered a blemish <b>because</b> the animal <b>is one that has a limb that is too large [<i>sarua</i>],</b> which is listed in the Torah as one of the blemished animals (see Leviticus 22:23). The Gemara comments: <b>This, too, stands to reason, as we learned</b> in a mishna (43a): Concerning <b>these blemishes</b> that were taught with regard to an animal, <b>whether</b> they are <b>permanent or transient,</b> they also disqualify a priest from performing the Temple service. And the subsequent mishna (44a) adds: <b>Beyond those are</b> additional blemishes that apply exclusively to <b>a person,</b> i.e., a priest: If <b>both of his eyes are large,</b> or <b>both of them are small.</b>

### Part 7
The reason for the latter <i>halakha</i> is that <b>it is with regard to a person that it is written: “Any man from the offspring of Aaron”</b> (Leviticus 22:4), which indicates <b>that we require a man who is equal to the seed of Aaron,</b> i.e., he has an ordinary appearance like other priests; <b>but</b> with regard to <b>an animal,</b> if <b>both</b> eyes <b>are big</b> or <b>both</b> eyes <b>are small, it is also not a blemish.</b>

### Part 8
Accordingly, if <b>one</b> of the animal’s eyes <b>is big or one is small, what is the reason</b> that it is considered a blemish? <b>If</b> it is <b>due to</b> the <b>deviation</b> in appearance, meaning it does not look like a sheep, then <b>even</b> if <b>both</b> eyes <b>are big</b> or <b>both are small</b> it should be considered a blemish. <b>Rather, is it not because it is</b> an animal <b>with a limb that is too large?</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara responds: <b>No, actually I will say to you</b> that the reason an animal with one big eye and one small eye is considered blemished is <b>because</b> of its <b>deviation,</b> as <b>a deviation is</b> considered <b>a blemish. And</b> as for <b>that which is difficult for you,</b> that if it is due to an anomalous appearance then <b>even</b> if <b>both are big</b> or <b>both are small</b> it should be considered a blemish, <b>there</b> it is not considered a deviation. This is because a particularly healthy animal has large eyes, while a particularly weak animal has small eyes. Therefore, only an animal with one large eye and with one small eye is considered to be blemished, as <b>if</b> the large eye <b>is due to extreme health both should have been healthy,</b> and <b>if</b> the small eye <b>is due to extreme weakness both should have been weak.</b>

### Part 10
§ In connection with the dispute between Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis whether an animal owned in partnership with a gentile has firstborn status, the Gemara relates the following incident: There was <b>a certain female convert whose</b> gentile <b>brothers would give her animals to fatten</b> and would then divide the profits with her. <b>She came before Rava</b> to ask whether firstborn status applies to the firstborn of these animals. Rava <b>said to her: There is no one who is concerned with this</b> ruling <b>of Rabbi Yehuda, who says</b> an animal owned in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile is obligated,</b> i.e., subject to counting its first offspring <b>a firstborn.</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara relates another incident: <b>Rav Mari bar Raḥel had a certain</b> flock of <b>animals. He would transfer ownership of the ears of</b> the firstborn fetuses <b>to a gentile</b> in order to exempt them from the obligations of firstborn status. <b>But</b> nevertheless he <b>prohibited them from</b> being <b>sheared and</b> used for <b>labor, and gave them to the priests,</b> <i>halakhot</i> that apply to a standard firstborn animal. <b>And</b> ultimately, <b>the animals of Rav Mari bar Raḥel died.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>But since he prohibited them from</b> being <b>sheared and</b> used for <b>labor and</b> also <b>gave them to the priests, why did he</b> initially <b>transfer ownership of their ears to the gentile,</b> abrogating their firstborn status? The Gemara answers that he did so <b>lest</b> the priests <b>come to</b> experience <b>a mishap with them,</b> improperly shearing them or using them for labor. The Gemara asks: <b>If so, what is the reason</b> that <b>the animals of Rav Mari died</b> as a punishment? The Gemara answers: It was <b>because he abrogated their sanctity</b> by selling their ears.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rav Yehuda say it is permitted for a person to inflict a blemish on a firstborn</b> animal fetus <b>before it emerges into the air of the world?</b> Here, too, Rav Mari abrogated his firstborn animals’ sanctity by selling their ears before their birth. The Gemara answers: <b>There,</b> when one inflicts a blemish on a firstborn animal, <b>he abrogates</b> the animal’s <b>sanctity of the altar,</b> as it is no longer fit for an offering, <b>but does not abrogate</b> its <b>sanctity of the priest,</b> as it is still given to the priest. <b>Here,</b> by contrast, when Rav Mari sold his animals’ ears to a gentile, <b>he abrogated even</b> their <b>sanctity of the priest,</b> as the partnership exempts the animals from the obligations of firstborn status entirely.

### Part 14
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the reason the animals of <b>Rav Mari bar Raḥel</b> died is that he himself <b>knew</b> that is was necessary <b>to transfer</b> ownership of the ears of the fetus to the gentile through <b>a complete transaction. And another person would see him</b> transferring ownership of the ears to a gentile <b>and would go and do</b> it himself but not perform a complete transaction, <b>and would think</b> that <b>Rav Mari performed the</b> same <b>matter</b> in abrogating its firstborn status, <b>and would come to</b> experience <b>a mishap with</b> his animal by not treating it with the sanctity of firstborn status. Due to this concern, Rav Mari should not have transferred ownership of the ears to a gentile, and consequently his animals died.

### Part 15
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>Priests and Levites are exempt</b> from the obligation to redeem a firstborn donkey; this is derived <b>from an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: In the wilderness the firstborn were redeemed in exchange for the Levites, as it is stated: “Take the Levites in exchange for all the firstborn among the children of Israel and the animal of the Levites in exchange for their animals” (Numbers 3:45). <b>If</b> the priests and Levites <b>rendered exempt</b> the firstborn children and donkeys <b>of the Israelites in the wilderness</b> from being counted firstborns, <b>it is</b> only <b>logical that</b> the priests and the Levites <b>should render</b> the firstborn of <b>their own</b> donkeys <b>exempt</b> from being counted firstborns.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC