
### Part 1
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the case in the mishna of the tail of a calf that does not reach the leg joint, it is <b>taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: This leg joint is <b>the upper joint,</b> between the thighbone and the tibia, <b>and not the lower joint,</b> between the middle and lower bones. <b>And</b> with regard to this upper joint, <b>the corresponding</b> bone <b>in</b> the leg of <b>a camel is conspicuous,</b> but in a calf it is not noticeable from the outside.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>For these blemishes</b> enumerated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>, <b>one slaughters the firstborn</b> outside the Temple <b>and disqualified consecrated</b> animals <b>may be redeemed on their account.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>Why do I</b> need <b>this additional</b> statement that for these blemishes one slaughters the firstborn outside the Temple? It was already <b>taught</b> in <b>the first clause,</b> at the beginning of the chapter: <b>For these blemishes, one may slaughter the firstborn</b> animal outside the Temple. The Gemara answers that <b>the latter clause</b> of the mishna was <b>necessary: Disqualified consecrated</b> animals <b>may be redeemed due to</b> these blemishes. The Gemara asks: But <b>this too</b> is <b>obvious;</b> if <b>one may slaughter</b> a firstborn due to these blemishes, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to state that <b>one may redeem them?</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rather, since</b> a previous mishna <b>taught</b> that Ila <b>added three</b> additional blemishes, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>said to him: We did not hear</b> about <b>those, and</b> then the <i>tanna</i> of the mishna <b>proceeded to teach</b> <i>halakhot</i> in the name <b>of individual</b> opinions, those of Rabbi Ḥananya ben Gamliel and Rabbi Ḥanina ben Antigonus, one might have thought that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with their rulings. Therefore, he states <b>an unattributed</b> ruling in this mishna <b>with regard to all their</b> statements: <b>For</b> all <b>these blemishes</b> enumerated in the previous <i>mishnayot</i>, <b>one slaughters the firstborn, and disqualified consecrated</b> animals <b>may be redeemed due to them.</b> This indicates that the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with all of these individual opinions.

### Part 5
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these</b> are the blemishes <b>that one does not slaughter</b> the firstborn <b>due to them, neither in the Temple nor in</b> the rest of <b>the country: Pale spots</b> on the eye <b>and tears</b> streaming from the eye <b>that are not constant; and internal gums that were damaged but that were not extracted; and</b> an animal <b>with boils</b> that are moist inside and out <b>[<i>garav</i>]; and</b> an animal <b>with warts; and</b> an animal <b>with boils [<i>ḥazazit</i>];</b> and <b>an old or sick</b> animal, <b>or</b> one with <b>a foul odor; and</b> one <b>with which a transgression was performed,</b> e.g., it copulated with a person or was the object of bestiality; <b>and</b> one <b>that killed a person.</b> In these latter two cases, the act of bestiality or killing became known <b>on the basis</b> of the testimony <b>of one witness or on the basis of the owner.</b>

### Part 6
<b>And</b> one does not slaughter <b>a <i>tumtum</i>,</b> whose sexual organs are concealed, <b>and a hermaphrodite [<i>ve’anderoginos</i>],</b> which has both male and female sexual organs, <b>neither in the Temple nor in</b> the rest of <b>the country. Rabbi Shimon says: You have no blemish greater than that,</b> and it may be slaughtered. <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The halakhic status of a hermaphrodite <b>is not</b> that of <b>a firstborn; rather,</b> its halakhic status is that of a non-sacred animal that may <b>be shorn and utilized for labor.</b>

### Part 7
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the two types of boils: <i>Garav</i> and <i>ḥazazit</i>, are not considered full-fledged blemishes for which one may slaughter a firstborn outside the Temple. The Gemara asks: <b>And is <i>garav</i> not</b> considered a blemish? <b>But isn’t it written “<i>garav</i>” in the Torah,</b> in the list of blemishes (see Leviticus 22:22)? <b>And</b> furthermore, <b>is <i>ḥazazit</i> not</b> considered a blemish? <b>But isn’t it written “<i>yalefet</i>” in the Torah,</b> in the same verse, <b>and it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>“<i>Garav</i>”; this is</b> referring to boils that are hard as <b>earthenware [<i>ḥeres</i>]; “<i>yalefet</i>”; this is the <i>ḥazazit</i></b> that affected <b>the Egyptians</b> (see Exodus 9:10). <b>And Reish Lakish says: Why is it called <i>yalefet</i>?</b> The reason is <b>that it grabs [<i>melapefet</i>] continuously</b> onto an invalid <b>until the day of death,</b> i.e., it cannot be healed.

### Part 8
<b>Granted,</b> the contradiction <b>between</b> the status of <b>the <i>ḥazazit</i></b> mentioned in the Torah and that of <b>the <i>ḥazazit</i></b> in the mishna is <b>not difficult,</b> as <b>here</b> the Torah is referring <b>to an Egyptian <i>ḥazazit</i>,</b> and <b>there</b> the mishna is referring <b>to a regular <i>ḥazazit</i>. But</b> the contradiction <b>between</b> the status of <b>the <i>garav</i></b> listed in the Torah and <b>the <i>garav</i></b> of the mishna is <b>difficult.</b> The Gemara answers that the contradiction <b>between the <i>garav</i></b> in the Torah and <b>the <i>garav</i></b> in the mishna is <b>also not difficult: This</b> ruling of the mishna is referring <b>to moist</b> boils, whereas <b>that</b> <i>garav</i> of the Torah is referring <b>to dry</b> boils. <b>Moist</b> boils will <b>heal</b> and therefore are considered a temporary blemish for which one may not slaughter a firstborn; <b>dry</b> ones will <b>not heal.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> does <b>a moist</b> boil <b>heal? But isn’t it written: “The Lord will smite you with the boil of Egypt,</b> and with the hemorrhoids, and with <i>garav</i>, and with <i>ḥares</i>, from which you cannot be healed” (Deuteronomy 28:27). <b>And since it is written: “And with <i>ḥares</i>,”</b> which is referring to boils that are as hard as earthenware [<i>ḥeres</i>], <b>moist <i>garav</i> is</b> thereby <b>stated, and</b> with regard to both types that verse <b>states: “From which you cannot be healed.”</b>

### Part 10
<b>Rather, there are three</b> types of <i>garav</i>: First, the <i>garav</i> <b>of the verse</b> that deals with blemishes, which is <b>dry both on the inside and on the outside.</b> This cannot be healed, and it is called <i>ḥares</i> in Deuteronomy. The second is the <i>garav</i> <b>of the mishna,</b> which can be healed, and is <b>moist on the outside and inside.</b> Third, the <i>garav</i> <b>of Egypt,</b> mentioned in Deuteronomy as one of the types of boils of Egypt. This <i>garav</i> is <b>dry on the inside</b> and therefore cannot be healed, <b>but</b> it <b>is moist on the outside, as it is written</b> with regard to the plague of boils in Egypt: <b>“And it became a boil breaking forth with <i>avabu’ot</i> upon man</b> and upon animal” (Exodus 9:10). <i>Avabu’ot</i> is referring to a substance that pours out [<i>nove’a</i>] and is moist.

### Part 11
§ Among the conditions that are not considered full-fledged blemishes, but one may not sacrifice an animal with one such condition as an offering either, the mishna lists: <b>And an old</b> animal, <b>or a sick</b> animal, <b>or</b> one with <b>a foul odor.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived? They are derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught:</b> The verse states: “And if his offering be <b>from [<i>min</i>] the flock, whether from the sheep or from the goats”</b> (Leviticus 1:10). These three instances of the word “from [<i>min</i>]” serve to <b>exclude the old, and the sick, and the</b> animal with <b>a foul odor,</b> which may not be sacrificed.

### Part 12
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> all three exclusions <b>are necessary. As, had the Merciful One written</b> the word “from” once, one might have said that this serves <b>to exclude an old</b> animal, <b>which will not become healthy again,</b> as it will never get younger. <b>But</b> with regard to a <b>sick</b> animal, <b>which</b> might <b>become healthy again, say</b> that it is <b>not</b> disqualified. <b>And,</b> alternatively, <b>had</b> the Merciful One <b>written</b> only one term of exclusion, one might have said that it serves <b>to exclude a sick</b> animal, <b>as</b> it is <b>not the</b> natural <b>manner</b> of an animal to be sick. <b>But</b> with regard to <b>an old</b> animal, <b>as this is the</b> natural <b>manner</b> of all animals to grow old, <b>say</b> that it should <b>not</b> be disqualified from the altar.

### Part 13
<b>And had the Merciful One written</b> only <b>two</b> terms of exclusion, one might have said that they serve <b>to exclude these weak</b> animals, the sick and the old, as one should sacrifice only a fat, healthy animal. <b>But</b> with regard to an animal with <b>a foul odor, which is not weak, say</b> that it should <b>not</b> be disqualified. <b>And alternatively,</b> had there been only one term of exclusion, one might have said that it serves <b>to exclude</b> an animal with <b>a foul odor, as</b> it is <b>repulsive. But</b> with regard to <b>these</b> other two cases of an old and a sick animal, <b>which are not repulsive, say</b> that they are <b>not</b> excluded. Therefore, all three exclusions <b>are necessary.</b>

### Part 14
§ The mishna teaches: <b>And</b> an animal <b>with which a transgression was performed,</b> and one that killed a person that was known on the basis of the testimony of one witness or the owner, are disqualified from being sacrificed. The Gemara asks: <b>From where are these matters</b> derived?

### Part 15
They are derived from a verse, <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that when the verse states: “You shall bring your offering from the cattle, even from the herd or from the flock” (Leviticus 1:2), each mention of the word “from” is interpreted as a term of exclusion. The expression <b>“from the cattle”</b> serves <b>to exclude an animal that copulated with a person and an animal that was the object of bestiality.</b> The expression <b>“from the herd”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> an animal <b>worshipped</b> as a deity, and <b>“from the flock”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> an animal <b>set aside</b> for idol worship. Finally, the word “or” in the expression <b>“or from the flock”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> an animal that <b>gored</b> and killed a person.

### Part 16
The Gemara challenges: In <b>these</b> cases of an animal that copulated with a person, an animal that was the subject of bestiality, and an animal that gored and killed a person, <b>they are liable to death</b> by stoning. Why, then, is a verse necessary to exclude them? The Gemara answers that this is referring to a case where the incident was known <b>on the basis</b> of the testimony <b>of one witness or on the basis of the owner.</b> Therefore, the animal is not killed, as there are not two witnesses to the event, but the testimony is sufficient to disqualify the animal as a sacrifice.

### Part 17
§ The mishna teaches that one does not slaughter a <i>tumtum</i> and a hermaphrodite, neither in the Temple nor in the rest of the country. The Gemara asks: <b>Granted,</b> one does not slaughter <b>a <i>tumtum</i>, neither in the Temple,</b> as <b>perhaps it is a female</b> and therefore does not have firstborn status and may not be sacrificed, <b>nor in</b> the rest of <b>the country,</b> as <b>perhaps it is a male and it does not have a blemish,</b> in which case he would be slaughtering a sacrificial animal.

### Part 18
<b>But</b> in the case of <b>a hermaphrodite, granted</b> that one does <b>not</b> slaughter it <b>in the Temple,</b> as <b>perhaps it is a female. But with regard to</b> the rest of <b>the country, even let it be</b> considered <b>a male;</b> nevertheless, its <b>female</b> sex organ <b>should be considered</b> as <b>a crack [<i>ḥaritz</i>],</b> which is included in the blemish of “cracked” [<i>ḥarutz</i>] listed in the Torah (Leviticus 22:22), <b>and</b> let <b>one slaughter</b> it <b>due to</b> that blemish.

### Part 19
<b>Abaye said</b> in response: <b>The verse states: “Or cracked or broken”</b> (Leviticus 22:22), which teaches that the blemish of being <b>cracked is similar to</b> that of being <b>broken: Just as</b> the blemish of being <b>broken</b> is relevant <b>in the location of a bone,</b> as there is no break where there is only flesh, <b>so too,</b> the term <b>cracked</b> is referring to a blemish found <b>in the location of a bone,</b> not in the location of the sex organs.

### Part 20
<b>Rava said:</b> Even <b>without</b> the comparison to <b>“broken,” you cannot say that a crack in the location of flesh,</b> where there is no bone, <b>is a blemish. As, if</b> it would <b>enter your mind</b> that <b>it is a blemish, since</b> the <i>tanna</i> of the <i>baraita</i> cited above <b>said</b> with regard to <b>“<i>garav</i>”</b> that <b>this is</b> referring to boils that are hard as <b>earthenware [<i>ḥeres</i>],</b> evidently this blemish is <b>a crack</b> in the skin, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to the skin disease of leprosy: <b>“And its appearance is deeper than the skin”</b> (Leviticus 13:30), and the Sages explained: <b>It is similar to the appearance of</b> an area lit by the <b>sun that</b> seems <b>deeper than the shade,</b> which appears to cover it.

### Part 21
<b>And</b> if so, <b>let the Merciful One write: Crack, and</b> it would <b>not need</b> to state <b><i>garav</i>, and I</b> would <b>say:</b> If being <b>cracked, which is not repulsive, is a blemish,</b> then with regard to <b><i>garav</i>, which is repulsive,</b> should it <b>not all the more so</b> be considered a blemish? Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes <i>garav</i>, to say that a crack</b> found <b>in the location of flesh is not a blemish.</b> Consequently, one cannot say that the female sex organ of a hermaphrodite should be considered a blemish for which one may slaughter a firstborn outside the Temple.

### Part 22
In this connection, the Gemara cites the statement of the mishna with regard to a hermaphrodite: <b>Rabbi Yishmael says: You have no blemish greater than that,</b> and it may be slaughtered. Evidently, Rabbi Yishmael maintains that the female sex organ of a hermaphrodite is considered a blemish. The Gemara explains: Rabbi Yishmael does <b>not state</b> a ruling <b>like</b> that of <b>Abaye,</b> as he maintains that <b>we do not say</b> that the blemish of being <b>cracked is similar to</b> that of being <b>broken.</b> Rather, they are entirely different blemishes, and a crack found on flesh is considered a blemish.

### Part 23
Rabbi Yishmael <b>also</b> does <b>not state</b> a ruling <b>like</b> that of <b>Rava,</b> as <b>perhaps</b> his conclusion that a crack found where there is no bone is not a blemish applies only in a case <b>where it is not conspicuous. But</b> in a case <b>where it is conspicuous,</b> such as the female sex organ, <b>we call it “an ill blemish”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:21), and the animal is disqualified for use as an offering.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC