
### Part 1
<b>But</b> in the case of <b>a blemished</b> firstborn, use of its wool is <b>permitted, even though an expert did not deem</b> the animal <b>permitted</b> for slaughter. This contradicts the statement of Rabbi Asi. The Gemara answers: It is possible that the <b><i>tanna</i> of</b> that <i>baraita</i> <b>calls</b> the animal <b>unblemished wherever an expert did not</b> yet <b>deem</b> the firstborn <b>permitted</b> for slaughter, even if it was physically blemished.

### Part 2
The Gemara remarks: <b>Let us say</b> that the interpretation of Reish Lakish is <b>the subject of</b> a dispute between <b><i>tanna’im</i>,</b> as the <i>baraita</i> states: With regard to <b>one who plucks the wool from an unblemished firstborn, even though it</b> later <b>developed a blemish and</b> the owner <b>slaughtered it,</b> use of the wool is <b>prohibited.</b> In the case of <b>a blemished firstborn from which one plucked</b> wool, <b>and it subsequently died, Akavya ben Mahalalel deems</b> the wool <b>permitted and the Rabbis deem</b> it <b>prohibited. Rabbi Yehuda said:</b> It was <b>not with regard to that</b> case <b>that Akavya ben Mahalalel deemed</b> use of the wool <b>permitted. Rather,</b> it was in a case <b>of the hair of a blemished firstborn</b> animal <b>that shed</b> from the animal <b>and one placed</b> the hair <b>in a compartment, and thereafter one slaughtered</b> the animal. <b>In that</b> case <b>Akavya ben Mahalalel deems</b> use of the wool <b>permitted, and the Rabbis deem</b> its use <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 3
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> My <b>father, Ḥalafta, concedes</b> to Akavya ben Mahalalel <b>in this</b> case of a slaughtered firstborn <b>that</b> use of the wool <b>is permitted. Indeed [<i>aval</i>], the Rabbis said explicitly: One places it in a compartment,</b> as <b>perhaps there is a hope</b> that use of the wool will ultimately be permitted, since if <b>he slaughters</b> the animal <b>all agree</b> that use of the wool is <b>permitted.</b> But if the animal <b>dies</b> by other means, <b>Akavya ben Mahalalel deems</b> use of the wool <b>permitted and the Rabbis deem</b> it <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara raises a difficulty: If that is the explanation of their dispute, the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei is</b> identical to the opinion of <b>the first <i>tanna</i></b> in the <i>baraita</i>, as both hold that use of the wool of a slaughtered blemished firstborn is permitted and the dispute between Akavya ben Mahalalel and the Rabbis applies to a case where the animal dies by other means. <b>Rather, is it not</b> correct to say the dispute <b>between them</b> concerns the requirement that <b>an expert deem</b> the animal <b>permitted</b> for slaughter?

### Part 5
The Gemara elaborates: <b>As the first <i>tanna</i> holds:</b> If <b>an expert deemed</b> the animal <b>permitted</b> before its wool was shed, then <b>yes,</b> use of the wool is permitted after the animal has been slaughtered; <b>but if not,</b> then use of the wool is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>And Rabbi Yosei comes to say</b> that <b>even</b> in a case <b>where an expert did not deem</b> the firstborn <b>permitted</b> for slaughter before its wool was shed, use of the wool is still permitted. If so, the interpretation of Reish Lakish is the subject of the dispute between the first <i>tanna</i> and Rabbi Yosei: The first <i>tanna</i> agrees with that opinion and Rabbi Yosei rejects it.

### Part 6
<b>Rava said: No,</b> the interpretation of Reish Lakish is not the subject of their dispute, <b>as everyone agrees that if an expert deemed</b> the animal <b>permitted</b> before its wool was shed, then <b>yes,</b> use of the wool is permitted, but <b>if</b> an expert <b>did not deem</b> the animal <b>permitted</b> beforehand then the use of its wool is <b>not</b> permitted. <b>And there are three disputes concerning</b> this <b>matter, as the first <i>tanna</i> holds:</b> Akavya ben Mahalalel and the Rabbis <b>disagree</b> with regard to a case where the firstborn <b>died, and the same is true,</b> i.e., they disagree, in a case where <b>he slaughtered it. And</b> the reason <b>that</b> the first <i>tanna</i> states <b>they disagree</b> specifically in a case where it <b>died</b> is <b>to convey to you the far-reaching</b> nature of the opinion <b>of Akavya,</b> i.e., that he deems use of the wool permitted even if the animal was not slaughtered.

### Part 7
<b>And Rabbi Yehuda holds:</b> With regard to a firstborn that <b>died, all,</b> i.e., Akavya ben Mahalalel and the Rabbis, <b>agree</b> that use of the wool is <b>prohibited,</b> and <b>when they disagree</b> it is with regard to a case where the owner <b>slaughtered</b> the animal. <b>And Rabbi Yosei comes to say: Where he slaughtered it, all agree</b> that use of the wool is <b>permitted,</b> and <b>when they disagree</b> it is with regard to a case where the animal <b>died.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> The <b><i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda, since we learned</b> a mishna <b>in our preferred</b> tractate <b>in accordance with his</b> opinion. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Eduyyot</i> 5:6): In the case of <b>the hair of a blemished firstborn</b> animal <b>that shed</b> from the animal <b>and one placed</b> the hair <b>in a compartment, and thereafter he slaughtered</b> the animal, <b>Akavya ben Mahalalel deems</b> use of the wool <b>permitted and the Rabbis deem</b> its use <b>prohibited</b> even after the animal’s death.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak says: The mishna is also precisely</b> formulated so that this conclusion can be inferred, <b>as we learned</b> in the latter clause of the mishna: With regard to <b>wool</b> that was not completely shed <b>which is dangling from a firstborn</b> animal, <b>that which appears</b> to be part <b>of the fleece</b> is <b>permitted</b> when the animal is shorn after its death, <b>and that which does not appear</b> to be part of the fleece is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 10
Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak explains the proof: In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion is this ruling? <b>If we say</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yosei,</b> that is difficult: <b>But in what</b> case did he issue this ruling? <b>If we say</b> it was in a case <b>where he slaughtered it</b> that cannot be correct, as <b>whether</b> the <i>halakha</i> follows the opinion of <b>Akavya</b> or <b>whether</b> it follows the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> in both <b>this</b> case of wool that appears to be part of the fleece <b>and that</b> case where it does not, the use of the wool is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> if one says this is referring to a case <b>where</b> the animal <b>died,</b> that too is difficult. <b>But</b> that cannot be correct either, since <b>if</b> the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with <b>the Rabbis,</b> then both <b>this</b> wool <b>and that</b> wool are <b>prohibited. And if</b> the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with <b>Akavya,</b> then the mishna <b>should have</b> stated the <b>opposite</b> ruling: If the dangling wool <b>appears</b> to be part <b>of the fleece</b> it is <b>prohibited, as</b> the <b>death</b> of the animal <b>renders it prohibited</b> because it is considered attached to the animal; if it <b>does not appear</b> to be part <b>of the fleece</b> it is <b>permitted, as it was</b> considered <b>detached from the beginning,</b> before the animal died.

### Part 12
<b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that this clause of the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Yehuda. And in what</b> case does the mishna’s ruling apply? <b>If we say</b> it is referring <b>to</b> a case where the animal <b>died,</b> then <b>whether</b> the <i>halakha</i> is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Akavya</b> or <b>whether</b> it is in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> in both <b>this</b> case of wool that appears to be part of the fleece <b>and that</b> case where it does not, the use of the wool is <b>prohibited.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather, is it not</b> referring <b>to</b> a case where <b>he slaughtered</b> the animal? <b>And</b> consequently, <b>if</b> the mishna is in accordance with the opinion of <b>Akavya,</b> then in both <b>this</b> case of wool that appears to be part of the fleece <b>and that</b> case where it does not, use of the wool <b>is permitted. Rather, is it not</b> correct to say the mishna <b>is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis? And</b> accordingly, one may <b>conclude from it</b> that Akavya and the Rabbis <b>disagree in</b> a case where <b>he slaughtered</b> the animal? The Gemara affirms: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rabbi Yannai raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>one who plucks wool from an unblemished burnt offering</b> which was later slaughtered, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara expresses surprise: If one intentionally violates a prohibition and <b>plucks</b> the wool from an unblemished consecrated animal, <b>is there anyone who deems</b> it <b>permitted?</b> All agree that use of the wool is prohibited in such a case. <b>Rather,</b> Rabbi Yannai’s question was: With regard to <b>wool that was torn out</b> by itself <b>from an unblemished burnt offering, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 15
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Do not raise the dilemma</b> concerning the wool <b>of a sin offering and a guilt offering. Since</b> these offerings <b>come for atonement</b> the owner <b>does not keep them</b> longer than necessary, and therefore there is no reason to deem the wool prohibited. Likewise, with regard to the wool <b>of a firstborn and</b> an animal <b>tithe</b> offering there is <b>also</b> no dilemma. <b>Since they do not come for atonement one</b> might <b>keep them</b> longer than necessary, and therefore the wool is prohibited in order to prevent one from violating the prohibition against shearing the animal or using it for labor. Rather, <b>when you raise the dilemma,</b> it is with regard to the wool <b>of a burnt offering. What</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Does one say that <b>since</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC