
### Part 1
The Gemara explains that this <i>halakha</i> is repeated in order <b>to include an enhancement that</b> occurs <b>by itself</b> after the death of the father or husband, for instance in a case when <b>fodder [<i>ḥafura</i>],</b> i.e., produce that has grown stalks but is not yet ripe, <b>becomes full ears,</b> or when <b>date flowers [<i>shalpufei</i>] become</b> fully developed <b>dates.</b> Despite the fact that in such cases the property became enhanced by itself, without any effort on the part of the other brothers, the firstborn may not claim his double portion from that enhancement, and the same applies in the other cases mentioned in the mishna.

### Part 2
With regard to the repetition of the statement: <b>Nor</b> does he take twice the portion <b>in</b> property <b>due</b> the father <b>as</b> he does <b>in</b> property <b>in</b> his <b>possession,</b> this serves <b>to include property of the father’s father,</b> in a case where the father died before his own father. The firstborn does not receive his portion in such property, despite the fact that it will certainly come into the father’s possession, as this too is considered property that is due the father, not property in his possession. The same <i>halakha</i> applies also in the case of property due the wife, the daughters, or a <i>yavam</i>.

### Part 3
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these</b> are the people <b>whose</b> properties, unlike an ancestral field, <b>do not return</b> to their original owners <b>in the Jubilee</b> Year: The firstborn who inherited his father’s property by the right of <b>primogeniture</b> need not return the extra portion for redistribution among the brothers; <b>and one who inherits his wife’s</b> property need not return it to her family; <b>and one who consummates the levirate marriage with the wife of his brother</b> and gains the right to his brother’s property need not return it for redistribution among the brothers.

### Part 4
<b>And</b> likewise, <b>a gift</b> of land need not be returned to the original owners in the Jubilee Year; this is <b>the statement of Rabbi Meir. And the Rabbis say:</b> The halakhic status of <b>a gift</b> is <b>like</b> that of <b>a sale,</b> and it must be returned. <b>Rabbi Elazar says: All these</b> lands <b>return in the Jubilee</b> Year. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says: Even one who inherits his wife’s</b> property <b>must return</b> the land <b>to the members of</b> her father’s <b>family and should deduct from them the monetary</b> value of the land, as the Gemara will explain.

### Part 5
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of Rabbi Meir,</b> who holds that none of these items return in the Jubilee Year? The Gemara answers: <b>It is</b> with regard to land acquired specifically by means of <b>a sale that the Merciful One states</b> that it <b>should be returned during the Jubilee</b> Year (see Leviticus 25:28), whereas <b>a gift and an inheritance</b> are <b>not</b> returned. <b>And these</b> cases listed in the mishna that are derived <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>an inheritance</b> have the status of <b>an inheritance, and those</b> that are derived <b>from a gift</b> have the status of <b>a gift.</b> The Gemara elaborates: With regard to <b>a firstborn,</b> it is stated: <b>“By giving him a double portion”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:17); here <b>the Merciful One calls</b> the portion of a firstborn <b>a gift,</b> an item that is given.

### Part 6
<b>And one who inherits his wife’s</b> property need not return it to her family in the Jubilee Year, as Rabbi Meir maintains that <b>the inheritance of a husband</b> is <b>by Torah law,</b> not a rabbinic enactment, and land acquired through inheritance is not returned. <b>And</b> likewise, <b>one who consummates the levirate marriage with the wife of his brother</b> need not return the brother’s property for redistribution among the brothers. This is because <b>the Merciful One calls</b> the <i>yavam</i> <b>a firstborn,</b> in the verse: “And it shall be, the firstborn” (Deuteronomy 25:6), and Rabbi Meir holds that the portion of the firstborn is not returned in the Jubilee Year, as explained earlier.

### Part 7
The mishna further teaches: <b>And the Rabbis say:</b> The halakhic status of <b>a gift</b> is <b>like</b> that of <b>a sale,</b> and must be returned. The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason of the Rabbis?</b> The Gemara answers that the term <b>“you shall return”</b> in the verse: “In the Jubilee Year you shall return every man to his possession” (Leviticus 25:13), is superfluous, as it is already stated: “It shall be a Jubilee for you, and you shall return every man to his possession” (Leviticus 25:10). Therefore, this term serves <b>to include a gift,</b> which is also returned in the Jubilee Year.

### Part 8
<b>And these</b> other cases listed in the mishna <b>are all</b> considered as <b>an inheritance,</b> and consequently they are not returned in the Jubilee Year. With regard to the husband’s inheritance of his wife’s property, the Rabbis, like Rabbi Meir, maintain that it applies by Torah law, and they agree that the <i>yavam</i> is considered like a firstborn with respect to his portion.

### Part 9
As for <b>a firstborn, the verse states: “By giving him a double portion”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:17), and the Rabbis disagree with Rabbi Meir, who derives from this verse that the portion of the firstborn has the status of a gift. Rather, they maintain that the verse <b>juxtaposes the</b> extra <b>portion of the firstborn to the portion</b> he receives as <b>an ordinary</b> brother: <b>Just as the portion</b> of <b>an ordinary</b> brother is not redistributed among the brothers in the Jubilee Year, but rather is <b>an inheritance,</b> as it is stated: “On the day that he causes his sons to inherit” (Deuteronomy 21:16), <b>so too the portion of the firstborn</b> is <b>an inheritance,</b> and is not returned in the Jubilee Year.

### Part 10
The mishna further teaches that <b>Rabbi Elazar says: All these</b> lands <b>return in the Jubilee</b> Year. The Gemara explains that Rabbi Elazar <b>holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis, who say</b> that the term <b>“you shall return”</b> serves <b>to include a gift, and</b> he further maintains that <b>these</b> cases listed in the mishna <b>are all</b> considered <b>gifts.</b> The Gemara elaborates: With regard to <b>a firstborn</b> it is stated: <b>“By giving him a double portion.”</b> Through the use of the term “giving,” <b>the Merciful One calls</b> his portion <b>a gift.</b>

### Part 11
<b>And</b> with regard to <b>one who inherits his wife’s</b> property, Rabbi Elazar maintains that <b>the inheritance of a husband</b> is <b>by rabbinic law,</b> and therefore it does not have the status of an inheritance that does not return in the Jubilee Year. <b>And</b> finally, <b>one who consummates the levirate marriage with the wife of his brother</b> returns the property for redistribution among the brothers, as <b>the Merciful One calls</b> him <b>a firstborn,</b> and Rabbi Elazar rules that the portion of the firstborn is returned in the Jubilee Year.

### Part 12
§ <b>Rabbi Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Brothers who divided</b> property received as an inheritance <b>are</b> considered <b>purchasers</b> from each other, i.e., one does not say they each received the exact inheritance to which they were entitled. <b>And</b> as purchasers of land, <b>they must return</b> the portions <b>to each other in the Jubilee</b> Year, at which point they redistribute the property. <b>Rav Hoshaya raises an objection</b> from the mishna: <b>And these</b> are the people <b>whose</b> properties <b>do not return</b> to their original owners <b>in the Jubilee</b> Year: The firstborn who inherited his father’s property by <b>the</b> right of <b>primogeniture.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar said to</b> Rav Hoshaya: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the clause: <b>They do not return?</b> It means that <b>they do not return for naught,</b> i.e., the firstborn does not forfeit the double portion; rather, when they redistribute the property he again receives a double portion. <b>Rav Sheshet objects to this: By inference</b> from this answer, should one conclude <b>that the one who says</b> the portion of the firstborn <b>returns</b> in the Jubilee Year <b>is saying</b> that <b>it returns for naught?</b> Why should the firstborn lose his double portion?

### Part 14
<b>Rav Ḥama read</b> the verse <b>about Rav Sheshet: “Wisdom is good with an inheritance”</b> (Ecclesiastes 7:11), i.e., it is not enough to inherit knowledge of <i>baraitot</i>, as does Rav Sheshet; rather, one must also be expert in the wisdom of <i>amora’im</i>. Rav Ḥama explained: <b>Didn’t</b> Rav Sheshet <b>hear this</b> matter, <b>that when Ravin came</b> from Eretz Yisrael to Babylonia, <b>he said</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says, <b>and some say</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar said</b> it <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar ben Shammua,</b> who is the <i>tanna</i> Rabbi Elazar in the mishna: <b>What</b> is the meaning of the clause: <b>They return</b> in the Jubilee Year? It means that <b>they return for naught,</b> and they forfeit that which they received.

### Part 15
§ The mishna teaches that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka says: Even one who inherits his wife’s</b> property <b>must return</b> the land <b>to the members of</b> her father’s family and should deduct from them the monetary value of the land. The Gemara asks: <b>What does</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka <b>hold? If he holds</b> that <b>the inheritance of a husband</b> is <b>by Torah law, why must he return</b> the property <b>to the members of</b> his wife’s <b>family?</b> An inheritance by Torah law is not given back in the Jubilee Year. <b>And if he holds</b> that <b>the inheritance of a husband</b> is <b>by rabbinic law, what is the purpose of the money</b> he receives from his wife’s relatives? Since the property belongs to them, they should not have to pay him anything.

### Part 16
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Beroka <b>holds</b> that <b>the inheritance of a husband</b> is <b>by Torah law, and what are we dealing with here?</b> We are dealing with a case <b>where his wife bequeathed to him</b> her family’s <b>graveyard. And due to</b> the need to avoid <b>a family flaw,</b> i.e., harm to the family name, if the wife’s family would be buried in plots belonging to others, <b>the Sages said he should take money</b> from them <b>and return</b> the graveyard.

### Part 17
<b>And</b> this is <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> discussing <i>halakhot</i> connected with burial that serve to uphold family honor: In the case of <b>one who sells his grave, or the path</b> to <b>his grave,</b> or <b>the place</b> where visitors would <b>stand</b> to comfort the mourners, <b>or the place of his eulogies, the members of</b> his <b>family may come and bury him</b> in his ancestral plot <b>against</b> the purchaser’s <b>wishes, due to</b> the need to avoid <b>a family flaw,</b> i.e., harm to the family name. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the clause: <b>And deduct for them</b> part <b>of the monetary</b> value of the property? It means that he must deduct <b>the monetary</b> value <b>of his wife’s grave</b> from the value of the field, as a husband is obligated to pay for his wife’s burial (see <i>Ketubot</i> 47b).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC