
### Part 1
<b>It is clear,</b> as was suggested initially, that <b>Rabbi Yishmael</b> holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who</b> says that <b>one must be concerned for the minority.</b>

### Part 2
<b>Ravina says: You</b> may <b>even say</b> that Rabbi Yishmael holds in accordance with the opinion of <b>the Rabbis. When the Rabbis follow the majority,</b> it is <b>with regard to a majority that is not dependent upon an action</b> but is simply the nature of reality. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a majority that is dependent upon an action,</b> such as the pregnancy of a young goat, which depends upon whether or not it had copulated with a male, the Rabbis do <b>not</b> follow the majority.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one purchased <b>a goat within its first year</b> from a gentile and does not know whether or not it had previously given birth, the subsequent male offspring <b>certainly</b> is given <b>to the priest; from that</b> point <b>forward</b> an offspring’s status as a firstborn is <b>uncertain.</b> If it was <b>a ewe within its second year</b> the offspring <b>certainly</b> is given <b>to the priest; from that</b> point <b>forward</b> an offspring’s status as a firstborn is <b>uncertain.</b> If it was <b>a cow within its third year</b> the offspring <b>certainly</b> is given <b>to the priest; from that</b> point <b>forward</b> an offspring’s status as a firstborn is <b>uncertain.</b> If it was <b>a donkey</b> it is subject to the same <i>halakha</i> <b>as a cow. Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Yehuda, says:</b> The offspring of <b>a donkey within its fourth year</b> also has the status of a firstborn. <b>Until here is the statement of Rabbi Yishmael.</b>

### Part 4
The <i>baraita</i> continues: <b>When these matters were stated</b> by the students <b>before Rabbi Yehoshua, he said to them: Go out</b> and <b>say to Rabbi Yishmael: You erred. Were an animal exempted only by</b> giving birth to <b>an offspring</b> and in no other manner the <i>halakha</i> would be <b>in accordance with your statement. But</b> the Rabbis said: <b>An indication of the offspring in a small animal</b> is <b>a murky discharge</b> from the womb, which exempts subsequent births from the mitzva of the firstborn. <b>And</b> the indication <b>in a large</b> animal is the emergence of <b>an afterbirth, and</b> the indication <b>in a woman</b> is <b>a fetal sac or an afterbirth.</b>

### Part 5
Rabbi Yehoshua added: That is the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>but I myself do not say so. Rather,</b> I hold that <b>a goat that expelled a murky discharge</b> from the womb <b>at</b> the age of <b>six</b> months can <b>give birth within its first year,</b> and <b>a ewe that expelled a murky discharge in its first year</b> can <b>give birth within its second year.</b> The Gemara will later discuss the practical difference between his opinion and the ruling that he ascribes to the Rabbis. <b>Rabbi Akiva says: I have not arrived at this method</b> of determining firstborn status. <b>Rather,</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where it is known that</b> the animal <b>had</b> previously <b>given birth, the priest has nothing here. And</b> in <b>any</b> case <b>where it is known that</b> the animal <b>had not</b> previously <b>given birth, that</b> is given <b>to the priest. And if it is uncertain, it may be eaten in its blemished</b> state <b>by the owner.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>. <b>With regard to what</b> matter <b>do Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Yehoshua disagree? Shall we say they disagree with regard to</b> whether or not <b>a murky discharge</b> from the womb <b>exempts</b> an animal from the mitzva of the firstborn; as <b>Rabbi Yishmael holds</b> that <b>a murky discharge does not exempt</b> an animal because it is not a sign of a birth, <b>and Rabbi Yehoshua holds</b> that <b>a murky discharge exempts</b> an animal?

### Part 7
The Gemara rejects this suggestion: <b>If we</b> actually <b>see a murky discharge, everyone agrees that</b> the <b>murky discharge exempts</b> an animal. <b>And here, it is</b> with regard to whether <b>one is concerned</b> about the possibility that an animal might have expelled <b>a murky discharge that they disagree. Rabbi Yishmael holds</b> that <b>we are not concerned about a murky discharge,</b> and it can therefore be assumed that the first offspring born after its purchase from the gentile is firstborn; <b>and Rabbi Yehoshua holds</b> that <b>one is concerned about a murky discharge,</b> and due to the uncertainty the next offspring remains with its owner.

### Part 8
The Gemara objects: <b>And</b> is it correct that Rabbi Yishmael is <b>not concerned</b> about the possibility that the mother might have expelled a murky discharge before giving birth to a live offspring? <b>But doesn’t Rava say: It is clear</b> that <b>Rabbi Yishmael holds in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Meir, who</b> says <b>one must be concerned for the minority?</b> If so, Rabbi Yishmael should be concerned for a murky discharge as well. The Gemara explains: <b>Where</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>is concerned</b> is when the concern leads <b>to a stringency.</b> But if the concern would lead <b>to a leniency,</b> as in this case, where it would mean that the animal born after a year is only an uncertain firstborn, he is <b>not concerned.</b>

### Part 9
<b>And if you wish, say</b> instead: <b>Whether</b> it leads <b>to a leniency</b> or <b>whether</b> it leads <b>to a stringency</b> Rabbi Yishmael <b>is concerned, and here they disagree with regard to</b> whether or not an animal can <b>expel a murky discharge and</b> then <b>return</b> to its fertile state <b>and give birth within its first year. As Rabbi Yishmael holds:</b> An animal that <b>expels a murky discharge does not return</b> to its fertile state <b>and give birth within its first year, and</b> accordingly, <b>from</b> the fact <b>that this</b> animal <b>gave birth</b> it can be concluded that it <b>certainly did not expel a murky discharge</b> beforehand. <b>And Rabbi Yehoshua holds:</b> An animal that <b>expels a murky discharge returns</b> to its fertile state <b>and</b> can <b>give birth within its first year.</b>

### Part 10
§ The <i>baraita</i> teaches that Rabbi Yehoshua said: That is the opinion of the Rabbis, <b>but I myself do not say so. Rather,</b> I hold that <b>a goat that expelled a murky discharge</b> from the womb <b>at</b> the age of <b>six</b> months still <b>gives birth within its first year,</b> while <b>a ewe that expelled a murky discharge in its first year</b> still <b>gives birth within its second year.</b> The Gemara asks: Since according to both opinions an animal that expelled a murky discharge can still give birth within a year, <b>what</b> difference <b>is there between</b> Rabbi Yehoshua’s <b>tradition</b> of the opinion of the Rabbis <b>and his</b> own <b>reasoning?</b>

### Part 11
The Gemara answers: The difference between their opinions is in a case <b>where</b> a goat <b>expelled a murky discharge at the end of</b> its first <b>six</b> months of life, when the seventh month began, and then gave birth before the end of its first year. <b>And there is</b> a difference <b>between</b> them with regard to the statement <b>of Ze’eiri, as Ze’eiri says:</b> The expulsion of <b>a murky discharge,</b> which is sufficient to exempt an animal from having its future offspring counted a firstborn, prevents it from being impregnated for <b>no less than thirty days.</b> If an animal becomes pregnant within thirty days of expelling a murky discharge, evidently that discharge was not the sign of a fetus, and therefore the offspring will have firstborn status.

### Part 12
In this case, as the pregnancy of a goat lasts five months and a murky discharge was expelled at the end of the sixth month, a goat that gave birth by the end of the year, i.e., twelve months, must have become pregnant within a month of the discharge. The Rabbis, whose opinion Rabbi Yehoshua cited by <b>tradition, accept</b> the statement <b>of Ze’eiri,</b> and therefore they rule that this goat, which became pregnant within a month of the discharge, is not exempt from the mitzva of the firstborn. <b>According to</b> Rabbi Yehoshua’s own <b>reasoning, he does not accept</b> the statement <b>of Ze’eiri,</b> which means that although this animal became pregnant within a month of the discharge, it was nevertheless exempt from the mitzva of the firstborn.

### Part 13
The Gemara suggests another answer: <b>And if you wish, say that everyone accepts</b> the statement <b>of Ze’eiri; and here,</b> in the case of a goat that gave birth within its first year after having expelled a murky discharge at the end of its sixth month, <b>they disagree</b> with regard to whether or not an animal <b>gives birth after incomplete</b> months, i.e., prematurely.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC