
### Part 1
<b>according to Rabbi Eliezer, what will be with them? Let them be eaten dry or roasted, or kneaded with fruit juice, or divided</b> into <b>small batches, provided that</b> there is <b>not an egg-bulk</b> of volume <b>in a single</b> batch. <b>And Ulla says: What is the reason</b> that the mixture may not be allowed to come in contact with water, despite the fact that it is entirely non-sacred? It is a rabbinic <b>decree, lest one bring a <i>kav</i> of non-sacred, impure</b> produce <b>from</b> some <b>other place and</b> take <b>a <i>kav</i> and</b> a little <b>more from this</b> mixture. Then he will <b>think</b> to himself: <b>I will nullify</b> the <i>kav</i> of impure produce <b>with the majority</b> of pure produce from the mixture. <b>But since there is some amount</b> of impure produce in the mixture, the <b>type</b> that was nullified <b>found its</b> own <b>type and is revived</b> in its impure state.

### Part 2
Abaye <b>said to</b> Rav Dimi: That proof is not conclusive. Even <b>if impurity revives impurity,</b> as in the case of <i>teruma</i> where the <i>kav</i> of produce is impure, why should it be assumed that <b>purity revives impurity,</b> as is suggested with regard to the fish brine, where the water in the pot is pure?

### Part 3
Abaye <b>raised an objection to</b> the opinion of Rabbi Yirmeya from a mishna (<i>Para</i> 9:7): If the <b>ashes</b> of a red heifer, which impart ritual impurity to the priests involved in its ritual and are <b>fit</b> for sprinkling on someone impure with impurity imparted by a corpse, <b>became intermingled with</b> regular <b>burned ashes, we follow the majority</b> in order <b>to</b> determine whether or not the mixture is <b>impure. And</b> therefore, <b>if</b> the <b>majority is</b> composed of the regular <b>burned ashes,</b> the mixture does <b>not impart impurity.</b> Abaye explains the objection: <b>And if you say</b> nullified <b>impurity is considered like an item that is</b> nevertheless present in the mixture and can be revived, then <b>although</b> the mixture <b>does not impart impurity through</b> physical <b>contact</b> as it is assumed that one touches the majority, <b>let it impart impurity through carrying</b> due to the ashes of the red heifer.

### Part 4
Rav Dimi responded: In fact, <b>it was stated with regard to that</b> mishna that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says:</b> The mixture is <b>pure</b> in the sense that it does not <b>impart impurity through contact, but it</b> does <b>impart impurity through carrying.</b>

### Part 5
Abaye responded: <b>But doesn’t Rav Ḥisda say:</b> If meat from an animal carcass, which imparts ritual impurity, was mixed with the meat of a slaughtered animal, the meat from the <b>carcass is nullified by</b> the meat of the <b>slaughtered animal</b> in the event that the ritually pure meat constitutes a majority. The reason is <b>that it is impossible for a carcass to become a slaughtered</b> animal, i.e., a ritually slaughtered animal can never have the status of a carcass with regard to impurity. Abaye explains the difficulty: <b>Granted that it does not impart impurity through contact,</b> but if the impurity is considered present to some extent <b>let</b> the mixture <b>impart impurity through carrying.</b>

### Part 6
Rav Dimi <b>said to</b> Abaye: <b>You learned</b> the mishna <b>according to</b> the interpretation of <b>Rav Ḥisda,</b> but <b>we learned it according to</b> the interpretation of <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> as <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches:</b> With regard to meat from <b>an animal carcass and</b> meat from <b>a slaughtered</b> animal, <b>one nullifies the other,</b> depending on the majority. <b>And it was stated with regard to this</b> ruling that <b>Rabbi Yosei, son of Rabbi Ḥanina, says:</b> If the majority is from a slaughtered animal the mixture is <b>pure</b> in the sense that it does not <b>impart impurity through contact, but it</b> does <b>impart impurity through carrying.</b>

### Part 7
Abaye raised another difficulty: <b>And that which we learned</b> in our mishna contradicts your opinion, as <b>Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov says:</b> In the case of <b>a large animal that expelled a mass of</b> congealed <b>blood, that</b> mass <b>must be buried, and</b> the animal <b>is exempt from</b> having any future offspring counted <b>a firstborn. And Rabbi Ḥiyya teaches</b> with regard to this ruling: That mass <b>does not impart</b> ritual <b>impurity,</b> neither <b>through</b> physical <b>contact nor through carrying.</b> But <b>why?</b> If Rav Dimi is correct, then <b>granted it does not impart impurity through contact,</b> but <b>let it</b> nevertheless <b>impart impurity through carrying.</b> Rav Dimi <b>was silent</b> in response.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: Why was Rav Dimi silent? <b>Perhaps</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>is different here, as it is decayed impurity,</b> since an animal carcass that has rotted does not impart impurity at all. The Gemara comments: <b>This works out well according to</b> the opinion of <b>bar Padda, who says:</b> An item with <b>severe</b> ritual <b>impurity,</b> such as that of a nonviable newborn, imparts impurity to substances <b>until</b> it is rotted to the degree that it is no longer fit to be consumed <b>by a gentile</b> who observes certain mitzvot [<i>ger toshav</i>], who is permitted to consume it; <b>but</b> an item with <b>light impurity,</b> which transmits impurity only by contact, imparts impurity to substances <b>until</b> it is no longer fit to be eaten <b>by a dog.</b> And as <b>this</b> congealed mass is <b>not fit</b> to be eaten <b>by a <i>ger</i></b> <i>toshav</i> it does not impart impurity. <b>But according to Rabbi Yoḥanan, who says:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC