
### Part 1
that if <b>one rendered impure</b> the <b>ritually pure items</b> of another <b>and died</b> before paying, the Sages <b>did not penalize his son after his</b> death and require him to pay for the damage. <b>What is the reason</b> for this? The reason is that <b>damage that is not evident,</b> i.e., which does not involve any visible change, <b>is not considered damage</b> by Torah law. There is <b>a penalty</b> imposed <b>by rabbinic law,</b> as the injured party suffered a loss, but <b>the Sages penalized</b> only <b>him; the Sages did not penalize his son.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> There was <b>an incident involving an old ram whose hair was</b> long and <b>dangling,</b> because it was a firstborn offering. <b>And one</b> Roman <b>quaestor [<i>kastor</i>] saw it and said</b> to its owner: <b>What is the status [<i>tivo</i>] of this</b> animal that you allowed it to grow old and you did not slaughter it? <b>They said to him:</b> It <b>is a firstborn</b> offering, <b>and</b> therefore <b>it may be slaughtered only if it has a blemish.</b> The quaestor <b>took a dagger [<i>pigom</i>] and slit its ear. And the incident came before</b> the <b>Sages</b> for a ruling, <b>and they deemed</b> its slaughter <b>permitted. And after</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> its slaughter <b>permitted,</b> the quaestor <b>went and slit the ears of other firstborn</b> offerings, <b>but</b> in these cases the Sages <b>deemed</b> their slaughter <b>prohibited,</b> despite the fact that they were now blemished.

### Part 3
<b>One time children were playing in the field and they tied the tails of lambs to each other, and the tail of one of them was severed, and it was a firstborn</b> offering. <b>And the incident came before the Sages</b> for a ruling <b>and they deemed</b> its slaughter <b>permitted.</b> The people who <b>saw that they deemed</b> its slaughter <b>permitted went and tied the tails of other firstborn</b> offerings, <b>and</b> the Sages <b>deemed</b> their slaughter <b>prohibited. This</b> is <b>the principle:</b> With regard to <b>any</b> blemish <b>that is</b> caused <b>intentionally,</b> the animal’s slaughter is <b>prohibited;</b> if the blemish is caused <b>unintentionally,</b> the animal’s slaughter is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna mentions that <b>one time</b> children <b>were</b> involved in a case in which they unintentionally blemished a firstborn offering whose subsequent slaughter the Sages deemed permitted. The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> although the first clause of the mishna mentions a similar occurrence, the incident involving the children is <b>necessary. As, had</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught us</b> only the incident involving the <b>gentile,</b> it might have been thought that the Sages permitted the slaughter of the firstborn offering only there, <b>as</b> it is <b>not</b> a problem if the gentile <b>will acquire the habit</b> of causing blemishes, because that prohibition does not apply to gentiles. <b>But</b> with regard to a Jewish <b>minor,</b> it is a concern <b>that he</b> is likely <b>to acquire the habit</b> of causing blemishes in firstborn offerings, and therefore one might <b>say</b> that even the first, unintentional time should <b>not</b> be permitted.

### Part 5
<b>And had</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught us</b> only the incident involving <b>a minor,</b> it might have been thought that the Sages deemed the firstborn offering permitted only there, <b>since</b> there is <b>no</b> concern that people <b>will come to confuse</b> a minor <b>with an adult.</b> People would not erroneously conclude that it is permitted to cause a blemish on a firstborn offering intentionally merely due to an incident involving a minor. <b>But</b> in the case of <b>a gentile</b> adult, where this is a concern <b>that</b> people would <b>come to confuse</b> him <b>with</b> a Jewish <b>adult,</b> one might <b>say</b> that even the first, unintentional time should <b>not</b> be permitted. It is therefore <b>necessary</b> for the mishna to teach both cases.

### Part 6
§ The Gemara analyzes the incident involving the Roman quaestor. <b>Rav Ḥisda says</b> that <b>Rav Ketina says: They taught</b> that the firstborn offering is permitted <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the bystanders <b>said to</b> the quaestor: A firstborn offering may not be slaughtered <b>unless it has a blemish,</b> as this is referring to a blemish that develops naturally. <b>But if they said to him</b> that a firstborn offering may be slaughtered only <b>if a blemish was caused</b> to form <b>upon it,</b> which indicates human intervention, <b>it is considered as though they</b> explicitly <b>told him: Go and cause a blemish on it,</b> in which case the animal is prohibited.

### Part 7
The Gemara cites a dissenting opinion. <b>Rava said: Now</b> consider, both expressions in fact indicate that the blemish occurred <b>by itself,</b> as both statements are in the passive. Accordingly, <b>what</b> difference is it <b>to me</b> whether the bystanders used the expression: If it <b>had</b> a blemish, or the expression: A blemish <b>was caused</b> in it? <b>Rather,</b> the expression: <b>Was caused, also</b> indicates that it occurred <b>by itself, and</b> there <b>is no difference</b> between the expressions. In both instances the firstborn offering would be permitted.

### Part 8
The mishna teaches that <b>this</b> is <b>the principle:</b> In the case of <b>any</b> blemish <b>that is</b> caused <b>with</b> his <b>intent,</b> the animal’s slaughter is <b>prohibited.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>What</b> does this principle serve <b>to add?</b> It serves <b>to add an indirect</b> action, i.e., a blemish caused in this manner is also considered an intentional act and the animal may not be slaughtered on its account.

### Part 9
The Gemara further inquires: What is added by the phrase in the second part of the principle: If the blemish was caused <b>without</b> his <b>intent,</b> the animal’s slaughter is permitted? This serves <b>to add</b> an instance where a gentile did not inquire about the nature of the firstborn offering, but rather discovered it from one who <b>speaks offhandedly.</b> Although the gentile intentionally caused a blemish in the animal, since the Jew did not intentionally prompt him to cause it, the animal is permitted.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one’s <b>firstborn</b> offering <b>was pursuing him,</b> and <b>he kicked</b> the animal <b>and caused a blemish in it, he may slaughter</b> the animal <b>on</b> account of <b>that</b> blemish.

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Pappa says: They taught</b> that the firstborn offering may be slaughtered <b>only</b> in an instance <b>where he kicked it at the time of its pursuit. But</b> if the individual kicked the animal <b>after</b> its <b>pursuit,</b> it may <b>not</b> be slaughtered, as he intended to cause a blemish in order to render it permitted to be slaughtered. The Gemara raises a difficulty: It is <b>obvious</b> that it is not permitted to slaughter the animal in such a case.

### Part 12
The Gemara explains: Rav Pappa’s statement is necessary, <b>lest you say</b> that it is in fact permitted to slaughter the firstborn offering since he kicked it after its pursuit only out of anger, as <b>he recalls his distress</b> caused by its pursuit of him, and not in order to render the animal permitted to be slaughtered. Rav Pappa therefore <b>teaches us</b> that it is assumed that he kicked the animal with the express intention of causing a blemish in it, not merely out of anger, and therefore it may not be slaughtered.

### Part 13
<b>There are</b> those <b>who say</b> the opposite version of this discussion. <b>Rav Pappa says: Do not say</b> that if the individual kicked the firstborn offering <b>at the time of</b> the <b>pursuit,</b> then <b>yes,</b> it is permitted to slaughter it, <b>but</b> if he kicked it <b>not at the time of</b> the <b>pursuit,</b> it is <b>not</b> permitted to slaughter it. <b>Rather, even</b> if he kicked it <b>after</b> its <b>pursuit</b> of him, it is <b>also</b> permitted. <b>What is the reason?</b> It is assumed that he kicked it after the pursuit not with the intention of causing a blemish, but because <b>he recalls his distress</b> caused by its pursuit of him.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rav Yehuda says: It is permitted to cause a blemish in a firstborn</b> fetus <b>before it emerges into the air of the world,</b> as it obtains its sacred status only when it is born. Applying this ruling, <b>Rava said:</b> In the case of <b>a kid,</b> it is practical to cause a blemish <b>on its ear.</b> Since a kid’s ears are long they emerge from the birth canal prior to the head. With regard to <b>a lamb,</b> whose ears are short and do not appear before the head, it is practical to cause a blemish only <b>on its lip. There are</b> those <b>who say</b> that there is a different version of this statement: In the case of <b>a lamb as well,</b> it is practical to cause a blemish <b>on its ear,</b> as one can <b>say</b> that <b>it emerges</b> from the birth canal <b>through its temples,</b> in which case its ears are visible first.

### Part 15
<b>Rava says:</b> In a case where a firstborn has a blemish in its mouth, if, when it <b>eats,</b> the blemish <b>is not visible,</b> but when it opens its mouth wide and <b>cries out, it is visible,</b> this <b>is</b> considered <b>a blemish,</b> rendering the animal fit for slaughter. The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> this <b>teaching us? We learn</b> this in the mishna (39a) with regard to blemishes that render a firstborn offering fit for slaughter: <b>The external gums that were damaged</b> and lacking or <b>that were scratched,</b> and likewise, <b>the internal</b> gums <b>that were</b> entirely <b>extracted,</b> are considered blemished. <b>What is the reason</b> that if the internal gums were extracted it is considered a blemish? Is it <b>not because when</b> the animal opens its mouth wide and <b>cries out, it is visible?</b> If so, what is the novelty of Rava’s statement?

### Part 16
<b>Rav Pappa says</b> in response: <b>Rava</b> is not in fact teaching a novel <i>halakha</i>. Rather, he <b>is explaining the reason</b> for the ruling <b>of the mishna: What is the reason</b> that if the internal gums <b>were extracted it is</b> considered <b>a blemish?</b> It is <b>that when</b> the animal opens its mouth wide and <b>cries out,</b> the blemish <b>is visible.</b>

### Part 17
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>all the blemishes that are capable of being brought about by a person, Israelite shepherds are deemed credible</b> to testify that the blemishes were not caused intentionally. But <b>priest-shepherds are not deemed credible,</b> as they are the beneficiaries if the firstborn is blemished. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> A priest is <b>deemed credible</b> to testify <b>about</b> the firstborn <b>of another, but is not deemed credible</b> to testify <b>about</b> the firstborn belonging <b>to him. Rabbi Meir says:</b> A priest <b>who is suspect about the matter</b> of causing a blemish may <b>neither adjudicate nor testify</b> in cases involving that matter, even on behalf of another.

### Part 18
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar</b> disagree with regard to the meaning of the mishna. <b>One</b> of them <b>says</b> that the case of <b>Israelite shepherds</b> is where the shepherds are in <b>the house of priests,</b> i.e., in the employ of a priest. These shepherds are <b>deemed credible</b> to testify that the blemishes were not caused intentionally, as <b>we are not concerned</b> they are lying <b>for a swallow [<i>lilegima</i>]</b> of the firstborn that their priest employer might give them in exchange.

### Part 19
And the case of <b>priest-shepherds</b> is where the shepherds are in <b>the house of an Israelite,</b> i.e., in the latter’s employ. In such a case, the priest-shepherds <b>are not deemed credible</b> to testify that the blemishes were not caused intentionally, as the priest-shepherd <b>can say: Since I have toiled with</b> this firstborn offering, my Israelite employer <b>will not forsake me and give</b> it <b>to another</b> priest. The priest is assumed to be lying, as he has a motive to cause a blemish in the animal.

### Part 20
<b>And the same is true</b> in the case of <b>a priest</b> who testifies <b>for</b> the sake of another <b>priest.</b> Although the first priest would not derive benefit from his testimony immediately, he is nevertheless not deemed credible to testify, <b>as we are concerned about reciprocal</b> behavior, i.e., the other priest might later repay the favor and lie on his behalf.

### Part 21
<b>And Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel comes to say</b> that the testimony of a priest in such a case, when he testifies <b>about</b> the firstborn <b>of another</b> priest, <b>is deemed credible,</b> as there is no concern about reciprocal behavior. But <b>he is not deemed</b> credible <b>with regard to his own</b> firstborn. <b>And Rabbi Meir comes to say</b> that a priest, <b>who is suspect about the matter</b> of causing a blemish, may <b>neither adjudicate nor testify</b> in cases involving that matter, even on behalf of another. The difference between the opinion of Rabbi Meir and that of the first <i>tanna</i> will be discussed further on.

### Part 22
The Gemara cites the other explanation of the mishna: <b>And</b> the other <b>one</b> of the two <i>amora’im</i> <b>says:</b> The case of <b>Israelite shepherds</b> is where the shepherds <b>are priests</b> in the employ of an Israelite. The mishna is teaching that these shepherds <b>are deemed credible</b> to testify that the blemishes on their employer’s firstborn offering were not caused intentionally, as they are not suspected of lying in order to obtain its meat.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC