
### Part 1
<b>Here, too,</b> the <i>halakha</i> <b>is no different.</b>

### Part 2
<b>And Shmuel</b> could <b>say to you: There,</b> with regard to betrothal, it is <b>in his power to betroth her from now,</b> when he gave her the coins, and therefore it is irrelevant that the money was spent. Conversely, <b>here,</b> in the case of redemption, it is <b>not in his power to redeem</b> his son <b>from now.</b> With regard to the practical <i>halakha</i> in this dispute the Gemara comments: <b>And even though we maintain</b> as a principle <b>that wherever Rav and Shmuel disagree the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav in ritual matters and in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel in monetary matters, here the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel,</b> who holds that if one redeems his son within thirty days he is not redeemed.

### Part 3
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>We learned</b> in the mishna on the previous <i>amud</i>: If the firstborn son <b>dies within thirty days</b> of birth, <b>although</b> the father <b>gave</b> five <i>sela</i> coins <b>to the priest,</b> the priest <b>must return</b> the <b>five <i>sela</i></b> coins <b>to him.</b> The Gemara infers: <b>The reason</b> he must return the money is <b>that</b> the son <b>died. But</b> if he did <b>not die</b> within thirty days <b>his son is redeemed</b> despite the fact that the father gave the priest the money prior to the proper time. This inference contradicts the opinion of Shmuel. The Gemara answers: <b>Here we are dealing with</b> a case <b>where</b> the <b>money is</b> still <b>extant,</b> i.e., in the priest’s possession.

### Part 4
The Gemara comments: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> another difficulty from the mishna: If the father of the firstborn son dies within thirty days of the birth <b>the presumptive status of</b> the son is <b>that he is not redeemed, until</b> people <b>will tell him that he is redeemed.</b> But if people tell him he is redeemed then the redemption is effective, in contradiction to the opinion of Shmuel. The Gemara answers: <b>There too,</b> it is referring <b>to</b> a case <b>where</b> the <b>money is</b> still <b>extant,</b> i.e., in the priest’s possession.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates that <b>a <i>tanna</i> taught</b> a <i>baraita</i> <b>in the presence of Rav Yehuda:</b> In the case of <b>one who redeems his</b> firstborn <b>son within thirty days</b> of his birth, <b>his son is redeemed.</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said to him: Shmuel said his son is not redeemed, and</b> yet <b>you say his son is redeemed?</b> The Gemara comments: <b>And even though we maintain</b> that the <i>halakha</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav in ritual matters and in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Shmuel in monetary matters, here the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Shmuel.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna teaches that if one had both <b>himself to redeem and his son to redeem, his</b> own redemption <b>takes precedence over</b> that of <b>his son. The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If one had both <b>himself to redeem and his son to redeem, his</b> own redemption <b>takes precedence over</b> that of <b>his son. Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The redemption of <b>his son takes precedence, as the mitzva</b> to redeem the father is incumbent <b>upon his</b> own <b>father, and the mitzva</b> to redeem <b>his son</b> is incumbent <b>upon him.</b> Consequently, he should first fulfill the mitzva that is incumbent upon him by redeeming his son.

### Part 7
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya says: Everyone concedes</b> that in a case <b>where there are only five <i>sela</i></b> coins available and one has to redeem both himself and his son, <b>his</b> own redemption <b>takes precedence over</b> that of <b>his son,</b> despite the indication to the contrary from the mishna. <b>What is the reason?</b> The reason is <b>that his own mitzva is preferable</b> to one he performs on behalf of others. <b>Where they disagree</b> is in a case <b>where there is</b> both land worth <b>five</b> <i>sela</i> coins that is <b>liened</b> property that had been previously sold to others <b>and</b> land worth <b>five</b> <i>sela</i> coins that is <b>unsold</b> property.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains the reasoning behind the dispute: <b>Rabbi Yehuda maintains</b> that <b>a loan that is written in the Torah,</b> i.e., a financial obligation by Torah law, such as redemption of the firstborn son with five <i>sela</i> coins, is <b>considered as though it is written in a document,</b> and it can therefore be collected from liened property, as can any loan recorded in a document. Therefore, the five <i>sela</i> coins that are liened property are available for one’s own redemption but not for that of one’s son, as the sale of the property presumably occurred before the birth of his firstborn. <b>And</b> therefore the priest <b>goes and repossesses</b> the land worth <b>five</b> <i>sela</i> that is <b>liened</b> property <b>for his</b> own redemption, like any debt written in a document; <b>and with those five</b> <i>sela</i> of <b>unsold</b> property <b>he redeems his son.</b> In this manner, one can fulfill both mitzvot.

### Part 9
<b>And the Rabbis maintain: A loan that is written in the Torah is not considered as though it is written in a document,</b> since buyers will not know to guard against repossession if it is not written in a document. Therefore, the five <i>sela</i> coins that are liened property are not available for redemption, and consequently <b>his own mitzva is preferable.</b> He accordingly redeems himself with the land that is not liened.

### Part 10
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> The <b>five <i>sela</i></b> coins <b>of</b> the redemption of <b>the</b> firstborn <b>son,</b> with regard to which it is written: “Five shekels of silver, after the shekel of the Sanctuary” (Numbers 18:16), are calculated <b>using a Tyrian <i>maneh</i>.</b> The silver content of the Tyrian coinage is significantly higher than that of provincial coinage, which is worth one-eighth its value.

### Part 11
With regard to the <b>thirty</b> shekels paid to the owner <b>of</b> a Canaanite <b>slave</b> who is killed by an ox (see Exodus 21:32), and the <b>fifty</b> shekels paid <b>by a rapist</b> (see Deuteronomy 22:29) <b>and by a seducer</b> (see Exodus 22:16) of a young virgin woman, <b>and</b> the <b>one hundred</b> shekels paid <b>by the defamer</b> of his bride with the claim that she is not a virgin (see Deuteronomy 22:19), <b>all of them,</b> even those cases where the word shekel is not explicitly written, are paid <b>in the shekel of the Sanctuary,</b> whose value is twenty <i>gera</i> (see Numbers 18:16) and that is calculated <b>using a Tyrian <i>maneh</i>. And all</b> monetary obligations <b>are redeemed,</b> i.e., paid, <b>with</b> coins <b>or with</b> items of <b>the equivalent</b> value of <b>money, except for the</b> half-<b>shekels</b> that are donated to the Temple each year, which must be given specifically as coins.

### Part 12
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna stated that the five <i>sela</i> coins of the redemption of the son are calculated using <b>a Tyrian <i>maneh</i>.</b> In explanation of this, <b>Rabbi Asi says:</b> One must give five <i>sela</i> of <b>the <i>maneh</i></b> used <b>in Tyre. Rabbi Ami says:</b> The five <i>sela</i> coins are equal to a golden <b>Arabian dinar. Rabbi Ḥanina says:</b> There is <b>a Syrian <i>sela</i> [<i>istera</i>], eight</b> of <b>which are sold for</b> a large golden <b>dinar.</b> One must give <b>five of these for the redemption of the son.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC