
### michna 1
If there is uncleanness in a wall, in a space of one cubic handbreadth, all upper stories above it, even if there are ten of them, are unclean. If there was a single upper story [built] over two houses, that one becomes unclean but all upper stories above it remain clean. [In a] beach- wall, uncleanness cleaves upwards and downward. [With regard to] a solid tomb monument,  a person who touches it from the side remains clean, since [its] uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards. But if there was a [free] space of a cubic handbreadth in the place where the uncleanness was, a person touching it anywhere becomes unclean, because it is like a closed grave. If he supported sukkot on [the monument] they become unclean. Rabbi Judah declares them clean.

### michna 2
All sloping [parts] of ‘tents’ are reckoned like ‘tents.' A ‘tent’ [whose sides] sloped downwards and finished off one fingerbreadth [from the ground]: If there is uncleanness in the ‘tent’, vessels beneath the slope become unclean. If there is uncleanness beneath the slope, vessels in the ‘tent’ become unclean. If there is uncleanness within, a person who touches [the tent] from the inside acquires a seven [days’] defilement,   but from the outside, a defilement [lasting till] evening. If there had been uncleanness outside, a person who touches the ‘tent’ from the outside acquires a seven [days’] defilement, but from the inside, a defilement [lasting till] evening. If there was [a portion of uncleanness] the size of half an olive [touching it] from inside and half an olive from the outside, a person who touches [the ‘tent’] either from within or without acquires a defilement [lasting till] evening. If a part [of the ‘tent’ side] trailed along the ground, when there is uncleanness beneath or above [this part], the uncleanness cleaves upwards and downwards. [In the case of] a ‘tent’ erected in an upper story, with a portion [of its side] trailing over the hatch between the house and the upper story: Rabbi Yose says it does protect. Rabbi Shimon says: it does not protect unless it put up in the usual manner of erecting tents.

### michna 3
If a corpse is in a house in which there are many doors, they all become unclean. If one of them was opened, that one becomes unclean but all the rest remain clean. If he intended to carry out the corpse through one of them or through a window of four hand breadths square, he protects all the other doors. Bet Shammai says: the intention must have been formed before the person died. Bet Hillel say: even after he died. If [a door] was blocked up and it was decided to open it: Bet Shammai says: [it is effective]   as soon he opens a [a space] four handbreadths square. Bet Hillel says: as soon as [the process] has begun. They agree, however, that when making an opening for the first time, four handbreadths must be opened up.

### michna 4
If a woman was having great difficulty giving birth and they carried her out from one house to another, the first house is doubtfully unclean and the second is certainly unclean. Rabbi Judah said: When is this so? When she is carried out [supported] by the armpits, but if she was able to walk, the first house remains clean, for after the "tomb" has been opened there is no possibility of walking, For stillborn children are not [deemed to have] opened the "tomb" until they present a head rounded like a spindle-knob.

### michna 5
If [at the birth of twins] the first came out dead and the second came out alive, the [live one] is clean. If the first was alive and the second dead, the [live child] is unclean. Rabbi Meir says: if they were in one sac, [the live child] is unclean,  but if there were two sacs, it remains clean.

### michna 6
If a woman is having trouble giving birth, they cut up the child in her womb and brings it forth limb by limb, because her life comes before the life of [the child]. But if the greater part has come out, one may not touch it, for one may not set aside one person's life for that of another.

>Credit : Dr. Joshua Kulp
>License : CC-BY