
### Part 1
<b>including the hide of the vulva,</b> the <i>halakha</i> is the same: If one performs the sacrificial rites with intent to burn one of them <b>outside its</b> designated <b>area,</b> the offering is <b>unfit, but there is no</b> liability for <b><i>karet</i></b> for one who partakes of the offering. If he had intent to burn it <b>beyond its</b> designated <b>time,</b> this renders it <b><i>piggul</i>, and one is liable</b> to receive <b><i>karet</i> for</b> eating <b>it.</b> This <i>baraita</i> indicates that only Rabbi Shimon holds that the hide of the hooves is treated like its flesh, and that the Sages disagree, as Rabbi Yoḥanan stated.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>And these are <i>tereifot</i> in a bird:</b> One with <b>a perforated gullet, or</b> with <b>a cut windpipe</b> that was cut across its width; or if <b>a weasel struck</b> the bird <b>on its head</b> in <b>a place that renders it a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> as one must be concerned that the membrane of the brain was perforated; or if <b>the gizzard was perforated;</b> or if <b>the small intestines were perforated.</b> In a case where a bird <b>fell into the fire and its innards were singed [<i>neḥmeru</i>], if</b> they turned <b>green</b> they are <b>unfit,</b> and the bird is a <i>tereifa</i>, but <b>if</b> they are <b>red</b> the bird is <b>kosher.</b> If a person <b>trampled</b> the bird, <b>or slammed it against a wall, or if an animal crushed it and it is twitching,</b> it is a <i>tereifa</i> because its limbs were shattered. <b>But</b> if the bird <b>lasted for</b> a twenty-four-hour <b>period, and</b> then <b>one slaughtered it,</b> it is <b>kosher.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna states: If a weasel struck the bird on its head in a place that renders it a <i>tereifa</i>, one must be concerned that the membrane of the brain was perforated. <b>Rav and Shmuel and Levi say:</b> How does one inspect the membrane? After slaughter, one <b>inserts his hand into</b> the mouth of the bird and pushes the nerve tissue with his finger <b>and inspects</b> it. <b>If</b> the nerve tissue <b>emerges and rises</b> out through the hole in the skull, the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> because this proves that the membrane has been perforated, allowing the nerve tissue through. <b>And if not,</b> the animal is <b>kosher.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> (45a) that an animal is not a <i>tereifa</i> <b>unless the inner membrane is perforated</b> as well. <b>But according to the one who says</b> that the animal is rendered a <i>tereifa</i> if <b>the outer</b> membrane <b>was perforated, even if the inner</b> membrane <b>was not perforated,</b> how can one rely on this inspection? <b>Let us be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps the outer</b> membrane <b>was perforated</b> but <b>the inner</b> membrane <b>was not perforated,</b> in which case the animal is a <i>tereifa</i> even if the nerve tissue does not emerge through the hole. The Gemara responds: <b>If it is</b> the case <b>that the outer</b> membrane <b>was perforated, the inner membrane will</b> inevitably <b>burst due to its fragility,</b> allowing the nerve tissue to emerge. If it does not emerge, it is certain that the outer membrane is intact as well.

### Part 5
<b>Ze’eiri says: There is no</b> effective <b>inspection for</b> a bird bitten on the head by <b>a weasel, because</b> the weasel’s <b>teeth are</b> so <b>thin</b> that even if they perforate the membrane, the nerve tissue will not emerge through the perforations. The Gemara asks: <b>And if its teeth are thin, what of it?</b> Certainly a small amount will emerge through the perforation. <b>Rav Oshaya said:</b> There is no inspection <b>because its teeth are fine and crooked.</b> The hole in the skull does not overlap the perforation in the membrane, and nothing will be able to escape.

### Part 6
The Gemara recounts: <b>When</b> Ze’eiri <b>went up to Neharde’a, he sent</b> a message <b>to</b> the Sages: <b>The matters that I stated before you are an error on my part. In fact, they said this in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: One inspects</b> a bird bitten on the head by <b>a weasel with</b> one’s <b>hand,</b> pressing against the nerve tissue to see if it emerges through the hole, <b>but not with a nail.</b> One may not inspect it by dragging the tip of a nail over the surface of the membrane to see if it catches on a perforation, since the nail itself may perforate the membrane. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> One may <b>even</b> inspect it <b>with a nail.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> this disagreement is also reflected <b>in the dispute of Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya,</b> wherein <b>one inspected</b> the bird <b>by hand, and one inspected</b> it <b>with a needle. The one who inspected</b> it <b>by hand said to the one who inspected</b> it <b>with a needle: Until when will you waste the money of the Jewish people</b> by causing them to discard kosher meat? Sometimes the needle itself will perforate a membrane that was initially whole. <b>The one who inspected</b> it <b>with a needle said to the one who inspected</b> it <b>by hand: Until when will you feed carcasses to the Jewish people,</b> as you permit for consumption a bird that might well be forbidden?

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>Carcasses? But</b> this is a <b>slaughtered</b> animal; even if it is forbidden, it is a <i>tereifa</i>, not a carcass. <b>Rather,</b> he must have said: Until when will you feed <b><i>tereifot</i></b> to the Jewish people; <b>perhaps the membrane of the brain was perforated.</b> Inspection by hand is not reliable, since the teeth of the weasel are thin and crooked and the nerve tissue may not escape even if the membrane is perforated.

### Part 9
The Gemara notes: <b>It may be concluded that it is Rabbi Yehuda who inspected</b> it <b>by hand, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar says in the name of Rabbi Yehuda</b> that <b>one may inspect</b> a bird bitten on the head by <b>a weasel with</b> one’s <b>hand, but not with a nail.</b> The <i>baraita</i> continues: If <b>the bone</b> of the skull <b>was broken, even if the membrane of the brain was not perforated,</b> the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>. The Gemara affirms: Indeed, <b>it may be concluded</b> that Rabbi Yehuda permits inspection only by hand.

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>This itself</b> is <b>difficult. You said</b> in the <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may inspect</b> a bird injured by <b>a weasel with</b> one’s <b>hand, but not with a nail; apparently, it has</b> an option of <b>inspection. But you then teach:</b> If <b>the bone</b> of the skull <b>was broken, even if the membrane of the brain was not perforated,</b> the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>; <b>apparently it has no inspection,</b> because inspecting for a perforation would be pointless. The Gemara responds: In <b>the latter clause, we come to</b> discuss <b>a water bird,</b> which cannot be inspected, <b>since it has no membrane.</b> The Gemara clarifies: Can it <b>enter your mind</b> that it <b>has no membrane?</b> One can see that it does. <b>Rather,</b> the response is: <b>Since its membrane is fragile,</b> it must have ruptured when the skull was broken.

### Part 11
Similarly, the Gemara relates that <b>Rav Naḥman said to Rav Anan: The Master says</b> that <b>Shmuel inspects</b> a bird bitten on the head by a weasel <b>with</b> his <b>hand and deems it kosher</b> if the membrane is not perforated, <b>and our colleague</b> Rav <b>Huna</b> also <b>says that Rav inspects</b> it <b>by hand and deems it kosher. But doesn’t Levi teach:</b> Those <b><i>tereifot</i> that the Sages enumerated in an animal</b> apply <b>likewise in a bird,</b> and <b>in addition to those, a bird</b> is a <i>tereifa</i> if <b>the bone</b> of the skull <b>was broken, even if the membrane of the brain was not perforated?</b> If so, how can a bird be permitted through inspection? Rav Anan <b>said to him: That</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a water bird,</b> which cannot be inspected <b>since it has no membrane.</b> The Gemara clarifies: Can it <b>enter your mind</b> that it <b>has no membrane? Rather,</b> the response is: <b>Since its membrane is fragile.</b>

### Part 12
Similarly, the Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain hen that was in the house of Rav Ḥana</b> whose skull was injured. <b>He sent it before Rav Mattana,</b> who inspected it and found that <b>the bone</b> of the skull <b>was broken but the membrane of the brain was not perforated, and he deemed it kosher.</b> Rav Ḥana <b>said to</b> Rav Mattana: <b>But doesn’t Levi teach:</b> Those <b><i>tereifot</i> that the Sages enumerated in an animal</b> hold <b>likewise in a bird,</b> and <b>in addition to those, a bird</b> is a <i>tereifa</i> if <b>the bone</b> of the skull <b>was broken, even if the membrane of the brain was not perforated?</b> Rav Mattana <b>said to him: That</b> <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to a water bird,</b> which cannot be inspected <b>since it has no membrane.</b> The Gemara clarifies: Can it <b>enter your mind</b> that it <b>has no membrane? Rather, say</b> that his response was: <b>Since its membrane is fragile.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara notes that <b>Rav Sheizvi would inspect</b> the membrane of the brain <b>by</b> the light of <b>the sun. Rav Yeimar would inspect</b> it <b>by</b> pouring <b>water</b> into the skull through the hole, to see if it emerges mixed with nerve tissue. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov would inspect</b> it

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC