
### Part 1
<b>one examines a knife</b> to ensure that it is perfectly smooth with no nicks <b>and gives it to</b> the transgressor, <b>and</b> it is <b>permitted to eat from</b> what <b>he slaughtered. But if one did not examine</b> the knife <b>and give it to</b> the transgressor, the transgressor <b>may not slaughter</b> an animal <i>ab initio</i>. <b>And if</b> the transgressor <b>slaughtered</b> an animal, <b>one examines his knife after his</b> slaughter. If <b>his knife is found</b> to be <b>perfectly</b> smooth, it is <b>permitted to eat</b> meat <b>from</b> what <b>he slaughtered, and if not,</b> it is <b>prohibited to eat from</b> what <b>he slaughtered.</b>

### Part 2
And it teaches: This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to all people <b>except for a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor, whose</b> slaughter is <b>not</b> valid <b>even after the fact.</b> The reason the Sages deemed such slaughter not valid is <b>lest</b> people in these categories <b>interrupt</b> the slaughter, <b>lest they press</b> the knife in the course of slaughter, <b>and lest they conceal</b> the knife beneath the windpipe or the gullet in the course of an inverted slaughter. The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to the clause in the mishna that follows: <b>And any of them who slaughtered</b> an animal and others see and supervise them, their slaughter is valid, <b>to which</b> case in the mishna is it referring? <b>If we say</b> that the reference is to the case <b>of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor,</b> since that is the <i>halakha</i> to which <b>it stands adjacent,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> formulated the phrase: <b>And if they slaughtered,</b> instead of: And any of them who slaughtered.

### Part 3
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the reference is to the case <b>of a Jewish transgressor</b> who slaughters. The Gemara asks: In what case? <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where one examined a knife and gave it to</b> the transgressor, <b>didn’t you say</b> in that case that the transgressor <b>may slaughter <i>ab initio</i>? Rather,</b> perhaps the reference is to a case <b>where one did not examine</b> the knife. <b>If</b> it is a case <b>where the knife is</b> available, <b>let him examine</b> the knife <b>now</b> to make sure that there are no nicks. <b>And if</b> it is a case <b>where the knife is not</b> available, then <b>when others see him</b> slaughter, <b>what of it?</b> How can one eat from what he slaughtered? <b>Perhaps he slaughtered the animal with a notched knife.</b> The Gemara concedes that the formulation of the mishna: And any of them who slaughtered, is <b>difficult</b> according to this explanation of the mishna.

### Part 4
§ <b>Ravina said</b> in resolution of the apparent contradiction in the mishna <b>that this</b> is what the mishna <b>is teaching: Everyone slaughters,</b> i.e., <b>everyone</b> who is <b>an expert</b> in the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter <b>slaughters;</b> all <b>experts</b> are qualified to slaughter, <b>and</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even if they are not established</b> as accustomed to slaughter with a steady hand and without fainting.

### Part 5
<b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said in a case <b>where</b> people <b>know about him that he knows</b> and is able <b>to recite the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter. But if</b> people <b>do not know about him that he knows</b> and is able <b>to recite the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter, he may not slaughter</b> an animal <i>ab initio</i>. <b>And if he slaughtered</b> an animal, <b>one examines him; if he knows</b> and is able <b>to recite the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter</b> it is <b>permitted to eat</b> meat <b>from</b> what <b>he slaughtered, and if not,</b> it is <b>prohibited to eat from</b> what <b>he slaughtered.</b>

### Part 6
And it teaches: This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to all people <b>except for a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor, whose</b> slaughter is <b>not</b> valid <b>even after the fact.</b> The reason the Sages deemed such slaughter not valid is <b>lest</b> people in these categories <b>interrupt</b> the slaughter, <b>lest they press</b> the knife in the course of slaughter, <b>and lest they conceal</b> the knife beneath the windpipe or the gullet in the course of an inverted slaughter. The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to the clause in the mishna that follows: <b>And any of them who slaughtered</b> an animal and others see and supervise them, their slaughter is valid, <b>to which</b> case in the mishna is this referring? <b>If we say</b> that the reference is to the case <b>of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor,</b> since that is the <i>halakha</i> to which <b>it stands adjacent,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> formulated the phrase: <b>And if they slaughtered,</b> instead of: And any of them who slaughtered.

### Part 7
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the reference is <b>to</b> a case <b>where they are not experts.</b> The Gemara rejects the possibility that they are not experts, as in that case, if <b>one examines him</b> after the slaughter to determine his expertise in the <i>halakhot</i> of ritual slaughter, it is <b>sufficient.</b> The Gemara answers: Supervision is necessary in the case where the one who slaughtered the animal <b>is not before us</b> so <b>that we</b> can <b>examine him.</b>

### Part 8
<b>And there are</b> those <b>who say</b> that <b>Ravina said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>is teaching: Everyone slaughters,</b> i.e., <b>everyone</b> who is <b>established</b> as accustomed to slaughter with a steady hand and without fainting <b>slaughters;</b> all those <b>established</b> concerning this are qualified to slaughter, <b>even</b> if it is <b>not</b> known if <b>they are experts. In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said in a case <b>where they slaughtered before us two or three times and did not faint. But if he did not slaughter before us two or three times he may not slaughter</b> an animal <i>ab initio</i>, <b>lest he faint. And if he slaughtered</b> an animal <b>and said: It is clear to me that I did not faint, his slaughter is valid.</b>

### Part 9
And it teaches: This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to all people <b>except for a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor, whose</b> slaughter is <b>not valid even after the fact.</b> The reason the Sages deemed such slaughter not valid is <b>lest</b> people in these categories <b>interrupt</b> the slaughter, <b>lest they press</b> the knife in the course of slaughter, <b>and lest they conceal</b> the knife beneath the windpipe or the gullet in the course of an inverted slaughter. The Gemara asks: If so, with regard to the clause in the mishna that follows: <b>And any of them who slaughtered</b> an animal and others see and supervise them, their slaughter is valid, <b>to which</b> case in the mishna is this referring? <b>If we say</b> that the reference is to the case <b>of a deaf-mute, an imbecile, and a minor,</b> since that is the <i>halakha</i> to which <b>it stands adjacent,</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>should have</b> formulated the phrase: <b>And if they slaughtered,</b> instead of: And any of them who slaughtered.

### Part 10
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps the reference is <b>to</b> a case <b>where they are not established</b> as accustomed to slaughter with a steady hand and without fainting. The Gemara rejects that possibility, as in that case, <b>didn’t you say</b> that if one said after the slaughter: <b>It is clear to me</b> that I did not faint, it is <b>sufficient?</b> The Gemara answers: Supervision is necessary in the case <b>where</b> the one who slaughtered the animal <b>is not before us</b> so <b>that we</b> can <b>ask him</b> whether he fainted.

### Part 11
The Gemara summarizes: <b>Ravina and Rabba bar Ulla did not say</b> a resolution to the apparent contradiction in the mishna <b>like</b> that of <b>Abaye, Rava, and Rav Ashi due to</b> the fact <b>that</b> the phrase in the mishna: <b>And any of them who slaughtered,</b> is <b>difficult for them.</b>

### Part 12
<b>All of</b> the other <i>amora’im</i> <b>did not say</b> a resolution to the apparent contradiction in the mishna <b>like</b> that of <b>Rabba bar Ulla,</b> who interprets the mishna as referring to the case of a ritually impure person; <b>according to that version that you said:</b> The mishna <b>here</b> is the <b>primary</b> source for the <i>halakha</i> of a ritually impure person who slaughtered a sacrificial animal, the other <i>amora’im</i> reject this interpretation because, <b>on the contrary,</b> the mishna <b>there</b> is the <b>primary</b> source, <b>as it is standing in</b> tractate <i>Zevaḥim</i>, which deals with <b>sacrificial</b> animals.

### Part 13
The <i>amora’im</i> also reject the interpretation <b>according to that</b> other <b>version that you said:</b> The mishna <b>there</b> is the <b>primary</b> source, <b>and here, since</b> the <i>tanna</i> <b>taught</b> the case of <b>a ritually impure</b> person who slaughtered <b>non-sacred</b> animals, <b>he teaches</b> the case of <b>a ritually impure</b> person who slaughtered <b>sacrificial</b> animals <b>as well.</b> The reason is that it <b>was not necessary for</b> the <i>tanna</i> to teach the case <b>itself</b> of <b>a ritually impure</b> person who slaughtered <b>a non-sacred</b> animal, as in the opinion of the other <i>amora’im</i>, the halakhic status of <b>non-sacred</b> foods <b>that were prepared according to</b> the strictures of <b>sacrificial</b> food is <b>not like</b> that of <b>sacrificial</b> food, and it is permitted to render such food impure.

### Part 14
<b>All of</b> the other <i>amora’im</i> <b>did not say</b> a resolution to the apparent contradiction in the mishna <b>like</b> that of <b>Ravina; according to that version that he said: Experts, yes,</b> may slaughter <i>ab initio</i>, but those <b>that</b> it is <b>not</b> known that they are <b>experts, no,</b> they may not slaughter <i>ab initio</i>, the other <i>amora’im</i> disagree because they hold that <b>the majority</b> of those <b>associated with slaughter are experts.</b> Therefore, even if it is not known whether they are experts, their slaughter is valid.

### Part 15
<b>According to that version that</b> Ravina <b>said:</b> People who are <b>established</b> as accustomed to slaughter without fainting, <b>yes,</b> they may slaughter <i>ab initio</i>, but people who are <b>not established</b> as accustomed to slaughter without fainting, <b>no,</b> they may not slaughter <i>ab initio</i>, the other <i>amora’im</i> disagree because they hold that <b>we are not concerned for</b> the possibility of <b>fainting.</b>

### Part 16
<b>Rava did not say</b> a resolution <b>like</b> that of <b>Abaye,</b> that the mishna is referring to a Samaritan, <b>in accordance with</b> the <b>difficulty</b> that <b>he</b> raised from the <i>halakha</i> of wine belonging to a Jew to which a gentile has access. <b>Abaye did not say</b> a resolution <b>like</b> that of <b>Rava,</b> that a Samaritan may slaughter <i>ab initio</i> if a Jew enters and exits, because <b>there,</b> in the case of wine, the gentile <b>does not touch</b> the wine; therefore, it is sufficient if the Jew enters and exits. <b>Here,</b> in the case of slaughter, the Samaritan <b>touches</b> the animal in the course of slaughter, and he can disqualify the slaughter in an instant. Therefore, Abaye holds that it is insufficient for a Jew to enter and exit.

### Part 17
<b>Rav Ashi did not say</b> a resolution <b>like</b> that of <b>both of them,</b> Abaye and Rava, because <b>he holds: Samaritans are converts</b> who converted under duress due to the threat posed by <b>lions,</b> and their conversion is void; therefore, their halakhic status is that of a gentile, whose slaughter is not valid.

### Part 18
<b>Abaye did not say</b> a resolution <b>like</b> that of <b>Rav Ashi,</b> who interprets the mishna as referring to a Jewish transgressor whose transgression is that he eats unslaughtered animal carcasses to satisfy his appetite, because <b>he does not hold that which Rava</b> said, that such a transgressor may slaughter <i>ab initio</i> if his knife is examined beforehand by someone reliable. <b>But</b> as for <b>Rava, what is the reason</b> that <b>he did not say</b> a resolution <b>in accordance with his</b> own statement of <b><i>halakha</i></b> with regard to the slaughter of a transgressor and explain the mishna in the manner that Rav Ashi did?

### Part 19
The Gemara answers: When Rava explained that the <i>tanna</i> in the mishna is referring to the slaughter of a Samaritan, <b>he stated</b> his opinion <b>in accordance with the statement of Abaye</b> in order to resolve the difficulty that Abaye raised; <b>but he himself does not hold accordingly.</b>

### Part 20
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>The slaughter</b> performed by <b>a Samaritan is permitted</b> <i>ab initio</i>. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is said in a case <b>where</b> there is <b>a Jew standing over him</b> and supervising to ensure that the slaughter was performed properly. <b>But</b> if the Jew <b>came and found that</b> the Samaritan already <b>slaughtered</b> the animal, the Jew <b>cuts an olive-bulk</b> of meat from the slaughtered animal <b>and gives it to</b> the Samaritan to eat. If the Samaritan <b>ate it,</b> it is <b>permitted</b> for the Jew <b>to eat</b> meat <b>from</b> what the Samaritan <b>slaughtered. But if</b> the Samaritan <b>did not</b> eat the meat, it is <b>prohibited to eat from</b> what the Samaritan <b>slaughtered.</b>

### Part 21
<b>Similarly,</b> if the Jew <b>found in the possession of</b> a Samaritan

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC