
### Part 1
<b>it is certain that</b> the perforation was created <b>before</b> the <b>slaughter</b> of the animal, and it is therefore a <i>tereifa</i>. If <b>a drop of blood is not found on it, it is certain that it</b> occurred <b>after</b> the <b>slaughter,</b> when the blood of the animal had stopped flowing. The animal is therefore kosher.

### Part 2
If <b>a scab covered the opening of the wound,</b> i.e., the perforation, <b>it is certain that</b> the perforation occurred <b>three days before</b> the <b>slaughter.</b> Consequently, if the animal was sold less than three days before the slaughter, the buyer can claim that the transaction was performed in error, as he did not intend to purchase a <i>tereifa</i> animal, and the seller must refund the buyer. If <b>a scab did not cover the opening of the wound,</b> and it is uncertain whether the perforation occurred before or after the animal was purchased, <b>the burden of proof rests upon the claimant.</b> Accordingly, the buyer must furnish proof that the perforation occurred before the purchase in order to demand a refund.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from all other perforations, where even though there is no blood</b> on the wound the <b>Master deems</b> the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>There,</b> in all other cases, <b>there is nothing to</b> which the blood can <b>attach.</b> Even if the wound had bled, the blood would be reabsorbed into the flesh. <b>Here, since there is a needle,</b> it follows that <b>if it is</b> the case that the perforation occurred <b>before slaughter,</b> blood from the wound <b>would have attached</b> to the needle. Accordingly, if there is no blood on the needle, it is certain that the perforation occurred after slaughter.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Safra said to Abaye:</b> Did <b>the Master see a Torah scholar who came from the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>and said: My name is Rav Avira? He said</b> that there was <b>an incident that came before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi involving <b>a needle that was found in the thickness of the reticulum</b> protruding <b>from</b> only <b>one side, and he deemed</b> the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> Abaye <b>sent</b> a message <b>to</b> Rav Avira calling for him to come and explain the matter, since this contradicts the <i>baraita</i> that states that the animal is a <i>tereifa</i> only if the needle protrudes from both sides. Rav Avira <b>did not come before him,</b> so Abaye <b>went before</b> Rav Avira. Rav Avira <b>was standing on the roof.</b> Abaye <b>said to him: Let Master descend and come,</b> but Rav Avira <b>did not descend.</b> Abaye <b>ascended to him</b> and <b>said to him: Say to me, what were the circumstances of the incident itself?</b>

### Part 5
Rav Avira <b>said to him: I am a director of assemblies</b> in the study hall. I was standing <b>above the Great Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, <b>and Rav Huna of Tzippori and Rabbi Yosei of Medea were sitting before him, and a needle came before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>that was found in the thickness of the reticulum</b> protruding <b>from one side,</b> i.e., the inside, <b>and Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>turned</b> the reticulum <b>over and found a drop of blood on</b> the outside, parallel to the wound on the inside, <b>and he deemed</b> the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>. And he said: If there is no wound</b> on the outside <b>there</b> as well, <b>from where</b> is this <b>drop of blood?</b> Abaye <b>said to</b> Rav Avira: <b>He caused that man trouble</b> needlessly, i.e., you troubled me for no reason. <b>This is</b> nothing more than <b>the mishna,</b> which states that an animal is a <i>tereifa</i> if the <b>omasum or the reticulum was perforated to the outside.</b>

### Part 6
§ The mishna states: An animal that <b>fell from the roof</b> is a <i>tereifa</i>, since its limbs may have been shattered. <b>Rav Huna says:</b> If one <b>left an animal above,</b> on the roof, <b>and he came</b> back <b>and found it below,</b> but did not see it fall, <b>one</b> need <b>not be concerned with regard to the shattering of limbs.</b> One may presume that it jumped intentionally and was not injured.

### Part 7
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain kid belonging to Ravina that saw barley groats through</b> an open <b>skylight. It jumped</b> down through the skylight and <b>fell from the roof to the ground.</b> The case <b>came before Rav Ashi,</b> and Ravina <b>said to him:</b> What is the rationale for <b>this</b> statement <b>that Rav Huna says,</b> that if one <b>left an animal above and he came</b> back <b>and found it below, one</b> need <b>not be concerned about the</b> possible <b>shattering of limbs?</b> Is it <b>because</b> the animal usually <b>has something to grab hold of?</b> If so, since <b>this</b> kid jumped through a skylight, it <b>did not have something to grab hold of,</b> and one must be concerned. <b>Or perhaps</b> it is <b>because</b> the animal <b>evaluates itself</b> and determines that it can jump without injury. If so, <b>this</b> kid <b>also evaluated itself</b> before jumping, and one need not be concerned.

### Part 8
Rav Ashi <b>said to him:</b> It is <b>because</b> the animal <b>evaluates itself</b> before jumping, <b>and this</b> kid <b>also evaluated itself</b> before jumping. Therefore, one need not be concerned about the possible shattering of limbs.

### Part 9
The Gemara relates that there was <b>a certain ewe that was</b> in <b>the house of Rav Ḥaviva, whose hind legs would drag. Rav Yeimar said: This</b> ewe <b>suffers from rheumatism</b> [<b><i>shigrona</i></b>], and this is why she drags her legs. <b>Ravina objects to this: But perhaps the spinal cord was cut,</b> and this is why the ewe dragged her legs, and the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>They inspected her and found</b> that the spinal cord was cut, <b>as Ravina</b> said. The Gemara notes: <b>And even so, the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rav Yeimar,</b> since <b>rheumatism is common,</b> but a cut <b>spinal cord is not common.</b> Accordingly, one need not be concerned about the possibility of a cut spinal cord.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Huna</b> also <b>says:</b> With regard to <b>rams that butt one another, one</b> need <b>not be concerned with regard to shattering of limbs. Even though they are in pain and stand</b> still, it is <b>only a fever that afflicts them;</b> one need not be concerned about the possibility of severe injuries. But <b>if they fall to the ground</b> due to the impact, <b>we certainly must be concerned</b> that their limbs may have been shattered.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Menashei says:</b> With regard to <b>these rams that thieves steal</b> and throw over the fence, <b>one</b> need <b>not be concerned with regard to the shattering of limbs. What is the reason</b> for this? <b>When</b> the thieves <b>throw them</b> over the fence, <b>they throw them</b> so that they land <b>on their hips,</b> where they will not be injured, <b>so that they will</b> be able to <b>run before them.</b> But if the thieves <b>returned them</b> to the owner, <b>we certainly must be concerned</b> that their limbs may have been shattered, since thieves do not throw them carefully when returning them. <b>And this statement</b> applies only <b>when they return them due to fear</b> of being caught, or are otherwise forced to return them. <b>But</b> if they return them <b>due to repentance, they have performed full-fledged repentance</b> and will take care to return them without injury.

### Part 12
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says:</b> If <b>one hit</b> an animal <b>on its head</b> with a stick, <b>and</b> the length of the stick <b>continued toward its back;</b> or if one hit the animal <b>on its tail and</b> the length of the stick <b>continued toward its head,</b> such that in either case the blow extended <b>along the entire spine, one</b> need <b>not be concerned with regard to the shattering of limbs. But if the</b> length of the <b>stick concluded at the middle of the back, we</b> must be <b>concerned</b> that the strike caused an injury to the spine. <b>And if there are knots,</b> i.e., protrusions, <b>on</b> the stick, <b>we</b> must be <b>concerned</b> that it injured the spine, even if the stick fell across the entire back. <b>And if he struck it like a slash</b> across the width of the back, <b>we</b> must <b>be concerned</b> that it injured the spine.

### Part 13
§ <b>Rav Naḥman says: The womb is not subject to</b> concern about possible <b>shattered limbs.</b> In other words, one need not be concerned that the limbs of a newborn calf may have been shattered by the narrow birth canal. <b>Rava said to Rav Naḥman:</b> That which <b>is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>supports your</b> opinion: <b>A one-day-old infant</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC