
### Part 1
<b>place</b> the <b>detail between</b> the two generalizations <b>and</b> then <b>expound them as a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization.</b> Therefore, the first instance of the phrase <b>“in the waters”</b> is <b>a generalization.</b> The phrase <b>“in the seas and in the rivers”</b> is <b>a detail.</b> And by the second instance of the phrase <b>“in the waters,” it then generalized</b> again.

### Part 2
Therefore, as in any instance of <b>a generalization, and a detail, and a generalization, you may deduce</b> that the verse is referring <b>only</b> to items <b>similar to the detail. Just as the detail,</b> seas and rivers, is referring <b>explicitly</b> to <b>flowing water, so too,</b> fish without fins and scales found in <b>all flowing water</b> are forbidden. <b>What</b> does this <b>include?</b> It includes <b>trenches and water channels, to prohibit</b> fish without fins and scales found in them. <b>And what</b> does it <b>exclude?</b> It excludes <b>pits, ditches, and caves,</b> which are collections of still water, <b>to permit</b> all fish found in them.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>say: Just as the detail</b> refers <b>explicitly</b> to <b>water that grows,</b> i.e., is found, <b>on the ground, so too,</b> it includes <b>all water that grows on the ground? And what</b> would this <b>include?</b> It would include <b>even pits, ditches, and caves, to prohibit</b> fish found in them that do not have fins and scales. <b>And what</b> would it <b>exclude?</b> It would <b>exclude</b> only those found in <b>vessels.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara responds: <b>If so, what use is</b> the phrase “These <b>may you eat</b> of all that are in the waters”? Even without it, vessels would be excluded, since they are not at all similar to seas and rivers. Rather, the phrase “These may you eat of all that are in the waters” serves to indicate that only trenches and water channels are considered similar to the detail, but all fish found in pits, ditches, and caves are permitted.

### Part 5
§ The <i>tanna</i> of the school of <b>Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> The verse’s use of the phrase <b>“in the waters,” “in the waters” twice is not</b> to be interpreted as <b>a generalization and a detail,</b> but <b>rather</b> as an instance of <b>amplification and restriction.</b> By the first phrase <b>“in the waters,”</b> the verse <b>amplifies,</b> by the phrase <b>“in the seas and in the rivers” it restricts,</b> and by the second instance of <b>“in the waters” it then amplifies again.</b> According to a hermeneutical principle, when a verse <b>amplified, and</b> then <b>restricted, and</b> then <b>amplified, it amplified</b> the relevant category to include <b>everything</b> except for the specific matter excluded by the restriction, i.e., in the seas and in the rivers. <b>What,</b> then, <b>does it include?</b> It includes <b>trenches and water channels, to prohibit</b> fish without fins and scales found in them. <b>And what does it exclude?</b> It excludes fish found in <b>pits, ditches, and caves, to permit</b> them.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: Why not <b>say: What does it include?</b> It includes fish found in <b>pits, ditches, and caves, to prohibit</b> them if they do not have fins and scales. <b>And what does it exclude?</b> It excludes only fish found in <b>vessels.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>If so, what use is</b> the phrase “These <b>may you eat</b> of all that are in the waters”? Even without it, vessels would be excluded. Rather, it indicates that pits, ditches and caves are excluded by the restriction, and all fish found in them are permitted.

### Part 7
The Gemara objects: <b>But</b> perhaps <b>l should reverse</b> the statement and claim that fish without fins and scales in pits, ditches, and caves are prohibited, and those in trenches and water channels are permitted. The Gemara responds: One must say <b>as Mattitya taught, as Mattitya bar Yehuda taught: What did you see</b> that caused you <b>to include pits, ditches, and caves, to permit</b> them, <b>and to exclude trenches and water channels, to prohibit</b> them? <b>I include pits, ditches, and caves, which</b> contain <b>still</b> water <b>like vessels, and I exclude trenches and water channels, which are not still like vessels,</b> as water flows through them.

### Part 8
§ The <i>baraita</i> on the previous <i>amud</i> states that the Torah permits all fish without fins and scales in vessels both explicitly and implicitly. The Gemara asks: <b>Which</b> verse is the <b>implicit</b> source <b>and which</b> is the <b>explicit</b> source? <b>Rav Aḥa and Ravina disagree with regard to it. One says:</b> The verse permitting “whatever <b>has</b> fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers,” is the <b>explicit</b> source, <b>and</b> the verse prohibiting “all that <b>have not</b> fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers,” is the <b>implicit</b> source. <b>And one says</b> the opposite, i.e., that the verse prohibiting “all that <b>have not</b> fins and scales” is the <b>explicit</b> source <b>and</b> the verse that permits “whatever <b>has</b> fins and scales” is the <b>implicit</b> source.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the one who says</b> that “whatever <b>has</b> fins and scales” is the <b>explicit</b> source? The Gemara responds: That Sage could have <b>said to you: It is from</b> this verse <b>that</b> the Gemara derives on the previous <i>amud</i> that fish without fins and scales found in <b>vessels are permitted.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reasoning of the one who says</b> that “all that <b>have not</b> fins and scales” is the <b>explicit</b> source? The Gemara responds: The reasoning is <b>that it is this</b> verse <b>that proves that the other</b> verse permits all fish in vessels. <b>As, if</b> one attempted to derive whether fish in vessels are permitted <b>from the other</b> verse alone, <b>I would say</b> the opposite: The verse indicates that a fish with fins and scales is permitted only in the seas and rivers; but <b>in vessels, even if it has</b> fins and scales, <b>you</b> may <b>still not eat</b> it. The phrase in the verse “and all that have not fins and scales” indicates that these restrictions apply only to fish in the seas and rivers.

### Part 11
§ <b>Rav Huna says: A person should not pour beer</b> into a vessel <b>through straw</b> to filter it <b>at night, lest</b> a creeping animal <b>emerge</b> from the beer <b>above the straw and then fall into the cup.</b> Since the drinker poured the beer through a filter, he will assume that all creatures found in the vessel originated there and are permitted despite lacking fins and scales. He will therefore drink the beer along with the creature, <b>and</b> in doing so, he <b>violates</b> the prohibition: “Every <b>swarming thing that swarms upon the earth</b> is a detestable thing; it shall not be eaten” (Leviticus 11:41).

### Part 12
The Gemara objects: <b>If so,</b> that one must be concerned that a creeping animal may have fallen from the straw into the cup, one should <b>also</b> be concerned about any beer found <b>in a vessel,</b> as <b>perhaps</b> some creature <b>emerged</b> from the beer <b>onto the side of the vessel,</b> thereby becoming forbidden, <b>and then fell</b> back <b>into the vessel.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>There, that is</b> the creature’s normal manner of <b>growth,</b> to attach itself to the sides of the vessel, and it is not considered to have emerged from the liquid.

### Part 13
<b>And from where do you say</b> that emerging in its normal manner of growth does not render it forbidden? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>to include pits, ditches, and caves, that</b> one may <b>dig</b> them <b>and drink from them and</b> need <b>not refrain</b> from drinking the creeping creatures inside them? <b>The verse states:</b> “These <b>may you eat of all that are in the waters,”</b> indicating that all fish in pits, ditches, and caves are permitted. <b>And</b> one might ask: <b>Let</b> one <b>be concerned</b> that <b>perhaps</b> a creature <b>emerged</b> from the water <b>onto the side</b> of the pit or cave, thereby becoming forbidden, <b>and then fell</b> back into it. <b>Rather,</b> one must say that since <b>that is</b> the creature’s normal manner of <b>growth,</b> it does not render it forbidden. <b>Here too,</b> with regard to beer in a vessel, <b>that is</b> the creature’s normal manner of <b>growth</b> and does not render it forbidden.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Ḥisda said to Rav Huna:</b> A <i>baraita</i> <b>is taught that supports your</b> statement that one need be concerned only about filtered beer: The verse: <b>“Every swarming thing that swarms upon the earth</b> is a detestable thing” (Leviticus 11:41), serves <b>to include gnats</b> found in liquid <b>that one filtered.</b> One may infer: <b>The reason</b> they are prohibited is <b>because one filtered</b> the liquids, <b>but</b> if one <b>did not filter them,</b> the gnats <b>are permitted.</b> Evidently, one need not be concerned that they emerged from the water onto the side of the vessel.

### Part 15
§ With regard to the prohibition against consuming creeping animals, <b>Shmuel says: A cucumber that became infested with worms</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC