
### Part 1
One may infer that <b>here,</b> since this verse specifies that it is referring to <b>a kid of the goats, consequently, anywhere</b> the word <b>“kid” is stated without specification, it means even a cow or a ewe.</b> Accordingly, the prohibition of meat cooked in milk applies to all kosher domesticated animals.

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why not <b>derive from</b> that verse that in general, every instance of the word “kid” is referring to a goat, including the prohibition of meat cooked in milk? The Gemara answers: This cannot be, as <b>another verse is written: “And the skins of the kids of the goats”</b> (Genesis 27:16). This indicates that only <b>here</b> they are <b>kids of the goats, but anywhere</b> the word <b>“kid” is stated without specification, it means even a cow or a ewe.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara objects: <b>But let us derive from</b> this verse as well that on the contrary, the word “kid” is always referring to a goat. The Gemara explains: These two examples <b>are two verses that come as one,</b> i.e., to teach the same matter, <b>and</b> as a rule, <b>any two verses that come as one do not teach</b> their common element to other cases.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>This works out well according to the one who says</b> this principle that two verses that come as one <b>do not teach</b> their common element to other cases, <b>but according to the one who says</b> that two verses that come as one do <b>teach</b> their common element to other cases, <b>what is there to say?</b> The Gemara answers: <b>Two exclusions are written,</b> as both of the verses cited use the term “the goats.” The verses could have stated simply: <b>Goats,</b> but state <b>“the goats,”</b> with the definite article, teaching that it is only in these cases that the reference is specifically to a goat.

### Part 5
§ <b>Shmuel says:</b> Each of the Torah’s three mentions of the prohibition of not cooking a kid in its mother’s milk serves to include a different case. The first mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> serves <b>to include</b> liability for cooking in milk and eating forbidden <b>fats,</b> beyond the liability for eating forbidden fat per se. The second mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> likewise serves <b>to include</b> additional liability for cooking in milk and eating the meat of <b>a dead</b> animal carcass. Finally, the third mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> serves <b>to include</b> liability for cooking in milk and eating an animal <b>fetus.</b>

### Part 6
Each mention excludes a case as well: The first mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> liability for cooking in milk and consuming <b>blood.</b> The second mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> liability for cooking in milk and eating <b>the placenta</b> of an animal. The third mention of the word <b>“kid”</b> serves <b>to exclude</b> liability for cooking in milk and eating the meat of <b>a non-kosher</b> animal.

### Part 7
Furthermore, the first instance of the phrase <b>“in its mother’s milk”</b> indicates that one is <b>not</b> liable for cooking meat <b>in the milk of a male</b> animal, in the rare case that a male might produce milk. The second instance of the phrase <b>“in its mother’s milk”</b> indicates that one is <b>not</b> liable for cooking meat <b>in the milk of</b> an already <b>slaughtered</b> animal, since it is considered milk only if given while the animal is alive. The third instance of the phrase <b>“in its mother’s milk”</b> indicates that one is <b>not</b> liable for cooking meat <b>in the milk of a non-kosher</b> animal.

### Part 8
The Gemara challenges: The word <b>“kid” is written</b> only <b>three</b> times, <b>and</b> yet <b>we expound</b> it to teach <b>six</b> different <i>halakhot</i>. The Gemara responds: <b>Shmuel maintains</b> that <b>a prohibition takes effect</b> even where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists, <b>and</b> therefore the <b>prohibition of</b> forbidden <b>fat</b> in milk <b>and</b> the prohibition of <b>a dead</b> animal carcass in milk <b>are both derived from one verse,</b> as both are applications of the prohibition to an already prohibited item. The exclusion of <b>blood</b> from the prohibition <b>also</b> does not require its own verse, as blood <b>is not</b> considered <b>a kid</b> at all, <b>and likewise</b> there is no need for a verse to exclude <b>a placenta</b> from the prohibition, as it <b>is merely a secretion</b> of the animal, rather than a kind of meat. Therefore, <b>two</b> mentions of “kid” <b>are left; one</b> serves <b>to include a fetus, and one</b> serves <b>to exclude a non-kosher animal.</b>

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>And does Shmuel</b> really <b>maintain</b> that <b>a prohibition takes effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists? <b>But didn’t Shmuel say in the name of Rabbi Elazar: From where</b> is it derived that <b>an impure priest who partakes of impure <i>teruma</i>,</b> i.e., the portion of produce designated for the priest, <b>is not</b> punished <b>with death</b> at the hand of Heaven as he would had the <i>teruma</i> been ritually pure? It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated,</b> with regard to the prohibition of an impure priest partaking of <i>teruma</i>: <b>“And die therein if they desecrate it”</b> (Leviticus 22:9), <b>to the exclusion of this</b> case of <i>teruma</i> that is impure, <b>which was already desecrated</b> before the priest ate it. Here, it seems, since impure <i>teruma</i> is already prohibited for consumption, the added prohibition of an impure priest partaking of <i>teruma</i> does not take effect.

### Part 10
The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that <b>in general</b> Shmuel maintains that <b>a prohibition takes effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists, and it <b>is different there,</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>, <b>as the Merciful One</b> expressly <b>excludes</b> impure <i>teruma</i> by the phrase <b>“and die therein</b> if they desecrate it,” and in this case the <i>teruma</i> is already desecrated. And <b>if you wish, say</b> that <b>in general Shmuel maintains</b> that <b>a prohibition does not take effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists, <b>and here,</b> the case of meat cooked in milk, <b>is different, as the Merciful One</b> expressly <b>includes</b> the meat of an animal carcass and forbidden fat by the repetition of the word <b>“kid.”</b>

### Part 11
<b>And if you wish, say</b> that <b>this</b> statement of Shmuel with regard to meat cooked in milk is <b>his</b> own opinion, as he maintains that a prohibition takes effect where another prohibition already exists, and <b>that</b> statement with regard to <i>teruma</i> <b>is his teacher’s,</b> i.e., Rabbi Elazar’s, opinion, as he holds that a prohibition does not take effect where another prohibition already exists.

### Part 12
§ <b>Rav Aḥadvoi bar Ami raised a dilemma to Rav:</b> If <b>one cooks</b> meat <b>in milk of a goat that has not</b> yet <b>nursed,</b> but that is about to give birth and already has milk, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Rav <b>said to him: From</b> the fact that <b>it was necessary for Shmuel to say</b> that the phrase <b>“in its mother’s milk”</b> teaches: <b>And not in the milk of a male</b> animal, one can infer that <b>it is</b> only the milk of <b>a male</b> that is excluded, as the male <b>cannot attain the status of a mother. But</b> in <b>this</b> case, <b>since</b> the goat <b>will attain the status of a mother,</b> it is <b>prohibited</b> to cook meat in its milk.

### Part 13
It <b>was stated:</b> With regard to <b>one who cooks</b> forbidden <b>fat in milk, Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi</b> disagree as to the <i>halakha</i>. <b>One says</b> that he <b>is flogged</b> for violating the prohibition of meat cooked in milk, <b>and one says</b> that he <b>is not flogged.</b> The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>they disagree about this: That the one who says</b> he <b>is flogged maintains</b> that <b>a prohibition takes effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists, <b>and the one who says</b> he <b>is not flogged maintains</b> that <b>a prohibition does not take effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists.

### Part 14
The Gemara responds: <b>No; everyone</b> agrees that <b>a prohibition does not take effect</b> where another <b>prohibition</b> already exists, and therefore <b>everyone agrees that</b> one <b>is not flogged for eating</b> the mixture. <b>When they disagree,</b> it is <b>with regard to cooking. The one who says</b> he <b>is flogged</b> holds that one who cooks violates only <b>one prohibition,</b> that of cooking meat in milk, since it is permitted to cook forbidden fat without eating it. Consequently, this is not a case of a prohibition taking effect where another prohibition already exists. <b>And the one who says</b> he <b>is not flogged</b> holds that it was <b>for this</b> reason that <b>the Merciful One expressed</b> the prohibition of <b>eating</b> meat cooked in milk in the Torah using <b>the language of cooking:</b> “You shall not cook a kid in its mother’s milk.”

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC