
### Part 1
the <b>vineyard bird,</b> which is similar to the <i>arbeh</i> in that its forehead is not smooth but has small hairs.

### Part 2
<b>I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a species <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and does not have a smooth forehead</b> is kosher. <b>From where</b> is it derived that even one <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and has a smooth forehead</b> is kosher? <b>The verse states: “<i>Solam</i>,”</b> and <b>this is</b> the <b><i>nippul</i>,</b> which has a smooth forehead. The phrase <b>“after its kinds”</b> that follows <i>solam</i> is another generalization, which serves <b>to include</b> a case similar to the detail, i.e., <b>the <i>ushkaf</i>,</b> which has a smooth forehead like the <i>solam</i>.

### Part 3
<b>And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a species <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and does not have a smooth forehead,</b> like the <i>arbeh</i>, or one <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and has a smooth forehead,</b> like the <i>solam</i>, or one that <b>comes</b> before a person <b>and has no tail,</b> is kosher, since none of the previously mentioned grasshoppers have a tail. <b>From where</b> is it derived that even one <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and has a tail</b> is kosher? <b>The verse states: “<i>Ḥargol</i>,”</b> and <b>this is</b> the <b><i>rashon</i>,</b> which has a tail. The phrase <b>“after its kinds”</b> that follows <i>ḥargol</i> is another generalization, and it serves <b>to include the <i>karsefet</i> and the <i>shaḥlanit</i>,</b> which also have tails.

### Part 4
<b>And I have</b> derived <b>only</b> that a species <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and does not have a smooth forehead,</b> or <b>that comes</b> before a person <b>and has a smooth forehead,</b> or <b>that comes and has no tail,</b> or <b>that comes and has a tail,</b> or <b>that comes and its head is not long,</b> is kosher, since every grasshopper mentioned until this point does not have a long head. <b>From where</b> is it derived that even one <b>that comes and its head is long</b> is kosher?

### Part 5
<b>You</b> will <b>say: You derive a paradigm from the three of them,</b> as follows: <b>The aspect [<i>re’i</i>] of</b> the <b><i>arbeh</i>,</b> which has neither smooth forehead nor tail, <b>is not similar to the aspect of</b> the <b><i>ḥargol</i>,</b> which has both; <b>and the aspect of</b> the <b><i>ḥargol</i> is not similar to the aspect of</b> the <b><i>arbeh</i>. And the aspect of neither of them is similar to the aspect of</b> the <b><i>solam</i>,</b> which has a smooth forehead but no tail, <b>and the aspect of</b> the <b><i>solam</i> is similar to neither of their aspects.</b> The characteristic that renders them all kosher can only be an aspect common to all of them. <b>Their common denominator is that</b> each <b>has four legs, and four wings, and jumping legs, and its wings cover most of its</b> body. <b>So too, any</b> other species <b>that has four legs, and four wings, and jumping legs, and its wings cover most of its</b> body is kosher, even if its head is long.

### Part 6
One might ask: <b>But doesn’t this <i>tzartzur</i> have four legs, and four wings, and jumping legs, and its wings cover most of its</b> body? Consequently, one <b>might</b> have thought that <b>it should be permitted.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “<i>Ḥagav</i>,”</b> to indicate <b>that its name</b> must be <b><i>ḥagav</i>.</b> This includes all of the species previously mentioned, but not the <i>tzartzur</i>.

### Part 7
But <b>if its name</b> must be <b><i>ḥagav</i>,</b> one <b>might</b> have thought that any <i>ḥagav</i> is kosher, even if <b>it does not have all these signs.</b> Therefore, <b>the verse states: “After its kinds,”</b> indicating that even if it is called a <i>ḥagav</i> it is not kosher <b>unless it has all these signs.</b> This concludes the <i>baraita</i> of the school of Rabbi Yishmael.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Aḥai refutes</b> the <i>baraita</i>: The four signs listed are not the sole common denominators between the <i>arbeh</i>, <i>ḥargol</i>, and <i>solam</i>. <b>What</b> is also unique <b>about these</b> grasshoppers in addition to these signs? They are unique <b>in that their heads are not long.</b> If so, grasshoppers with long heads might not be kosher. <b>And if you would say: Since they share</b> these <b>four signs, we include</b> all others with these four signs <b>and we do not refute</b> them, since the included species need not be identical in all their aspects, <b>if so,</b> the Torah <b>should not even write</b> the <b><i>ḥargol</i>, which shares</b> these four signs <b>with</b> the <i>arbeh</i> and the <i>solam</i>, <b>and let it be derived</b> that the <i>ḥargol</i> is kosher by inference <b>from the</b> common denominators between the <b><i>arbeh</i> and <i>solam</i>.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> it was necessary for the verse to write <i>ḥargol</i> because if it were omitted, its inclusion <b>could be refuted</b> as follows: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about these,</b> the <i>arbeh</i> and <i>solam</i>? They are unique <b>in that they</b> both <b>have no tail.</b> Since the <i>ḥargol</i> has a tail, its kosher status cannot be inferred from theirs. <b>So too,</b> the inclusion of grasshoppers with long heads <b>can be refuted</b> as follows: <b>What</b> is unique <b>about these,</b> the <i>arbeh</i>, <i>ḥargol</i>, and <i>solam</i>? They are unique <b>in that their heads are not long.</b> If so, grasshoppers with long heads might not be kosher.

### Part 10
<b>Rather, Rav Aḥai said:</b> One can derive that grasshoppers with long heads are kosher as follows: The <b><i>solam</i></b> mentioned in the verse <b>is redundant.</b> How so? <b>Let the Merciful One not write <i>solam</i>, and</b> instead <b>let it be derived</b> by inference <b>from</b> the common denominators between the <b><i>arbeh</i> and <i>ḥargol</i>,</b> that they have four legs, four wings, jumping legs, and that their wings cover most of their body. <b>As what can you</b> say to <b>refute</b> this? If you say: <b>What</b> can be derived <b>from</b> the <b><i>arbeh</i>, which,</b> unlike the <i>solam</i>, <b>does not have a smooth forehead;</b> one can respond: <b>But</b> there is the <b><i>ḥargol</i>, which has a smooth forehead.</b> And if you say: <b>What</b> can be derived <b>from</b> the <b><i>ḥargol</i>, which,</b> unlike the <i>solam</i>, <b>has a tail,</b> one can respond: <b>But</b> there is the <b><i>arbeh</i>, which has no tail.</b> If so, <b>why do I</b> need the <b><i>solam</i> that the Merciful One wrote?</b> Rather, <b>if</b> the <i>solam</i> <b>is not</b> necessary <b>for the matter itself, apply it</b> to the <b>matter of a long-headed</b> grasshopper, to teach that it is kosher.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC