
### Part 1
<b>One who wishes to become wealthy</b> should <b>engage in</b> raising <b>small domesticated animals. Rav Ḥisda said: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “And the flocks [<i>ve’ashterot</i>] of your sheep”</b> (Deuteronomy 7:13)? It means <b>that</b> sheep <b>enrich [<i>me’ashrot</i>] their owners.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara cites additional statements by Rabbi Yoḥanan providing practical advice. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> It is preferable to drink from <b>a cup of witches and not</b> to drink from <b>a cup of lukewarm</b> water, which is extremely unhealthy. Rabbi Yoḥanan qualifies his statement: <b>We said this only with regard to</b> lukewarm water <b>in metal vessels, but in earthenware vessels we have no</b> problem <b>with it. And even in metal vessels, we said</b> that lukewarm water is unhealthy <b>only</b> in a case where <b>one did not cast flavorings into</b> the water, <b>but if he cast flavorings into</b> the water <b>we have no</b> problem <b>with it. And even if one cast flavorings into</b> the water, <b>we said this only</b> in a case <b>where</b> the water had <b>not</b> been <b>boiled [<i>tzeyatz</i>], but</b> if the water had been <b>boiled we have no</b> problem <b>with it.</b>

### Part 3
<b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> In the case of <b>one whose father bequeathed him a great deal of money and he seeks to lose it,</b> he <b>should wear linen garments, and should use glass vessels, and should hire laborers and not sit with them</b> to supervise. The Gemara elaborates: <b>He should wear linen garments;</b> this is stated <b>with regard to Roman linen,</b> which becomes tattered quickly. <b>He should use glass vessels;</b> this is stated <b>with regard to</b> expensive <b>white glass. And he should hire laborers and not sit with them;</b> this applies to laborers who work <b>with oxen, whose</b> potential for causing <b>damage is great</b> if they are not supervised, as they will trample the crops.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Avira interpreted</b> the following verse homiletically, but <b>sometimes</b> he <b>said</b> the interpretation <b>in the name of Rabbi Ami and sometimes he said it in the name of Rabbi Asi: What</b> is the meaning of that <b>which is written: “Good is the man who is gracious and lends, who orders his affairs with justice”</b> (Psalms 112:5)? It means to teach that <b>a person should always eat and drink less than what is</b> within <b>his means, and he should dress and cover himself in accordance with his means, and he should honor his wife and children more than what is</b> within <b>his means; as they are dependent on him and he is dependent on the One Who spoke and the world was</b> created.

### Part 5
§ The mishna teaches that one may not slaughter a <i>koy</i> on a Festival since he may not cover its blood, as it is unclear whether there is an obligation by Torah law to do so. But if one transgressed and slaughtered a <i>koy</i>, one does not cover its blood. With regard to this, <b>Rav Eina taught at the entrance to the house of the Exilarch: One who slaughters</b> an undomesticated animal or a bird <b>for</b> a critically <b>ill</b> person <b>on Shabbat,</b> for whom it is permitted to slaughter, is <b>obligated to cover</b> its blood. <b>Rabba said to</b> those present: Rav Eina <b>is saying an astonishing</b> statement; <b>remove his interpreter from</b> before <b>him. As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Yosei says: One may not slaughter a <i>koy</i> on a Festival, but if he slaughtered</b> it, <b>one does not cover its blood</b> until after the Festival.

### Part 6
Rabbi Yosei elaborates: This can be derived <b>from an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference: <b>And if</b> with regard to the mitzva of <b>circumcision,</b> concerning <b>which a definite</b> obligation <b>overrides Shabbat,</b> nevertheless <b>its uncertain</b> obligation <b>does not override a Festival;</b> then with regard to the mitzva of <b>covering</b> the blood, concerning <b>which</b> even <b>a definite</b> obligation <b>does not override Shabbat,</b> is it <b>not logical that its uncertain</b> obligation, e.g., covering the blood of a <i>koy</i>, <b>would not override a Festival?</b> Although circumcision involves an act of prohibited labor, one performs it on Shabbat for a male infant whose eighth day from birth occurs on Shabbat. But in a case where it is uncertain when the eighth day from birth occurs, it is forbidden to circumcise the child on a Festival. By contrast, covering the blood is never performed on Shabbat.

### Part 7
The Sages <b>said to him</b> in rebuttal: <b>The sounding of the shofar in the provinces,</b> i.e., outside the Temple, <b>will prove</b> that this <i>a fortiori</i> inference is incorrect. This is <b>because its definite</b> obligation <b>does not override Shabbat</b> and it is prohibited to sound the shofar on Rosh HaShana that falls on Shabbat; <b>and</b> yet <b>its uncertain</b> obligation <b>overrides</b> the <b>Festival.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Rabbi Elazar HaKappar the Distinguished responded</b> with another <b>refutation</b> of the <i>a fortiori</i> inference: It cannot be inferred from circumcision that an uncertain obligation of the mitzva of covering the blood does not override a Festival. <b>What</b> is notable <b>about circumcision?</b> It is notable in <b>that it is not in effect on Festival nights,</b> but is performed only during the daytime. Will <b>you</b> then <b>say with regard to</b> the mitzva of <b>covering</b> the blood, <b>which is in effect on Festival nights,</b> that it does not override a Festival? Perhaps, since the mitzva of covering the blood is in effect during both day and night, its uncertain obligation overrides a Festival as well.

### Part 9
In reference to Rabbi Elazar HaKappar’s refutation, <b>Rabbi Abba says: This</b> <i>a fortiori</i> inference drawn by Rabbi Yosei is <b>one of the matters</b> with regard to <b>which Rabbi Ḥiyya says: I do not have any refutation for them, and Rabbi Elazar HaKappar the Distinguished</b> successfully <b>responded</b> with <b>a refutation.</b>

### Part 10
Rabba concludes his refutation of the statement of Rav Eina: <b>In any event,</b> the <i>baraita</i> <b>teaches that definite</b> obligations with regard to the mitzva of <b>covering</b> the blood <b>do not override Shabbat.</b> Now, <b>what</b> is a case of <b>a definite</b> obligation <b>of covering</b> the blood <b>that does not override Shabbat?</b> Is it <b>not</b> a case where <b>one slaughters</b> an undomesticated animal or a bird <b>for</b> a critically <b>ill</b> person <b>on Shabbat?</b> The <i>baraita</i> nevertheless teaches that one does not cover the blood, in contradiction to the ruling of Rav Eina.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>But perhaps</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to an instance <b>where</b> one <b>transgressed</b> Shabbat <b>and slaughtered</b> an animal for a healthy person. But in a case where one slaughtered an animal for an ill person, since it was permitted for him to slaughter the animal, perhaps he must cover the blood as well.

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: The <i>baraita</i> cannot be referring to such a case, since Rabbi Yosei compares it with circumcision. Therefore, it must be <b>similar to</b> the case of <b>circumcision,</b> in that <b>just as</b> the <b>circumcision</b> was performed <b>with permission,</b> as it is a mitzva to perform circumcision even if the eighth day falls on Shabbat, <b>so too,</b> the <b>covering</b> of the blood must be referring to a case where the slaughter was done <b>with permission,</b> i.e., for an ill person. Accordingly, the <i>baraita</i> poses a difficulty to the statement of Rav Eina.

### Part 13
§ The <i>baraita</i> states that the Sages <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yosei in refutation of his <i>a fortiori</i> inference: <b>The sounding of the shofar in the provinces will prove</b> that the inference is incorrect, <b>since its definite</b> obligation <b>does not override Shabbat and its uncertain</b> obligation <b>overrides a Festival.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is <b>its uncertain</b> obligation that overrides a Festival?

### Part 14
<b>If we say</b> that it is referring to <b>uncertainty</b> with regard to whether one of the two days of Rosh HaShana is <b>a weekday</b> or <b>a Festival,</b> this is unfeasible: <b>Now</b> that the sounding of the shofar <b>overrides</b> the <b>definite Festival</b> of Rosh HaShana, <b>is it necessary</b> to teach that it overrides a day with regard to which it is <b>uncertain</b> whether it is <b>a Festival</b> or <b>a weekday?</b> That is, if the uncertainty is with regard to the Festival itself, then this case should have no bearing on the <i>halakha</i> concerning the obligation to cover the blood of a <i>koy</i> on a Festival, since the latter occurs on a definite Festival.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC