
### Part 1
The Gemara rejects this: <b>How can</b> these cases <b>be compared? There,</b> in the incident involving the students of Rav, it is <b>impossible to drink and recite a blessing simultaneously.</b> Accordingly, by requesting a cup over which to recite the blessing of Grace after Meals, they demonstrated their desire to cease drinking. <b>Here,</b> when one covers the blood of the undomesticated animal before slaughtering the bird, it is <b>possible to slaughter</b> the bird <b>with the one</b> hand <b>and cover</b> the blood of the undomesticated animal <b>with the</b> other <b>one.</b> Accordingly, the act of covering the blood of the undomesticated animal is not considered an interruption of the acts of slaughter, since they could have been performed simultaneously.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> If one <b>slaughtered</b> an undomesticated animal or bird <b>and did not cover</b> the blood, <b>and another</b> person <b>saw</b> the uncovered blood, the second person is <b>obligated to cover</b> the blood. If one <b>covered</b> the blood <b>and it was</b> then <b>uncovered,</b> he is <b>exempt from covering it</b> again. If <b>the wind</b> blew earth on the blood and <b>covered it,</b> and it was consequently uncovered, he is <b>obligated to cover</b> the blood.

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And he shall pour out</b> its blood <b>and cover</b> it with earth” (Leviticus 17:13), indicating that <b>the one who poured out</b> its blood, i.e., slaughtered the animal, <b>shall cover it.</b> If one <b>slaughtered</b> the animal or bird <b>and did not cover</b> the blood, <b>and another person saw</b> the uncovered blood, <b>from where</b> is it derived <b>that</b> the person who saw the blood <b>is obligated to cover</b> it? It is derived from the following verse, <b>as it is stated: “Therefore I said to the children of Israel”</b> (Leviticus 17:12), which is <b>a warning to all the children of Israel</b> to fulfill the mitzva of covering the blood.

### Part 4
<b>It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And he shall pour out</b> its blood <b>and cover</b> it with earth,” indicating that <b>with that which he poured out</b> the blood <b>he shall cover it,</b> i.e., he must use his hand, and <b>he</b> may <b>not cover it with</b> his <b>foot, so that mitzvot will not be contemptible to him. It is taught</b> in <b>another</b> <i>baraita</i>: The verse states: <b>“And he shall pour out</b> its blood <b>and cover</b> it with earth,” indicating that <b>the one who poured out</b> the blood <b>shall cover it. An incident</b> occurred <b>involving one who slaughtered</b> an undomesticated animal or bird <b>and another</b> individual <b>preempted</b> him <b>and covered</b> the blood, <b>and Rabban Gamliel deemed him obligated to give ten gold coins to</b> the one who performed the act of slaughter.

### Part 5
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: Are these ten gold coins <b>compensation</b> for the stolen <b>mitzva or</b> are they <b>compensation</b> for the stolen <b>blessing</b> recited over the mitzva? The Gemara elaborates: <b>What is the</b> practical <b>difference?</b> The difference is <b>with regard to</b> a similar case involving <b>Grace after Meals. If you say</b> the coins are <b>compensation for the mitzva,</b> then with regard to Grace after Meals, since all its blessings constitute <b>one</b> mitzva, one would be obligated to give only ten gold coins. <b>But if you say</b> they are <b>compensation for the</b> lost <b>blessing,</b> then with regard to Grace after Meals the compensation <b>is forty</b> gold coins, since Grace after Meals comprises four blessings. <b>What</b> is the conclusion?

### Part 6
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a proof from an incident in <b>which a certain heretic said to Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi: <b>He who created mountains did not create wind, and he who created wind did not create mountains;</b> rather, each was created by a separate deity, <b>as it is written: “For behold, He Who forms the mountains and He Who creates the wind”</b> (Amos 4:13), indicating that there are two deities: One who forms the mountains and one who creates the wind. Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to him: Imbecile, go to the end of the verse,</b> which states: <b>“The Lord, the God of hosts, is His name.”</b> The verse emphasizes that God is the One Who both forms and creates.

### Part 7
The heretic <b>said to</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi: <b>Give me three days’ time and I will respond to you</b> with <b>a rebuttal</b> of your claim. <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>sat</b> and fasted <b>three</b> days of <b>fasting</b> while awaiting the heretic, in order that he would not find a rebuttal. <b>When</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>wanted to have a meal</b> at the conclusion of those three days, <b>they said to him:</b> That <b>heretic is standing at the doorway.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>recited</b> the following verse about himself: <b>“They put gall into my food,</b> and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink” (Psalms 69:22), i.e., my meal is embittered with the presence of this heretic.

### Part 8
When Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi came to the door he saw that it was in fact a different heretic, not the one who asked for three days to prepare a rebuttal. This heretic <b>said to him: Rabbi, I am a bearer of good tidings for you: Your enemy did not find a response, and he threw himself from the roof and died.</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to</b> the heretic: Since you have brought me good tidings, <b>would you like to dine with me?</b> The heretic <b>said to him: Yes. After they ate and drank,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>said to</b> the heretic: Would <b>you</b> like to <b>drink the cup of blessing,</b> i.e., the cup of wine over which the Grace after Meals is recited, <b>or</b> would <b>you</b> like to <b>take forty gold coins</b> instead, and I will recite the Grace after Meals? The heretic <b>said to him: I</b> will <b>drink the cup of blessing. A Divine Voice emerged and said: The cup of blessing is worth forty gold coins.</b> Evidently, each one of the blessings in the Grace after Meals is worth ten gold coins.

### Part 9
The Gemara adds: <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: That family</b> of the heretic who dined with Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi <b>still exists among the prominent</b> families <b>of Rome, and</b> that family <b>is called: The family of bar Luyyanus.</b>

### Part 10
§ The mishna teaches that if one <b>covered</b> the blood <b>and it was</b> then <b>uncovered</b> he is not obligated to cover it again. <b>Rav Aḥa, son of Rava, said to Rav Ashi: What is different</b> about this case from the mitzva of <b>returning a lost item, where the Master said:</b> The verse states with regard to the obligation to return a lost item: <b>“You shall return</b> them to your brother” (Deuteronomy 22:1), <b>even one hundred times?</b>

### Part 11
Rav Ashi <b>said to</b> Rav Aḥa: <b>There,</b> in the verse discussing the obligation to return a lost item, <b>a restriction is not written</b> in the verse to limit the obligation. <b>Here,</b> in the verse discussing the obligation to cover the blood, <b>a restriction is written,</b> as the verse states: <b>“And he shall cover it.”</b> The usage of the term “it” indicates that one must cover the blood only one time.

### Part 12
§ The mishna teaches that if <b>the wind</b> blew earth on the blood and <b>covered it</b> one is obligated to cover the blood. <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: They taught</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>only</b> if the blood <b>was again uncovered. But</b> if the blood <b>was not again uncovered</b> one is <b>exempt from</b> the obligation <b>to cover it.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And when</b> the blood <b>was again uncovered, what of it? Isn’t it</b> already <b>rejected</b> from the mitzva of covering since it was covered by the wind? <b>Rav Pappa said: That is to say</b> that <b>there is no permanent</b> rejection <b>with regard to mitzvot.</b> Although the wind covered the blood, the mitzva to cover it was not rendered null; rather, the mitzva simply could not be performed. Consequently, once the blood is again uncovered, the mitzva to cover the blood remains in place.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> even if the wind covered the blood and it remained covered, why is one exempt from performing the mitzva of covering the blood? <b>What is different</b> about this case <b>from that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: In a case where <b>one slaughters</b> an undomesticated animal or a bird <b>and</b> its <b>blood is absorbed by the ground,</b> one is <b>obligated to cover</b> the blood? The Gemara responds: <b>There,</b> the <i>baraita</i> is referring to a case <b>where the impression</b> of the blood <b>is</b> still <b>recognizable,</b> i.e., it was not entirely absorbed in the ground.

### Part 14
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In a case of the <b>blood</b> of an undomesticated animal or bird <b>that was mixed with water, if there is in</b> the mixture <b>the appearance of blood</b> one is <b>obligated to cover</b> it. If the blood <b>was mixed with wine one views</b> the wine <b>as though it is water,</b> and if a mixture with that amount of water would have the appearance of blood one is obligated to cover it. Likewise, if the blood of an undomesticated animal or a bird <b>was mixed with the blood of a domesticated animal,</b> which one does not have to cover,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC