
### Part 1
<b>empty bottles,</b> i.e., not to falsely attribute statements to him? <b>So said Rav Naḥman:</b> With regard to <b>the place that</b> the rectum <b>is attached</b> to the hips, <b>even</b> if <b>all of it was removed,</b> the animal is <b>kosher. And this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>where sufficient</b> space <b>remains of it</b> for a hand to <b>grip.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> is considered sufficient to grip? <b>Abaye said: The width of a finger.</b> This measure is sufficient even <b>in</b> the case of a large <b>bull.</b>

### Part 2
§ The mishna states that if <b>the internal rumen</b> was perforated or most of the external rumen was torn, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>. With regard to this, <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: Natan bar Sheila, chief butcher of Tzippori, testified before Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>in the name of Rabbi Natan: Which is the internal rumen?</b> It is <b>the cecum. And so said Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa:</b> It is <b>the cecum. Rabbi Yishmael said:</b> It is the <b>opening [<i>istumka</i>] of the rumen.</b>

### Part 3
<b>Rav Asi says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> says: <b>There is a narrow place in the rumen,</b> and this is the internal rumen; all the rest is the external rumen. <b>But I do not know which</b> area <b>is</b> this narrow place. <b>Rav Naḥman bar Yitzḥak said: The rumen has fallen in a pit,</b> i.e., since it is unknown which area is considered the narrow place, a perforation in any part of the rumen renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>Rav Aḥa bar Rav Ava says</b> that <b>Rav Asi says:</b> The inner rumen extends <b>from the narrow place,</b> where the rumen begins to narrow as it approaches the gullet, <b>and downward</b> toward the gullet when the animal is suspended by its legs.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Ya’akov bar Naḥmani says</b> in the name of <b>Shmuel:</b> The internal rumen is the <b>place</b> in the rumen <b>that has no wool,</b> i.e., downy projections on the inside of the rumen. <b>Rabbi Avina says</b> in the name of <b>Geneiva,</b> who said <b>in the name of Rav:</b> The <b>handbreadth in the gullet adjacent to the rumen, this is the internal rumen.</b>

### Part 5
<b>In the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, <b>they said in the name of Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina: The entire rumen is the internal rumen. And</b> if so, <b>which is the external rumen?</b> It is the <b>flesh that envelops the majority of the rumen</b> on the underside of the animal. <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna says:</b> The internal rumen is the <b><i>mafrata</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What is the <i>mafrata</i>? Rav Avya said:</b> It is <b>the place that the butcher exposes</b> when he opens up the animal, i.e., the underside of the stomach.

### Part 6
The Gemara recounts: <b>In Neharde’a, they practiced in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna. Rav Ashi said to Ameimar,</b> one of the Sages of Neharde’a: <b>What</b> about <b>all these</b> other <b>statements,</b> that the internal rumen is another part of the rumen? Ameimar <b>said to him: They are all included in</b> the definition <b>of</b> the rumen according to <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna.</b> The cecum, the opening of the stomach, and the place with no wool all face the underside of the stomach, i.e., the <i>mafrata</i>.

### Part 7
Rav Ashi replied: <b>And what</b> about the opinion <b>that Rav Asi says</b> in the name of <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> that the internal rumen is an unknown narrow area? Shouldn’t the entire rumen be treated as the internal rumen? Ameimar <b>said to him: Rav Aḥa bar Ava already explained</b> that <b>it</b> is the area extending from the narrow place until the gullet. This area is also included in the <i>mafrata</i>. Rav Ashi asked further: <b>And what</b> of the opinion <b>of Rabbi Avina,</b> that the internal rumen is the handbreadth near the gullet, <b>and of the residents of the West,</b> Eretz Yisrael, that it is the entire rumen? Ameimar <b>said to him: These</b> opinions <b>certainly disagree</b> with that of Rabba bar Rav Huna, but we do not follow them.

### Part 8
§ The mishna states: <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to a tear in the external rumen, for <b>a large</b> animal, a tear of one handbreadth renders it a <i>tereifa</i>, while for a small animal, it is a <i>tereifa</i> only if most of it was torn. <b>Rabbi Binyamin bar Yefet says</b> that <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The word: <b>Large,</b> is <b>not</b> referring <b>literally</b> to <b>a large</b> animal, and the word: <b>Small,</b> is <b>not</b> referring <b>literally</b> to <b>a small</b> animal. <b>Rather,</b> concerning <b>any</b> animal large enough that <b>its</b> external rumen can be <b>torn one handbreadth and</b> this <b>does not constitute most</b> of it, <b>this is what we learned:</b> For <b>a large</b> animal, a tear of <b>one handbreadth</b> renders it a <i>tereifa</i>. And concerning any animal small enough that <b>most</b> of its external rumen can be torn <b>and</b> this does <b>not constitute one handbreadth, this is what we learned: For a small</b> animal, it is a <i>tereifa</i> only if <b>most</b> of it was torn. In other words, any external rumen torn either one handbreadth or in its majority renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: If <b>most</b> of the external rumen is torn <b>but</b> it does <b>not constitute a handbreadth,</b> isn’t it <b>obvious</b> that the animal is rendered a <i>tereifa</i>? There is a principle that the majority of an entity is considered like all of it. The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to teach this for a case <b>where</b> the tear would <b>constitute a handbreadth with any amount</b> more than a majority, i.e., the external rumen is slightly smaller than two handbreadths. <b>Lest you say</b> that in such a case, the animal <b>is not a <i>tereifa</i> until a handbreadth of it is torn,</b> this <i>halakha</i> <b>teaches us</b> that this is not so. Rather, if the majority of the rumen is torn, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>, even if this constitutes less than a handbreadth.

### Part 10
<b>Geneiva says</b> that <b>Rabbi Asi says:</b> If a round hole was <b>bored</b> through the external rumen <b>as</b> large as <b>a <i>sela</i></b> coin, the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, since if</b> a hole of such size <b>will be stretched, it will reach the</b> length of a <b>handbreadth. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said:</b> This matter <b>was explained to me</b> personally <b>by Geneiva</b> himself, when we were <b>on the ferry of Neharde’a:</b> If the hole is exactly as large <b>as a <i>sela</i>,</b> the animal is <b>kosher.</b> If the size of the hole is <b>greater than a <i>sela</i>,</b> it is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And how much</b> is considered <b>greater than a <i>sela</i>? Rav Yosef said: For example,</b> if <b>three</b> date <b>pits covered</b> in remains of the date can fit through the hole <b>with difficulty,</b> or if, <b>without</b> being <b>covered</b> in any remains, they can fit <b>comfortably,</b> this is considered a hole larger than a <i>sela</i>.

### Part 11
§ The mishna states: An animal is a <i>tereifa</i> if the <b>omasum or the reticulum</b> was perforated to the outside, i.e., to the abdominal cavity. With regard to this, <b>the Sages taught:</b> In the case of <b>a needle that is found in the thickness of the reticulum,</b> if it pierced the wall <b>from</b> only <b>one side,</b> the animal is <b>kosher.</b> If it pierced the wall <b>from both sides,</b> i.e., the needle completely pierced the wall of the stomach, it is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> But even if it protrudes from both sides, it is not always a <i>tereifa</i>, and it may be inspected further: If <b>a drop of</b> congealed <b>blood is found on top of</b> the needle,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC