
### Part 1
<b>we do not derive</b> in this manner. <b>And Rabbi Eliezer comes to say</b> that <b>we derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of non-sacred slaughter <b>outside</b> the Temple <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple, and therefore the intent of the gentile invalidates non-sacred slaughter. <b>And Rabbi Yosei comes to say</b> that <b>even inside</b> the Temple, in a case where <b>this</b> owner <b>has</b> improper <b>intent and that</b> other person is <b>performing</b> the slaughter, <b>we do not say</b> that the intent of the owner invalidates the slaughter.

### Part 2
§ <b>It was stated</b> that there is an amoraic dispute with regard to <b>one who slaughtered an animal</b> in order <b>to sprinkle its blood for idol worship, or to burn its fat for idol worship. Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The slaughter is <b>not valid,</b> and benefit from the animal is forbidden. <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says:</b> The slaughter is valid and deriving benefit from the animal is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara elaborates. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The slaughter is <b>not valid</b> and benefit from the animal is forbidden. He holds that <b>one transfers intent from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite.</b> If, while slaughtering a sacrificial animal, one intends to perform one of the other sacrificial rites in an improper manner the offering is invalidated. <b>And</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan holds that <b>we derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of non-sacred slaughter <b>outside</b> the Temple <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple. Since that intent invalidates the slaughter of sacrificial animals inside the Temple, it invalidates the slaughter of non-sacred animals outside the Temple as well.

### Part 4
<b>Reish Lakish says:</b> The slaughter is valid, and deriving benefit from the animal is <b>permitted.</b> He holds that <b>one does not transfer intent from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite.</b> Therefore, while slaughtering the animal, only intent to perform the slaughter improperly invalidates the offering, but intent to perform another sacrificial rite improperly does not invalidate the offering. <b>And</b> Reish Lakish holds that <b>we do not derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of non-sacred slaughter <b>outside</b> the Temple <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple.

### Part 5
<b>And</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish <b>follow their</b> standard line of <b>reasoning, as it was stated:</b> If one <b>slaughtered</b> a sin offering <b>for its own sake,</b> but with intent <b>to sprinkle its blood not for its own sake</b> but for the sake of another type of offering, <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that the offering is <b>unfit,</b> and <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says</b> that the offering is <b>fit.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara elaborates: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> that the offering is <b>unfit.</b> He holds that <b>one transfers intent from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite, and</b> the reason is that <b>we derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of slaughter of a sin offering not for its sake <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>intent for <i>piggul</i>,</b> i.e., performance of one of the sacrificial rites with the intent to sprinkle the blood of the offering beyond its appointed time. And <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish says</b> that the offering is <b>fit</b> because he holds that <b>one does not transfer intent from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite, and</b> the reason is that <b>we do not derive</b> the <i>halakha</i> of any other improper intent <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b>intent for <i>piggul</i>.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara notes: <b>And</b> it is <b>necessary</b> to state the dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish in both cases. <b>As, if</b> it <b>were stated</b> only <b>with regard to that</b> case of one who slaughters an animal in order to sprinkle its blood for idol worship, perhaps one would conclude that it is specifically <b>in that</b> case that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish states</b> his opinion that the slaughter is valid, <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that we do not derive</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of non-sacred slaughter <b>outside</b> the Temple <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple. <b>But</b> in the case of one who slaughters an offering for the sake of another offering, where we would be deriving the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple <b>from</b> the <i>halakhot</i> of another case of slaughter of sacrificial animals <b>inside</b> the Temple, <b>say</b> that Reish Lakish <b>concedes to Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> that the offering is unfit.

### Part 8
<b>And if</b> their dispute <b>was stated with regard to this</b> case of one who slaughters an offering for the sake of another offering, perhaps one would conclude that it is specifically <b>in this</b> case that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said</b> that the offering is unfit, because he holds that one derives the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals inside the Temple from the <i>halakhot</i> of another case of slaughter of sacrificial animals inside the Temple. <b>But in that</b> case of one who slaughters an animal in order to sprinkle its blood for idol worship, <b>say that</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>concedes to Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish</b> that the offering is fit due to the fact that the <i>halakhot</i> of non-sacred slaughter outside the Temple are not derived from the <i>halakhot</i> of slaughter of sacrificial animals inside the Temple. Therefore, it is <b>necessary</b> to state the dispute between Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish in both cases.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Sheshet raises an objection</b> to both Rabbi Yoḥanan and Reish Lakish from the statement in the mishna with regard to one who slaughters for a gentile when the intent of the gentile is for idol worship. <b>Rabbi Yosei says:</b> The <b>matter</b> of the intent of the gentile is irrelevant in this case as can be derived by means of <b>an <i>a fortiori</i></b> inference. <b>If in a place where intent</b> while slaughtering the animal <b>invalidates</b> the slaughter, i.e., <b>in sacrificial</b> animals, such as when slaughtering an offering with the intent to sacrifice it beyond its designated time, <b>everything follows only</b> the intent of the priest <b>performing the service</b> and not the intent of the owner, then <b>in a place where intent does not invalidate</b> the slaughter, i.e., <b>in non-sacred</b> animals, <b>is it not right that everything should follow only</b> the intent of <b>the one who slaughters</b> the animal?

### Part 10
Rav Sheshet elaborates: <b>What</b> is the meaning of: <b>Intent does not invalidate</b> the slaughter <b>in non-sacred</b> animals? <b>If we say</b> that it means <b>that</b> intent <b>does not invalidate</b> the slaughter of non-sacred animals <b>at all, but</b> then <b>how can you find</b> a case of <b>slaughter</b> with intent <b>for idol worship where</b> the animal <b>is forbidden?</b>

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> it is <b>obvious</b> that the meaning of that phrase in the statement of Rabbi Yosei is that one does not transfer intent <b>from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite, and this</b> is what Rabbi Yosei <b>is saying: If in a place where intent invalidates,</b> i.e., <b>in sacrificial</b> animals, <b>from</b> one sacrificial <b>rite to</b> another sacrificial <b>rite, everything follows only</b> the intent of the one <b>performing</b> the slaughter, and the intent of the owners is irrelevant, in a <b>place where intent does not invalidate,</b> i.e., <b>in non-sacred</b> animals, <b>from</b> one <b>rite to</b> another <b>rite</b> but it does so <b>only within the same rite, is it not right that everything should follow only</b> the intent of <b>the one who slaughters</b> the animal?

### Part 12
According to this understanding of the contention of Rabbi Yosei in the mishna, the case of the slaughter of a sacrificial animal <b>inside</b> the Temple is <b>difficult for Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish,</b> as contrary to his opinion, Rabbi Yosei says that in that case one transfers intent from one sacrificial rite to another sacrificial rite. The case of slaughter of a non-sacred animal <b>outside</b> the Temple is <b>difficult for Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> as contrary to his opinion, Rabbi Yosei says that in that case one does not transfer intent from one rite to another rite.

### Part 13
Rav Sheshet continues: <b>Granted,</b> the case of <b>inside</b> the Temple is <b>not difficult for Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish,</b> because one can explain that he stated <b>this</b> statement that one does not transfer intent from one sacrificial rite to another sacrificial rite before <b>he heard</b> the mishna <b>from Rabbi Yoḥanan,</b> his teacher, and he stated <b>that</b> one transfers intent from one sacrificial rite to another sacrificial rite <b>after he heard</b> the mishna <b>from Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b> His dispute with Rabbi Yoḥanan is limited to transfer of intent for idol worship from rite to rite. <b>But</b> the case of slaughter of a non-sacred animal <b>outside</b> the Temple <b>is difficult for Rabbi Yoḥanan.</b>

### Part 14
Rav Sheshet <b>raises the objection, and he resolves it.</b> That which Rabbi Yosei said, that intent inside the Temple disqualifies the slaughter of a sacrificial animal but intent outside the Temple does not disqualify the slaughter of a non-sacred animal, is unrelated to transfer of intent from one rite to another. Rather, Rabbi Yosei is referring to a case where one performed any <b>of the four</b> sacrificial <b>rites</b> with improper intent, e.g., to eat the offering beyond its appointed time. <b>And this</b> is what Rabbi Yosei <b>is saying: If in a place where intent</b> while slaughtering the animal <b>invalidates</b> the slaughter <b>in sacrificial</b> animals, if that intent was <b>during</b> performance of any of the <b>four</b> sacrificial <b>rites,</b> i.e., slaughter, receiving the blood, conveying the blood to the altar, and sprinkling the blood on the altar, <b>everything follows only</b> the intent of the priest <b>performing the service</b> and not the intent of the owner,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC