
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> With regard to <b>an animal whose hind legs were severed,</b> if they were severed <b>from the leg joint and below,</b> the animal is <b>kosher; from the leg joint and above,</b> the animal is thereby rendered a <i>tereifa</i> and is <b>not kosher. And likewise,</b> an animal <b>whose convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh <b>was removed</b> is a <i>tereifa</i> and is not kosher.

### Part 2
If <b>the bone</b> of a limb <b>was broken</b> but the limb was not completely severed, and the animal was then slaughtered, <b>if the majority of the flesh</b> surrounding the bone <b>is intact, the slaughter of</b> the animal <b>renders it permitted; but if not, its slaughter does not render it permitted.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya says:</b> When the mishna makes reference to the leg being severed from the leg joint and <b>below,</b> it means that the cut was <b>below the leg joint,</b> and when it says that if it was severed from the leg joint and <b>above</b> it is a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>it means</b> that the cut was <b>above the leg joint.</b> And <b>with regard to which leg joint did they say</b> this? <b>With regard to</b> the <b>leg joint that is sold together with the head</b> of the animal. This is the lower leg joint that connects the lower bone, or metatarsus, and middle bone, or tibia. Accordingly, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i> only if the leg was severed in the middle bone or upper bone.

### Part 4
<b>Ulla says</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya</b> says: The mishna is referring to the leg joint that in most animals cannot be seen from the outside, but <b>the corresponding</b> joint <b>in</b> the leg of <b>a camel</b> is prominent and <b>conspicuous.</b> This is referring to the joint between the upper bone, or femur, and middle bone, or tibia. Accordingly, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i> only if it was severed in the upper bone.

### Part 5
<b>Ulla said to Rav Yehuda: Granted, according to my</b> opinion, <b>as I say</b> it means the joint whose <b>corresponding</b> joint <b>in</b> the leg of a camel is <b>conspicuous,</b> i.e., the upper joint, <b>this</b> explanation is consistent with <b>that which</b> the mishna <b>teaches: And likewise,</b> an animal <b>whose convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh <b>was removed</b> is not kosher. The convergence of sinews lies on the lower part of the middle bone. Since I hold that if the middle bone is severed, this does not render the animal a <i>tereifa</i>, it is necessary for the mishna to teach that nevertheless, if that bone was severed at the point of the convergence of sinews, this would render it a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>But according to your</b> opinion that the mishna is referring to the lower joint, and if the middle bone is severed, this renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>what</b> is the purpose of teaching: <b>And likewise,</b> an animal <b>whose convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh <b>was removed</b> is not kosher?

### Part 6
Rav Yehuda <b>said to</b> Ulla: According to my opinion, the mishna is referring to two cases: The first is where the leg was severed above the lower <b>leg joint,</b> in the middle bone, <b>without</b> the removal of <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh, <b>and</b> the second is where <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh was removed <b>without</b> the leg above the <b>leg joint</b> being severed. Ulla then asked Rav Yehuda: <b>But</b> the mishna <b>teaches: Were severed,</b> indicating that the leg was entirely severed, which perforce includes the convergence of sinews. Rav Yehuda <b>was silent,</b> as he did not have a resolution.

### Part 7
<b>After</b> Ulla <b>left,</b> Rav Yehuda <b>said</b> to himself: <b>What is the reason</b> that <b>I did not say to him</b> the following resolution: When the mishna states that if the leg was severed <b>below</b> the leg joint the animal is kosher, it means <b>below the</b> lower <b>leg joint,</b> and when it says that if it was severed <b>above</b> it is a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>it means</b> in the middle bone above <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh. Accordingly, it would still be necessary to teach that if the convergence of sinews in the thigh was removed, this would render it a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 8
Rav Yehuda <b>then said</b> to himself: It is good that I did not suggest this resolution, as <b>did I not</b> initially <b>say</b> a resolution <b>to him, and he said to me</b> that it was refuted by the fact that the mishna <b>teaches: Were severed,</b> which clearly indicates that it was severed completely? <b>Here too,</b> he could have said: You cannot explain the mishna as referring only to severing the leg above the convergence of sinews, as the mishna <b>teaches: From the</b> lower <b>leg joint and above,</b> which clearly includes the entire middle bone, including the area of the convergence of sinews.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Pappa teaches</b> the previous discussion <b>like this: Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says</b> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya says:</b> When the mishna refers to severing the leg <b>below,</b> it means severing <b>below</b> both <b>the leg joint and the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh, i.e., the lower bone was severed, and when it refers to severing the leg <b>above,</b> it means severing <b>above</b> both <b>the leg joint and the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh, i.e., the upper bone was severed. <b>And</b> then the mishna adds that with regard to the middle bone, it is only a <i>tereifa</i> <b>when</b> the <b>convergence of sinews was removed.</b> And this explanation assumes that <b>the leg joint itself</b> is referring to the upper leg joint, <b>in accordance with</b> that which <b>Ulla said</b> that <b>Rabbi Oshaya</b> said, i.e., that it means the joint whose corresponding joint in the leg of a camel is conspicuous.

### Part 10
The Gemara questions Rav Pappa’s explanation of the opinions of Ulla and Rav Yehuda: <b>But is there any</b> possibility <b>that if one went higher up</b> the leg and <b>severed</b> the middle bone above the convergence of sinews, <b>it would live,</b> i.e., the animal would not be a <i>tereifa</i>, but if <b>one went down</b> the leg and <b>severed it</b> on the convergence of sinews, it would be a <i>tereifa</i> <b>and would die</b> within twelve months? It is illogical that severing more of the leg is less life-threatening for the animal.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ashi said: Are you comparing</b> different types of <b><i>tereifot</i> to one another? One cannot say with regard to <i>tereifot</i></b> that <b>this is similar to that, as</b> different areas of an animal’s body react differently: One <b>cuts it from here,</b> at a low point on the animal’s body, <b>and it</b> could <b>die;</b> and one <b>cuts it from there,</b> at a higher point, <b>and it</b> could <b>live.</b>

### Part 12
§ The Gemara asks: <b>And which</b> parts are included in <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh, such that if they are removed it renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>? The sinews at the bottom of the bone cleave to it, as there is no flesh on that part of the bone. A short distance above that they separate from the bone and then they diverge from each other as they enter the flesh. <b>Rabba says</b> that <b>Rav Ashi</b> says: Those <b>which are off the bone,</b> before they diverge. <b>Rabba bar Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav Ashi</b> says: Those <b>which are adjacent to the bone. Rava, son of Rabba bar Rav Huna, says</b> that <b>Rav Asi</b> says: The convergence of sinews begins even lower and includes those <b>which are above the <i>arkum</i></b> bone, a small bone that lies between the lower bone and the middle bone of the leg.

### Part 13
The Gemara relates: <b>One of the Sages sat before Rabbi Abba, and he sat and said:</b> The convergence of sinews includes the sinews <b>of the <i>arkum</i></b> bone <b>itself. Rabbi Abba said to</b> his students: <b>Do not listen to</b> that Sage, as his ruling is too stringent. <b>This</b> is what <b>Rav Yehuda said:</b> It is in the place <b>where butchers split open</b> the animal’s leg. The Gemara comments: <b>And this is</b> the same as that which <b>Rava, son of Rabba bar Rav Huna,</b> says that <b>Rav Asi says,</b> i.e., that it includes the sinews above the <i>arkum</i>.

### Part 14
<b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Shmuel says: The convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh <b>that they spoke</b> of in the mishna is the <b>place where the sinews converge</b> and appear as though they are a single entity. The Gemara asks: <b>And until how far</b> does it extend? <b>One of the Sages, and his name is Rav Ya’akov, said to them: When we were</b> studying <b>in the school of Rav Yehuda, he said to us: Hear from me a matter that I heard from a great man, and who is he? Shmuel. The convergence of sinews that they spoke</b> of is the <b>place where the sinews converge, and</b> it extends <b>from</b> the <b>place where they converge until</b> the <b>place where they diverge</b> and are subsumed within the flesh.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>And how far</b> is this? <b>Abaye said: Four handbreadths in an ox.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the measure <b>in a small domesticated animal? Abaye said:</b> There is no set measure; rather, as long as the sinews are <b>prominent</b> and are not subsumed within the flesh, <b>they are</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh, but once they are <b>subsumed they are not</b> considered part of <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh.

### Part 16
Abaye adds: The sinews that are <b>hard are</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews</b> in the thigh; those that are <b>soft are not</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews.</b> Those that are <b>thick are</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews;</b> those that are <b>thin are not</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews.</b> Those that are <b>white are</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews;</b> those that are <b>not white are not</b> part of <b>the convergence of sinews.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC