
### Part 1
<b>And</b> if their dispute <b>was stated</b> only <b>with regard to that</b> case, when one-third emerged through the wall of the womb, one might have thought it is only <b>in that</b> case that <b>Rabba says</b> the animal is consecrated from that point forward, as that results in a stringency, i.e., the fetus is subject to firstborn status. <b>But in this</b> case, when after one-third emerged it was sold to a gentile, and where ruling that the animal is consecrated from that point forward results in a leniency, one might <b>say</b> that Rabba <b>concedes to Rav Huna.</b> Therefore, it was <b>necessary</b> for the dispute to be stated in both cases.

### Part 2
The Gemara raises a difficulty with the opinion of Rav Huna. <b>We learned</b> in the mishna: If <b>an animal that was giving birth to a firstborn male was encountering difficulty giving birth,</b> and in order to alleviate the difficulty one wishes to terminate the birth, <b>he may cut up</b> the fetus <b>limb by limb and cast it to the dogs. What, is it not</b> teaching that <b>one cuts</b> each limb <b>and leaves</b> it outside the body, casting the limbs to the dogs only after he has already extracted a majority of its body? <b>And if you say</b> a firstborn is <b>consecrated retroactively,</b> then once the majority of the fetus emerges from the womb all of the limbs would be consecrated retroactively according to Rav Huna. Accordingly, the mishna <b>should have</b> said the limbs <b>must be buried.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara responds: <b>No, here we are dealing with one who cuts</b> each limb <b>and</b> immediately <b>casts</b> it to the dogs, before any consecration takes effect.

### Part 4
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to this, if <b>one cuts</b> the limbs <b>and leaves</b> them, <b>what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? Each one <b>must be buried.</b> If that is so, <b>rather than teaching in the latter clause</b> of the mishna: If <b>a majority of</b> the fetus <b>had</b> already <b>emerged</b> it is considered to have been born and duly consecrated, and so if one cut it up <b>it must be buried, and</b> any future offspring from that animal <b>is exempted from firstborn</b> status; <b>let</b> the <i>tanna</i> instead <b>distinguish and teach</b> a case in which the limbs are consecrated <b>within the</b> context of the first case <b>itself,</b> in the following manner: <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement,</b> that the limbs may be cast to the dogs, <b>said?</b> It is <b>with regard to one who cuts</b> pieces of the fetus <b>and</b> immediately <b>casts</b> them to the dogs <b>limb by limb,</b> before a majority has emerged. <b>But</b> if <b>one cuts and leaves</b> the limbs until a majority has emerged, each one of them <b>must be buried.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara answers: <b>That is indeed what</b> the latter clause of the mishna <b>is saying: In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is <b>with regard to one who cuts and casts</b> the limbs to the dogs before a majority emerges. <b>But</b> if <b>one cuts and leaves</b> the limbs until a majority emerges it is <b>regarded as though a majority of it emerged</b> at one time, <b>and</b> so <b>it must be buried.</b>

### Part 6
§ <b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> Does <b>one follow the majority with regard to limbs or</b> does <b>one not follow the majority with regard to limbs?</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this dilemma; what exactly is Rava’s question?

### Part 7
<b>If we say</b> it is referring to a case <b>where</b> the <b>majority</b> of the fetus <b>emerged,</b> but that majority <b>includes</b> the emergence of the <b>minority</b> part <b>of</b> one of its <b>limbs,</b> then Rava is <b>raising the</b> following <b>dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>this minority</b> part of a limb <b>that is outside</b> the womb, do <b>we cast it,</b> i.e., count it, together <b>with</b> the <b>majority of</b> that <b>limb,</b> which is still inside the womb, as if the entire limb was still inside the womb? If so, it would be regarded as though a majority of the fetus has not yet emerged. <b>Or</b> perhaps <b>we cast it</b> and count it together <b>with the majority of the fetus</b> that has already emerged, and so it is regarded as though a majority of the fetus has emerged and it is duly consecrated.

### Part 8
The Gemara rejects this possibility: In that case it is <b>obvious that we do not disregard the majority of</b> the <b>fetus and go after the majority of</b> the <b>limb.</b> Consequently, Rava would not have raised a dilemma about this.

### Part 9
<b>Rather,</b> the dilemma is referring to a case <b>where half of</b> the fetus <b>emerged,</b> but that half <b>includes the majority of</b> a certain <b>limb, and</b> Rava <b>raises the</b> following <b>dilemma:</b> With regard to <b>this minority</b> part of a limb <b>that is inside</b> the womb, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> as <b>to</b> whether <b>one casts it</b> and counts it together <b>with the majority of</b> that <b>limb</b> and considers it as if that entire limb has emerged? If it is counted, it would be regarded as though a majority of the fetus has emerged, and it is duly consecrated.

### Part 10
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> a resolution from a statement of the mishna: If <b>a majority of</b> the fetus <b>had</b> already <b>emerged,</b> it is considered to have been born and duly consecrated, and so if one cut it up <b>it must be buried.</b> The Gemara clarifies: <b>What</b> is meant by <b>a majority of</b> the fetus? <b>If we say</b> it means <b>literally the majority of</b> the fetus, then the following difficulty arises: <b>Until now had we not learned</b> the principle that <b>the majority</b> of an item is considered <b>like all</b> of <b>it?</b> This is a well-established principle and it is not necessary to teach it again in this context.

### Part 11
<b>Rather, is</b> the mishna <b>not</b> referring to a case <b>where half of</b> the fetus <b>emerged,</b> but that half <b>includes the majority of a limb?</b> If so, the mishna directly resolves Rava’s dilemma and teaches that the minority part of the limb inside the womb is regarded as though it had emerged.

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the mishna could be referring to a case <b>where</b> the <b>majority of</b> the fetus <b>emerged,</b> but that majority <b>includes</b> the emergence of the <b>minority of a limb, and it teaches us that we do not disregard the majority of</b> the <b>fetus and go after the majority of</b> the <b>limb.</b>

### Part 13
§ A firstborn animal is consecrated by virtue of the fact that its birth is the first in which the womb of the mother opens, as indicated by the verse: “Consecrate to Me every firstborn, that which opens the womb” (Exodus 13:2). Concerning this condition, <b>Rava raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>one wrapped</b> the fetus <b>in</b> the <b>bast</b> of a palm tree while it was still in the womb, and it therefore did not come in contact with the opening of the womb directly when it emerged, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether it is consecrated? Likewise, if one wrapped it <b>in his robe</b> when it emerged, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 14
Rava adds: If it emerged wrapped <b>in its afterbirth, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara interjects: How could one suggest that being wrapped <b>in its afterbirth</b> would pose a problem? <b>That is its</b> natural <b>manner</b> of birth, and the afterbirth is consequently not considered an interposition. Accordingly, it is considered as though it was in direct contact with the opening of the womb. <b>Rather,</b> Rava’s dilemma must be as follows: If it emerged wrapped <b>in</b> the <b>afterbirth</b> of <b>a different</b> animal, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 15
Another dilemma: If one <b>wrapped it</b> in one’s hands <b>and held it and brought it out</b> in that fashion, such that the fetus did not come in direct contact with the opening of the womb, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? With regard to all these dilemmas the Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances? If</b> the fetus <b>had</b> already partially <b>emerged headfirst</b> and then one wrapped up the body, which was still inside the womb, the <i>halakha</i> in such a case is clear: Since its head emerged, it is already considered to have been born and to have <b>opened up</b> the womb, and it is duly consecrated. <b>Rather,</b> the dilemma is in a case <b>where it</b> partially <b>emerged hind legs first,</b> and the majority of the body, which was still in the womb, was wrapped before it emerged.

### Part 16
Rava raises additional dilemmas: If <b>a weasel</b> entered the womb and <b>swallowed</b> the fetus there, <b>and</b> then exited the womb, <b>bringing</b> the fetus <b>out</b> in its stomach, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara interjects: Is there any doubt about a case where the weasel <b>brought</b> the fetus <b>out</b> in its stomach? In such a case it is the weasel that <b>brought it out,</b> and it is certainly not regarded as though the fetus opened the womb. <b>Rather,</b> the dilemma concerns a case where the weasel <b>swallowed</b> the fetus <b>and brought it out, and</b> then <b>brought it</b> back <b>into</b> the womb <b>and vomited it</b> out while inside the womb, <b>and</b> the fetus subsequently <b>emerged of its own accord. What is</b> the <i>halakha</i> in this case?

### Part 17
Another dilemma: If <b>one pressed together</b> the openings of <b>two wombs</b> of two animals giving birth to firstborns, <b>and</b> a fetus <b>exited from</b> the womb of <b>this</b> animal <b>and entered</b> the womb of <b>that</b> animal, and then emerged from the womb of the second animal, after which the second animal gave birth to its fetus, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i> with regard to whether the fetus of the second animal is consecrated as a firstborn? Is the womb considered to have <b>opened</b> only when <b>its own</b> fetus emerges from inside, but a fetus <b>that is not its own</b> is <b>not</b> halakhically considered to have <b>opened</b> the womb? <b>Or perhaps</b> even a fetus <b>that is not its own</b> is <b>also</b> considered to have <b>opened</b> the womb? The Gemara does not provide a resolution for these dilemmas and concludes: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 18
<b>Rav Aḥa raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>the walls of the</b> opening of the <b>womb opened</b> and widened to such an extent that when the fetus emerged it did not touch them, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Does the <b>airspace</b> of the opening of the <b>womb consecrate</b> the fetus as it is born, <b>and</b> this situation <b>exists</b> here in this case; <b>or perhaps</b> it is the <b>contact with</b> the opening of the <b>womb</b> that <b>consecrates it, and</b> this situation <b>does not exist</b> here in this case?

### Part 19
<b>Mar bar Rav Ashi raises a dilemma:</b> If <b>the walls of the</b> opening of the <b>womb were removed, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara interjects: The <i>halakha</i> in this case is clear, since if <b>they were removed they are not</b> there to consecrate the fetus. <b>Rather,</b> the dilemma is in a case where <b>they were removed</b> from their original place, recessed inside the womb, <b>and</b> as the fetus emerged, the walls <b>lay on its neck.</b> In such a case, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Do the walls of the opening of the womb <b>consecrate</b> a fetus only <b>when they are in their</b> natural <b>place,</b> but <b>when they are not in their</b> natural <b>place they cannot consecrate</b> a fetus? <b>Or perhaps when they are not in their</b> natural <b>place they also consecrate</b> the fetus.

### Part 20
<b>Rabbi Yirmeya raises a dilemma before Rabbi Zeira:</b> If <b>the walls of the opening of the womb were thinned [<i>nigmemu</i>]</b> by removing the inner layer, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If the fetus then emerges through them is it consecrated? Rabbi Zeira <b>said to him: You have touched upon a dilemma that was</b> already <b>raised before us,</b> and that discussion provides the answer to your dilemma. <b>As Rabbi Zeira raised a dilemma, and some say Rabbi Zeira raised</b> that <b>dilemma before Rabbi Asi:</b> If a section of the opening of the womb was cut away, but the <b>standing</b> section, i.e., the part remaining, <b>is greater</b> in size <b>than the breached,</b> removed, section, <b>and</b> the offspring <b>emerged through the breached</b> section; or if the <b>breached</b> section <b>is greater</b> in size <b>than the standing</b> section <b>and</b> the offspring <b>emerged through</b> the <b>standing</b> section, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 21
Rabbi Zeira explains how this dilemma can resolve Rabbi Yirmeya’s dilemma: That <b>dilemma was raised only with regard to</b> a case where the <b>breached</b> section <b>is greater than the standing</b> section, <b>as there is</b> at least some part of the womb still <b>standing</b> and therefore one can consider the possibility that it could consecrate the fetus. <b>But a dilemma was not raised with regard to</b> case where the walls <b>were thinned,</b> because in that case it is obvious that the fetus is not consecrated, as there is nothing left to consecrate it.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC