
### Part 1
because <b>by standing</b> on the eve of the Festival <b>and saying: This</b> bird <b>and that</b> bird <b>I will take</b> on the Festival, he would have effected <b>sufficient</b> preparation for their use on the Festival. The Gemara responds: <b>These,</b> the offspring and the eggs, <b>were new produce, which Levi bar Simon himself had not</b> yet <b>acquired. And this</b> is what Shmuel was <b>saying to him: Go and bang on the nest</b> so <b>that</b> the mothers <b>will rise up, and Levi bar Simon will</b> have then <b>acquired</b> the young in the nest,<b>and</b> consequently, <b>he</b> may <b>then transfer ownership to you through</b> acquisition by means of <b>a cloth.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> <b>A person may not take the mother</b> bird <b>with the offspring even</b> if he takes the mother for use as part of the ritual <b>to purify the leper.</b> The mishna compares the reward for performing the mitzva of sending away the mother bird from the nest to the reward for performing other mitzvot: <b>And if</b> with regard to the sending away of the mother bird, which is <b>a mitzva</b> whose performance is <b>simple, as</b> it entails a loss of no more than <b>an <i>issar</i>,</b> i.e., the value of the mother bird, <b>the Torah says: “That it may be well with you, and that you may prolong your days”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:7), it may be derived by <b><i>a fortiori</i></b> inference that the reward is no less <b>for</b> the fulfillment <b>of the mitzvot in the Torah</b> whose performance is <b>demanding.</b>

### Part 3
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> <b>The school of Rabbi Ya’akov taught that</b> Rabbi Ya’akov <b>says: There is not a single mitzva</b> written <b>in the Torah whose reward</b> is stated <b>alongside it, which is not dependent on</b> a belief in <b>the resurrection of the dead,</b> i.e., the reward is actually bestowed in the World-to-Come, after the resurrection of the dead. How so? <b>With regard to honoring one’s father and mother, it is written: “That your days may be long, and that it may go well with you”</b> (Deuteronomy 5:16). <b>With regard to</b> the <b>sending</b> away of the mother bird from <b>the nest, it is written: “That it may be well with you, and that you may prolong your days”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:7).

### Part 4
Despite this, it occurred that <b>there was</b> one <b>whose father said to him: Climb to</b> the top of <b>the building and bring me fledglings; and he climbed to</b> the top of <b>the building and sent</b> away <b>the mother</b> bird <b>and took the offspring,</b> thereby simultaneously fulfilling the mitzva to send away the mother bird from the nest and the mitzva to honor one’s parents, <b>but as he returned he fell and died. Where is the length of days of this one? And where is the goodness</b> of the days <b>of this one? Rather,</b> the verse <b>“that your days may be long”</b> is referring <b>to the world that is entirely long,</b> and <b>“that it may be well with you”</b> means <b>in the world where all is well.</b>

### Part 5
The Gemara suggests: <b>But perhaps this</b> incident described by Rabbi Ya’akov <b>never occurred.</b> It is possible that everyone who performs these mitzvot is rewarded in this world, and the situation described by Rabbi Ya’akov never happened. The Gemara answers: <b>Rabbi Ya’akov</b> himself <b>saw an incident</b> of this kind. The Gemara suggests: <b>But perhaps</b> that man <b>was contemplating sin</b> at the time, and he was punished for his thoughts. The Gemara responds: There is a principle that <b>the Holy One, Blessed be He, does not link a bad thought to an action,</b> i.e., one is not punished for thoughts alone.

### Part 6
The Gemara objects: <b>But perhaps</b> the son <b>was contemplating idol worship</b> at the time, <b>as it is written</b> with regard to idol worship: <b>“So I may take the house of Israel in their own heart”</b> (Ezekiel 14:5), <b>and Rav Aḥa bar Ya’akov says: This</b> is referring to punishment for the <b>thought of</b> performing <b>idol worship.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara responds: <b>This</b> is what Rabbi Ya’akov was <b>saying</b> after witnessing the incident mentioned above: <b>If it is so that there is reward for</b> performance of <b>mitzvot in this world, it should be effective for</b> the son <b>and protect him so that he not come to contemplate</b> idol worship <b>and be harmed. Rather,</b> one must conclude that <b>there is no reward for</b> performance of <b>mitzvot in this world.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Elazar say: Those on the path to perform a mitzva are not</b> susceptible to <b>harm?</b> How is it possible that this individual, who was sent by his father to perform a mitzva, could have died? The Gemara answers: <b>When they return</b> it <b>is different,</b> as after one has performed the mitzva, one is susceptible to harm.

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: <b>But didn’t Rabbi Elazar say: Those on the path to perform a mitzva are not</b> susceptible to <b>harm, neither when they</b> are <b>on their way</b> to perform the mitzva <b>nor when they are returning</b> from performing the mitzva? The Gemara answers: In that case, it <b>was a rickety ladder</b> on which the son ascended and descended, <b>and a place where danger is established is different,</b> and even those on the path to perform a mitzva are susceptible to harm. This is apparent from the incident where the prophet Samuel traveled to anoint David as king in place of Saul, <b>as it is written: “And Samuel said: How can I go? If Saul hears of it, he will kill me”</b> (I Samuel 16:2). Although Samuel was on the path to perform a mitzva, he feared that harm would befall him from established dangers.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Yosef said: Had Aḥer,</b> literally Other, the appellation of the former Sage Elisha ben Avuya, <b>interpreted homiletically this</b> aforementioned <b>verse:</b> “That it may go well with you” (Deuteronomy 5:16), as referring to the World-to-Come, <b>as</b> did <b>Rabbi Ya’akov, the son of his daughter,</b> he would <b>not have sinned.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>What did</b> Aḥer <b>see</b> that led him to heresy? <b>Some say</b> that <b>he saw an incident like this</b> one witnessed by Rabbi Ya’akov, <b>and some say</b> that <b>he saw the tongue of Rabbi Ḥutzpit the disseminator, which was cast in a garbage dump</b> after he was executed by the government. Aḥer <b>said: Will a mouth that produced pearls</b> of wisdom <b>lick the dust? But he did not know</b> that the phrase <b>“that it may be well with you”</b> means <b>in the world where all is well,</b> and that the phrase <b>“that your days may be long”</b> is referring <b>to the world that is entirely long.</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC