
### Part 1
If <b>its womb was removed,</b> the animal is <b>kosher.</b> If <b>its liver became infested by worms,</b> with regard to <b>this</b> there <b>was an incident, and the residents of Asia</b> Minor <b>went up</b> on <b>three occasions to</b> the great Sanhedrin in <b>Yavne</b> to inquire with regard to the <i>halakha</i>. On the first two occasions they did not receive an answer; on <b>the third occasion,</b> after the Sanhedrin had deliberated, <b>they permitted</b> the animal <b>to them.</b>

### Part 2
§ <b>Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> With regard to <b>a lung that is adjacent,</b> i.e., attached, <b>to the</b> ribs in the chest <b>wall, one</b> need <b>not be concerned about</b> the possibility that <b>it</b> became attached as a result of a perforation in the lung as opposed to some injury to the chest wall. But if <b>cysts</b> full of pus <b>sprouted</b> on the lung itself in the area of its attachment to the chest wall, <b>one</b> must be <b>concerned about</b> the possibility that <b>it</b> was perforated, and that this gave rise to the cysts. <b>Mar Yehuda says in the name of Avimi:</b> In <b>both this</b> case <b>and that</b> case, whether or not there are cysts on the lung, <b>one</b> must be <b>concerned about</b> the possibility that the lung was perforated.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>How do we perform</b> an examination to determine whether the injury is in the chest wall or the lung? <b>Rava said: Ravin bar Sheva explained</b> the procedure <b>to me: We bring a knife whose edge is</b> sharp and <b>thin, and we separate</b> the lung from the chest wall. <b>If there is a defect,</b> a wound or disease, <b>in the</b> chest <b>wall, we attribute</b> the attachment <b>to</b> the defect in the chest <b>wall. And if not,</b> we presume that the attachment is <b>due to</b> a defect in <b>the lung, and</b> the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>. And</b> this is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though</b> the lung <b>does not expel air</b> when inflated, since it is assumed that a scab covered the perforation, and a scab does not prevent the animal from being rendered a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 4
The Gemara relates that <b>Rav Neḥemya, son of Rav Yosef, examined</b> such a lung by inflating it <b>in tepid</b> water to see if bubbles would appear. <b>Mar Zutra, son of Rav Huna, son of Rav Pappi, said to Ravina:</b> Concerning <b>this</b> episode <b>of Rav Neḥemya, son of Rav Yosef, you teach it</b> as being <b>about this</b> case of a lung attached to the chest wall. But <b>we teach it</b> as being <b>about</b> the case <b>of Rava, as Rava says: These two lobes</b> of the lung <b>that adhere to one another have no</b> means of <b>inspection to deem them kosher.</b> Still, <b>Rav Neḥemya, son of Rav Yosef, examined</b> such a lung by inflating it <b>in tepid water.</b> If no bubbles appeared he would deem the lung kosher.

### Part 5
<b>Rav Ashi objects to this: What is this?</b> How can an animal with a lung whose lobes adhered to one another be permitted by means of such an inspection? <b>Granted, here,</b> in the case of a lung attached to the chest wall, <b>we attribute</b> the attachment to an injury <b>in the</b> chest <b>wall</b> rather than the lung, <b>and</b> the animal is <b>kosher. But there,</b> in the case of an adhesion between two lobes, what can be said? <b>If this</b> lobe <b>was perforated</b> the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>, and if that</b> lobe <b>was perforated</b> the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> Even if a scab covers the perforation and prevents bubbles from appearing, the animal is still a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 6
Rav Naḥman stated that if there are cysts on the lung in the area of its attachment to the chest wall, one must be concerned about the possibility that the lung was perforated. Evidently, if the lung was perforated, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>And did Rav Naḥman</b> really <b>say this? But doesn’t Rav Yosef bar Minyumi say</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> If the <b>lung was perforated but the</b> chest <b>wall seals</b> the perforation, the animal is <b>kosher?</b> The Gemara responds: This is <b>not difficult. There,</b> Rav Naḥman is referring to a lung attached to the chest wall <b>in the place that it grows [<i>revita</i>]</b> naturally. In that case, if the chest wall seals the perforation it will remain sealed, and the animal can live. But <b>here,</b> Rav Naḥman is referring to a lung attached to the chest wall <b>not in the place that it grows.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara clarifies: <b>And where is the place that it grows?</b> It is the area of <b>the sectioning of the lobes,</b> i.e., the front of the lung where the lobes are adjacent to the chest wall on all sides.

### Part 8
§ Since the Gemara cited the statement of Rav Naḥman, the Gemara turns to <b>the</b> matter <b>itself: Rav Yosef bar Minyumi says</b> that <b>Rav Naḥman says:</b> If the <b>lung was perforated but the</b> chest <b>wall sealed</b> the perforation, the animal is <b>kosher.</b> With regard to this statement, <b>Ravina said: And this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>when</b> the lung <b>is tangled in the flesh</b> of the chest wall, between the ribs. <b>Rav Yosef said to Ravina: And if</b> it is <b>not tangled, what</b> is the <i>halakha</i>? The animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>. Evidently, we say</b> that the lung <b>is perforated.</b> But <b>if so, when it is tangled as well,</b> it should be deemed a <i>tereifa</i>.

### Part 9
<b>As isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If a man’s penis was <b>perforated,</b> he is <b>unfit</b> to marry a Jewish woman of fit lineage, <b>because</b> his semen <b>is discharged gently</b> and he cannot procreate, in accordance with the verse: “He that is crushed or maimed in his private parts shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:2). But if the perforation <b>was</b> later <b>sealed</b> with flesh, he is <b>fit, because</b> now <b>he can procreate. And this is</b> an instance of someone who is <b>unfit who returns to his</b> previous state of <b>fitness.</b> Rav Yosef continues: When the <i>baraita</i> states: <b>And this is, what does it</b> serve <b>to exclude?</b> Does it <b>not</b> serve <b>to exclude a case like this,</b> where the lung was perforated and then sealed by the chest wall, in which case the animal would not become kosher again?

### Part 10
The Gemara responds: <b>No,</b> the phrase serves <b>to exclude a membrane that appeared due to a wound in the lung, which is not</b> considered <b>a membrane</b> that can seal a perforation, because it is temporary. By contrast, the flesh of the chest wall is considered a permanent seal on the lungs and renders the animal kosher.

### Part 11
<b>Rav Ukva bar Ḥama objects to</b> the ruling of Rav Naḥman that if a lung was perforated but the chest wall sealed the perforation, the animal is kosher: <b>If</b> flesh <b>in the</b> chest <b>wall was perforated against</b> the perforation in the lung, <b>what</b> would the <i>halakha</i> be? The animal would be <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> since air can now escape from the lung. Evidently, the question of whether the animal is permitted is dependent on the state of the chest wall. If so, <b>let</b> the mishna <b>teach,</b> in addition to the given list of <i>tereifot</i>: An animal <b>whose</b> chest <b>wall was perforated.</b>

### Part 12
The Gemara responds: <b>And according to your reasoning,</b> one can also ask: The mishna states that if the gallbladder was perforated, the animal is a <i>tereifa</i>. <b>That which Rav Yitzḥak bar Yosef says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says</b> with regard to this, that if the <b>gallbladder was perforated but the liver sealed</b> the perforation the animal is <b>kosher,</b> is difficult. <b>If the liver were perforated against</b> the perforation in the gallbladder, <b>what</b> would the <i>halakha</i> be? The animal would be <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b> If so, <b>let</b> the mishna also <b>teach:</b> An animal <b>whose liver was perforated.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rather,</b> one must say that the mishna <b>does not teach</b> cases <b>where</b> the <b>perforated</b> organ is <b>not</b> the one <b>by which</b> the animal <b>is rendered a <i>tereifa</i>. Here, too,</b> in the case of a lung sealed by the chest wall, <b>since</b> the perforated organ, i.e., the chest wall, is <b>not</b> the one <b>by which</b> the animal <b>is rendered a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> the mishna <b>does not teach</b> it.

### Part 14
§ <b>Rabba bar bar Ḥana asked Shmuel:</b> If the lung <b>grew cysts</b> full of pus, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Shmuel <b>said to him:</b> The animal is <b>kosher.</b> Rabba bar bar Ḥana <b>said to him</b> in reply: <b>I also say so,</b> that the animal is kosher, <b>except that the students doubt the matter, as Rav Mattana says:</b> If the cyst was <b>full of pus,</b> the animal is <b>a <i>tereifa</i>;</b> if it was full of <b>clear fluid,</b> it is <b>kosher.</b> Shmuel <b>said to him: That</b> <i>halakha</i> of Rav Mattana <b>was stated</b> with regard to a cyst <b>on the kidney,</b> not on the lung.

### Part 15
The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Yosef was walking after Rabbi Yirmeya in the butchers’ market. He saw these</b> lungs <b>that were full of cysts,</b> and he wished to determine the <i>halakha</i> with regard to them. <b>He said to</b> Rabbi Yirmeya: <b>Doesn’t</b> the <b>Master desire a piece of meat?</b> If so, meat from those animals is for sale. Rabbi Yirmeya, not wanting to issue a ruling with regard to the meat, <b>said to him: I have no money.</b> Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Yosef <b>said to him: I will</b> buy them for you on <b>credit.</b> Rabbi Yirmeya realized that he could not avoid issuing a ruling, so <b>he said to him: What can I do for you? As when</b> people <b>came before Rabbi Yoḥanan</b> with such lungs, <b>he</b> would <b>send them before Rabbi Yehuda, son of Rabbi Shimon, who</b> would <b>instruct</b> them <b>in</b> such cases <b>in the name of Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, to permit</b> the meat for consumption. <b>But</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>himself does not hold accordingly,</b> and does not permit the meat. I practice stringency in accordance with his opinion.

### Part 16
<b>Rava said: When we would walk after Rav Naḥman in the market</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC