
### Part 1
The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> is the resolution of the dilemma raised by Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: <b>When regard for sanctity is effective</b> in rendering an item susceptible to impurity, is it only <b>to disqualify</b> that item <b>itself, but to count</b> the descending levels of <b>first-degree</b> impurity <b>and second-degree</b> impurity, it is <b>not</b> effective; <b>or perhaps</b> once it is rendered susceptible to impurity there <b>is no difference</b> whether it is rendered susceptible by means of regard for sanctity or by means of contact with liquids? The Gemara answers: The dilemma <b>shall stand</b> unresolved.

### Part 2
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slaughters</b> an animal <b>that is in danger</b> of imminent death, <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> The slaughter is valid <b>only</b> in a case <b>where</b> after the slaughter <b>it convulses with its foreleg and with its hind leg. Rabbi Eliezer says: It is sufficient if</b> blood <b>spurted</b> from the neck. <b>Rabbi Shimon says:</b> In the case of <b>one who slaughters at night and the next day he awoke and found walls full of blood,</b> the slaughter is <b>valid,</b> as it is clear <b>that</b> the blood <b>spurted, and</b> this is <b>in accordance with the rule of Rabbi Eliezer. And the Rabbis say:</b> It is valid <b>only</b> in a case <b>where it convulses with its foreleg or with its hind leg, or</b> in a case <b>where it wags its tail.</b>

### Part 3
This is the <i>halakha</i> with regard to <b>both a small animal,</b> e.g., a sheep, <b>and a large animal,</b> e.g., a cow, that is in danger of imminent death. The slaughter of <b>a small animal that</b> when being slaughtered <b>extended its foreleg</b> that was bent <b>and did not restore</b> it to the bent position <b>is not valid, as</b> extending the foreleg <b>is only</b> part of the natural course of <b>removal</b> of the animal’s <b>soul</b> from its body and not a convulsion indicating life. <b>In what</b> case <b>is this statement said?</b> It is in a case <b>where the presumptive status</b> of the animal <b>was</b> that it was <b>in danger</b> of imminent death. <b>But if its presumptive status was</b> that it was <b>healthy,</b> then <b>even if there were none of these indicators,</b> the slaughter is <b>valid.</b>

### Part 4
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> is it known <b>that</b> the flesh of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is permitted</b> by means of slaughter? The Gemara responds with a question: <b>And from where would it enter your mind that it is prohibited?</b> The Gemara explains that one may have thought it is prohibited, <b>as it is written: “These are the living beings [<i>haḥayya</i>] that you may eat</b> among all the animals that are on the earth” (Leviticus 11:2). One might have thought that the verse is saying: <b>Eat</b> an animal that is fit to <b>live [<i>ḥayya</i>], but do not eat</b> an animal <b>that is not</b> fit to <b>live. And this</b> animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is not</b> fit to <b>live.</b>

### Part 5
The fact that its meat is permitted is derived <b>from the fact that the Merciful One states that you shall not eat an unslaughtered animal carcass,</b> as it is written: “You shall not eat any unslaughtered carcass” (Deuteronomy 14:21); one learns <b>by inference</b> that eating the meat of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is permitted. As, if it enters your mind</b> that eating the meat of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is prohibited, now</b> if an animal is <b>prohibited while alive,</b> is it <b>necessary</b> to state that it is prohibited <b>after death?</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara rejects that proof. <b>And</b> that is not a legitimate inference, as <b>perhaps</b> the halakhic status of <b>an unslaughtered carcass is</b> the same as <b>that of</b> an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death, and the prohibition: “You shall not eat any unslaughtered carcass,” includes both. The Gemara answers: <b>It would not enter your mind</b> to say so, <b>as it is written: “And if any animal of which you may eat dies, one who touches its carcass</b> shall be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 11:39). This indicates that <b>it is after death that the Merciful One calls</b> the animal <b>a carcass; while alive,</b> the animal <b>is not called a carcass.</b>

### Part 7
The Gemara questions that understanding. <b>And perhaps, actually I will say to you:</b> The halakhic status of <b>an unslaughtered carcass is</b> the same as <b>that of</b> an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death, but if one slaughters the animal in danger of imminent death <b>while alive,</b> he would be <b>in</b> violation of <b>a positive</b> mitzva: “These are the living beings that you may eat” (Leviticus 11:2), whereas <b>after</b> its <b>death,</b> he would be <b>in</b> violation of <b>a prohibition:</b> “You shall not eat any unslaughtered carcass” (Deuteronomy 14:21).

### Part 8
<b>Rather,</b> the fact that its meat is permitted is derived <b>from the fact that the Merciful One states you shall not eat that an animal with a wound that will cause it to die within twelve months [<i>tereifa</i>],</b> as it is written: “And you shall not eat any animal that was mauled in the field [<i>tereifa</i>]” (Exodus 22:30). From here, one learns <b>by inference</b> that eating the meat of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is permitted. As, if it enters your mind</b> that eating the meat of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>is prohibited, now</b> that an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death <b>that is not lacking</b> any limb <b>is prohibited,</b> is it <b>necessary</b> to state that <b>a <i>tereifa</i>,</b> an animal that was mauled and lacking body parts, is prohibited?

### Part 9
The Gemara rejects that proof. <b>And</b> that is not a legitimate inference, as <b>perhaps</b> the halakhic status of <b>a <i>tereifa</i></b> that is lacking body parts <b>is</b> the same as that of an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death that is not lacking body parts, and both are included in the category of <i>tereifa</i>. This would render one who slaughters either <b>to</b> be <b>in violation</b> of both <b>a positive</b> mitzva: “These are the living beings that you may eat,” <b>and a prohibition:</b> “And you shall not eat any animal that was mauled in the field [<i>tereifa</i>].” The Gemara questions that understanding: <b>If so, why do I</b> need the prohibition <b>that the Merciful One writes</b> with regard to <b>an unslaughtered carcass? If while</b> an animal is <b>alive one stands in</b> violation of <b>a prohibition and a positive</b> mitzva, <b>is</b> it <b>necessary</b> to state that it is prohibited <b>after death?</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara objects: <b>And</b> that is not a legitimate question, as <b>perhaps</b> the halakhic status of <b>an unslaughtered carcass is</b> the same as <b>a <i>tereifa</i></b> that is lacking body parts, and <b>is</b> the same as <b>that of</b> an animal <b>in danger</b> of imminent death that is not lacking body parts. Therefore, when the Torah writes the word “carcass,” it is the same as though it had written <i>tereifa</i> and the same as though it had written an animal in danger of imminent death. The Torah prohibits each, <b>and the result will be that he will violate two prohibitions and a positive</b> mitzva.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> the fact that the meat of an animal in danger of imminent death is permitted is derived <b>from here: “And the fat of a carcass and the fat of a <i>tereifa</i> may be used for any purpose; but you shall not eat it”</b> (Leviticus 7:24). <b>And the Master says:</b> In order <b>to</b> derive <b>what <i>halakha</i></b> is this verse written? Would one imagine that because it is an unslaughtered carcass or a <i>tereifa</i> its fat would be permitted for consumption? <b>The Torah states: Let the prohibition against</b> eating <b>an unslaughtered carcass come and take effect upon the prohibition against</b> eating forbidden <b>fat,</b> which already exists. One who eats the forbidden fat of an unslaughtered carcass is liable for violation of both prohibitions. Likewise, the word “<i>tereifa</i>” in the verse teaches: <b>Let the prohibition against</b> eating <b>a <i>tereifa</i> come and take effect upon the prohibition against</b> eating forbidden <b>fat,</b> which already exists, so that one who eats the forbidden fat of a <i>tereifa</i> is liable for transgressing both prohibitions.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC