
### Part 1
appear to <b>emulate [<i>yeḥakkeh</i>] the heretics.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: <b>One may not slaughter</b> an animal and have its blood flow, <b>neither into</b> seas, nor into rivers, nor into vessels, but one may slaughter an animal and have its blood flow into a round excavation containing water. The Gemara asks: <b>What is different</b> about slaughter <b>into seas?</b> Is it <b>that</b> one may <b>not</b> perform it, <b>as</b> onlookers will <b>say: He is slaughtering to the angel of the sea?</b> If so, slaughter <b>into a round excavation</b> containing <b>water</b> should <b>also</b> be prohibited, as onlookers will <b>say: He is slaughtering to</b> his <b>reflection [<i>bavua</i>],</b> which is also similar to idolatry. <b>Rava said:</b> The <i>tanna’im</i> <b>taught</b> that <i>halakha</i> <b>in</b> the case of <b>murky</b> water, in which no reflection can be seen.

### Part 3
§ The mishna states: <b>One</b> may <b>not slaughter</b> an animal and have its blood flow <b>into a small hole</b> in the ground at all, but one may fashion a small hole inside his house so that the blood will enter into it. The Gemara asks: How is it permitted to slaughter and have the blood flow into a hole inside his house? <b>But didn’t you</b> initially <b>say</b> that <b>one may not slaughter</b> an animal and have its blood flow <b>into a small hole</b> in the ground <b>at all? Abaye said: The first clause</b> of the mishna, where there is a blanket prohibition against having the blood flow into a small hole, is referring <b>to a small hole that is in the marketplace.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rava said to him: But</b> isn’t it so that <b>from</b> the fact <b>that the latter clause teaches: And in the marketplace one may not do so, it may be inferred that</b> in <b>the first clause we are not dealing with the marketplace?</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rather, Rava said</b> that <b>this</b> is what the mishna <b>is saying: One may not slaughter</b> an animal and have its blood flow <b>into a small hole</b> in the ground <b>at all. And one who wishes to clean his courtyard</b> and ensure that it will not be sullied in blood, <b>how does he do</b> so? <b>He fashions a place</b> with an incline or a furrow <b>outside the small hole, and slaughters</b> the animal there, <b>and the blood flows and descends into the hole. And in the marketplace one may not do so,</b> so <b>that</b> he will <b>not</b> appear to <b>emulate the heretics.</b>

### Part 6
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rava:</b> If one <b>was traveling on a ship and he has no place on the ship to slaughter</b> an animal, <b>he extends his hand</b> with a knife, holds the head of the animal <b>outside</b> the walls of <b>the ship, and slaughters</b> the animal there; <b>and the blood flows and descends</b> down <b>the sides of the ship.</b> He may not slaughter an animal and have its blood flow directly into the sea. <b>And one may not slaughter</b> an animal and have its blood flow <b>into a small hole</b> in the ground <b>at all.</b>

### Part 7
<b>And one who wishes to clean his courtyard</b> and ensure that it will not be sullied with blood, <b>how does he do</b> so? <b>He fashions a place</b> with an incline or a furrow <b>outside the small hole, and slaughters</b> the animal there, <b>and the blood flows and descends into the hole. And in the marketplace, one may not do so, as it is stated: “Neither shall you follow their statutes”</b> (Leviticus 18:3). <b>And if he did so, he requires examination after his</b> actions to ascertain whether he is a heretic.

### Part 8
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slaughters</b> an animal and asserts that he is slaughtering it <b>for the sake of a burnt offering, for the sake of a peace offering, for the sake of a provisional guilt offering, for the sake of a Paschal offering,</b> or <b>for the sake of a thanks offering, his slaughter is not valid,</b> as it appears that he is consecrating animals and slaughtering sacrificial animals outside the Temple. <b>And Rabbi Shimon deems</b> his slaughter <b>valid.</b>

### Part 9
If there were <b>two</b> people <b>grasping a knife</b> together <b>and slaughtering</b> an animal, <b>one</b> slaughtering <b>for the sake of one of all those</b> enumerated in the first clause of the mishna <b>and one</b> slaughtering <b>for the sake of a legitimate matter,</b> their <b>slaughter is not valid.</b> With regard to <b>one who slaughters</b> an animal <b>for the sake of a sin offering, for the sake of a guilt offering</b> for <b>a definite</b> transgression, <b>for the sake of</b> the offering of <b>a firstborn, for the sake of</b> the offering of animal <b>tithe,</b> or <b>for the sake of a substitute</b> for a sacrificial animal, <b>his slaughter is valid.</b> All of these offerings may be brought only as obligations and not as gifts. Therefore, there is no concern that he consecrated the animals.

### Part 10
<b>This is the principle:</b> For <b>any item,</b> i.e., offering, <b>which</b> is consecrated as a voluntary <b>vow or gift,</b> in the case of <b>one who slaughters for its sake</b> the animal is <b>forbidden. And</b> for any offering <b>that is not</b> consecrated as a voluntary <b>vow or gift</b> but is an obligation that is incumbent upon him, in the case of <b>one who slaughters for its sake</b> the animal is <b>permitted.</b>

### Part 11
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches: In the case of <b>one who slaughters</b> an animal and asserts that he is slaughtering it <b>for the sake of a burnt offering,</b> for the sake of a peace offering, for the sake of a provisional guilt offering, for the sake of a Paschal offering, or for the sake of a thanks offering, the slaughter is not valid. This is because one who slaughters for the sake of any type of offering that is consecrated as a vow or as a gift renders the animal forbidden. The Gemara asks: <b>Is a provisional guilt offering fit</b> to be consecrated as <b>a vow or</b> as <b>a gift?</b> A provisional guilt offering is brought only when one is obligated to do so due to uncertainty whether or not he is liable to bring a sin offering. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan said:</b> In accordance with <b>whose</b> opinion <b>is this</b> <i>halakha</i> in the mishna? <b>It is</b> in accordance with the opinion of <b>Rabbi Elazar, who says</b> in a mishna (<i>Karetot</i> 25a): <b>A person donates a provisional guilt offering every day</b> if he chooses, due to concern that perhaps he violated a prohibition.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>Is a Paschal offering fit</b> to be consecrated as <b>a vow or</b> as <b>a gift? The time is fixed for its</b> offering on Passover eve, when bringing it is an obligation, and it may not be brought on any other day. <b>Rabbi Oshaya said: The Paschal offering is different, since</b> although the date for bringing and slaughtering it is the fourteenth of Nisan, <b>its designation</b> can be performed <b>throughout the entire year.</b>

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Yannai says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that slaughter of an animal for the sake of an offering is not valid <b>only</b> if the animals were <b>unblemished. But</b> with regard to animals with <b>blemishes,</b> the slaughterer <b>knows</b> that they are blemished and disqualified from sacrifice. Therefore, despite his declaration, there is no concern that his actual intent was to slaughter the animal for that purpose. <b>And Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> Slaughter of an animal for the sake of an offering is not valid <b>even</b> if the animals were <b>blemished as well,</b> as there are <b>times that an item is cast over the blemish</b> and covers it, <b>and he does not know</b> that the animal is blemished.

### Part 14
The mishna teaches: With regard to <b>one who slaughters</b> an animal <b>for the sake of a sin offering,</b> his slaughter is valid, as, since one cannot voluntarily contribute a sin offering, there is no concern that the onlookers will draw the wrong conclusion. <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that slaughter of an animal for the sake of a sin offering is valid <b>only</b> with regard to a slaughterer <b>who is not liable</b> to bring <b>a sin offering. But</b> a slaughterer who knows that he is <b>liable</b> to bring <b>a sin offering,</b> his slaughter is not valid. <b>Say</b> that <b>he is performing</b> consecration and slaughter <b>for the sake of his sin offering.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> didn’t he say before the slaughter: For the sake of a sin offering, and <b>he did not say: For the sake of my sin offering?</b> Why, then, is that a concern? <b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> Indeed, the reference is to a case <b>where he says:</b> I am slaughtering this animal <b>for the sake of my sin offering.</b>

### Part 15
The mishna teaches: With regard to one who slaughters <b>for the sake of a substitute</b> for a sacrificial animal, his slaughter is valid. <b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that the slaughter is valid <b>only</b> in a case <b>where he does not have</b> an animal consecrated as <b>an offering inside his house</b> for which it can be the substitute, <b>but</b> if <b>he has</b> an animal consecrated as <b>an offering in his house, say</b> that he is <b>substituting</b> this animal <b>for it,</b> and the slaughter is not valid. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> didn’t he say before the slaughter: For the sake of a substitute for a sacrificial animal, and <b>he did not say: For the sake of a substitute for my</b> animal consecrated as an <b>offering?</b> Why, then, is that a concern? <b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> Indeed, the reference is to a case <b>where he says:</b> I am slaughtering this animal <b>for the sake of a substitute for my</b> animal consecrated as an <b>offering.</b>

### Part 16
The mishna states that <b>this is the principle:</b> For any offering that is consecrated as a voluntary vow or gift, in the case of one who slaughters for its sake, the animal is forbidden. The Gemara asks: <b>What</b> case does this clause <b>add?</b> The list in the mishna appears to be comprehensive. The Gemara answers: The clause serves <b>to add</b> the <b>burnt offering of a nazirite. As, lest you say</b> there is no concern in that case, <b>as that</b> person did <b>not vow</b> to become a nazirite and could not possibly be obligated to bring that offering, therefore, the <i>tanna</i> teaches that there is a concern if he said he was slaughtering for the sake of the burnt offering of a nazirite. <b>Say</b> that perhaps <b>he vowed</b> to become a nazirite <b>in private,</b> and no one else was aware of it.

### Part 17
The Gemara asks: What is added by the second half of the principle: <b>And</b> for any offering <b>that is not consecrated</b> as a voluntary <b>vow or</b> as <b>a gift,</b> in the case of one who slaughters for its sake the animal is permitted? The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to add the burnt offering of a woman after childbirth.</b> If one slaughters an animal for the sake of a burnt offering of a woman after childbirth, the slaughter is valid, as it is an obligation.

### Part 18
<b>Rabbi Elazar says:</b> The Sages <b>taught</b> that the slaughter is valid <b>only</b> in a case <b>where he does not have a wife. But</b> if <b>he has a wife, say that he performs</b> consecration and slaughter of the animal <b>for her sake</b> and therefore the slaughter is not valid. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> didn’t he say before the slaughter: For the sake of the burnt offering of a woman after childbirth, and <b>he did not say: For the sake of the burnt offering of my wife</b> after childbirth? Why, then, is that a concern? <b>Rabbi Abbahu said:</b> Indeed, the reference is to a case <b>where he says:</b> I am slaughtering this animal <b>for the sake of the burnt offering of my wife</b> after childbirth.

### Part 19
The Gemara objects: This is <b>obvious.</b> Clearly, if he explicitly declared that the slaughter is for the sake of the burnt offering of his wife after childbirth the slaughter is not valid.

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC