
### Part 1
It could <b>enter your mind to say: Since</b> benefit from disqualified consecrated animals <b>is forbidden with regard to</b> their <b>fleece and labor,</b> perhaps benefit from <b>their blood</b> is also forbidden, and <b>let</b> it <b>require burial.</b> Therefore, the verse <b>teaches us</b> that benefit from their blood is permitted.

### Part 2
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught</b> that the verse: <b>“And drinks the blood of carcasses,”</b> from which it is derived that the blood of an animal that was killed renders food items susceptible to ritual impurity, serves to <b>exclude blood</b> that emerges in <b>a surge</b> due to arterial pressure at the moment of slaughter while the animal is still alive <b>that does not render seeds susceptible to</b> ritual impurity.

### Part 3
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to one who <b>slaughters</b> an animal <b>and splashed blood</b> of the slaughter <b>on a gourd</b> of <i>teruma</i>, <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> The gourd is <b>rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya says:</b> If the gourd came into contact with a source of impurity, <b>one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance,</b> as there is uncertainty whether the blood rendered it susceptible to impurity.

### Part 4
<b>Rabbi Oshaya said: Since Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says</b> that the gourd is <b>rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity <b>and Rabbi Ḥiyya says</b> that <b>one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance, on whom shall we rely? Come and let us rely on the statement of Rabbi Shimon, as Rabbi Shimon would say:</b> It is <b>slaughter</b> that <b>renders</b> the animal <b>susceptible, and not blood.</b>

### Part 5
<b>Rav Pappa said</b> in explanation: <b>Everyone,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi and Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>agrees</b> that <b>where there is blood</b> on the gourd throughout the slaughter continuously <b>from beginning to end, everyone,</b> both Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, who says: Slaughter is defined only as the conclusion of its performance, and Rabbi Yoḥanan, who says: Slaughter is defined from the beginning to the end of its performance, <b>agrees that</b> the blood <b>renders</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to impurity, in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, who disagree with Rabbi Shimon. <b>When they disagree</b> is in a case <b>where the blood is wiped</b> off the gourd <b>between</b> the cutting of one <b><i>siman</i> and</b> the other <b><i>siman</i>. Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>holds</b> that <b>slaughter is</b> defined <b>from</b> the <b>beginning to</b> the <b>end</b> of its performance, <b>and this blood</b> that splashed on the gourd <b>is blood of slaughter.</b>

### Part 6
<b>Rabbi Ḥiyya holds</b> that <b>slaughter is</b> defined <b>only</b> as <b>the conclusion</b> of its performance, <b>and this is blood of a wound,</b> which does not render food items susceptible to ritual impurity. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the ruling of Rabbi Ḥiyya that <b>one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance?</b> It means that <b>one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance until</b> the <b>conclusion of</b> the <b>slaughter. If there is blood</b> remaining on the gourd <b>at the conclusion of the slaughter</b> the blood <b>renders</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, <b>and if not,</b> the blood <b>does not render</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And what</b> is the meaning of the statement of Rabbi Oshaya: <b>Come and let us rely on the statement of Rabbi Shimon?</b> According <b>to Rabbi Shimon</b> the blood of slaughter <b>does not render</b> food items <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, while according <b>to Rabbi Ḥiyya</b> the blood of slaughter <b>renders</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity.

### Part 8
The Gemara answers that in a case <b>where</b> the blood <b>is wiped</b> off the gourd prior to the conclusion of slaughter, <b>in any event,</b> the opinions of Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>correspond to each other:</b> One <b>Sage</b> holds that the blood of slaughter <b>does not render</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity <b>and</b> the other <b>Sage</b> holds that the blood of slaughter <b>does not render</b> the gourd <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. The result is that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who holds that the blood of slaughter renders the gourd susceptible to ritual impurity, <b>is one</b> Sage stating an individual opinion, <b>and the statement of one</b> Sage <b>has no</b> standing <b>in a place</b> where it is disputed by <b>two</b> Sages.

### Part 9
<b>Rav Ashi said</b> that the term: <b>One places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance, indicates</b> that it remains in abeyance <b>forever.</b> It is a fundamental halakhic uncertainty for which there is no resolution. <b>And</b> in the case where the blood is <b>wiped</b> off the gourd prior to the conclusion of the slaughter, the <i>halakha</i> is unclear. This is because <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya is uncertain whether slaughter is</b> defined <b>from</b> the <b>beginning to</b> the <b>end</b> of its performance <b>or whether slaughter is</b> defined <b>only</b> as the <b>conclusion</b> of its performance. <b>And what</b> is the meaning of his ruling that <b>one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance?</b> It means that if a source of impurity comes into contact with the gourd after the blood was wiped off the gourd, <b>one may neither eat</b> the gourd, as perhaps it is impure <i>teruma</i>, <b>nor may one burn</b> it, as perhaps it is pure.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> according to this explanation, <b>what</b> is the meaning of the statement of Rabbi Oshaya: <b>Come and let us rely on the statement of Rabbi Shimon?</b> According <b>to Rabbi Shimon</b> the blood of slaughter <b>does not render</b> food items <b>susceptible</b> to ritual impurity, while according <b>to Rabbi Ḥiyya,</b> there is <b>uncertainty</b> with regard to the status of the gourd. The Gemara answers that with regard <b>to the matter of burning, in any event,</b> the opinions of Rabbi Shimon and Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>correspond to each other:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Shimon, <b>does not burn</b> the gourd, because it was not rendered susceptible to impurity, <b>and</b> the other <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya, <b>does not burn</b> the gourd, due to the uncertainty.

### Part 11
The result is that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi, who holds that one burns the gourd since the blood of slaughter renders the gourd susceptible to ritual impurity and contact with a source of impurity renders it impure, <b>is one</b> Sage stating an individual opinion, <b>and the statement of one</b> Sage <b>has no</b> standing <b>in a place</b> where it is disputed by <b>two</b> Sages. <b>And this</b> is what Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>is saying:</b> In a case <b>such as this, one places</b> the matter <b>in abeyance; one may neither eat</b> the gourd <b>nor burn</b> it.

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish raises a dilemma:</b> With regard to a dry <b>portion</b> of consecrated flour that was not mixed with the oil <b>of meal offerings,</b> does <b>one count</b> the descending levels of impurity characteristic of other foods that come into contact with a primary source of impurity, i.e., that food assumes <b>first-degree</b> impurity, <b>and</b> food that comes into contact with that food assumes <b>second-degree</b> impurity; <b>or</b> does one <b>not count</b> the descending levels of <b>first-degree</b> impurity <b>and second-degree</b> impurity? The Gemara elaborates: <b>When regard for sanctity is effective</b> in rendering an item susceptible to impurity, is it effective only <b>to disqualify</b> that item <b>itself, but to count</b> the descending levels of <b>first-degree and second-degree</b> impurity it is <b>not</b> effective? <b>Or perhaps</b> once it is rendered susceptible to impurity there <b>is no difference</b> whether it is rendered susceptible by means of regard for sanctity or by means of contact with liquids.

### Part 13
<b>Rabbi Elazar said: Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from a <i>baraita</i>. It is written: <b>“Of all food that may be eaten,</b> on which water comes, it shall be impure; and all drink that may be drunk it shall be impure” (Leviticus 11:34). From that verse it is derived: <b>Food that comes into</b> contact with <b>water is rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity and to count the descending levels of impurity, but <b>food that does not come into</b> contact with <b>water is not rendered susceptible</b> to ritual impurity. Apparently, for the dry portion of flour that did not come into contact with a liquid but was rendered susceptible by regard for sanctity, one does not count the descending levels of impurity.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>Is that to say</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish does not have</b> knowledge of the <i>halakha</i> that only <b>food that comes into</b> contact with <b>water</b> is susceptible to ritual impurity? The Gemara answers: <b>This is the dilemma</b> that <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish is raising:</b> Is the halakhic status of consecrated food that is subject to <b>regard for sanctity like</b> that of <b>food that comes into</b> contact with <b>water,</b> and one does not count the descending levels of impurity for items that come into contact with it, <b>or no,</b> its halakhic status is unique?

### Part 15
The Gemara explains that <b>Rabbi Elazar,</b> who cited the verse to resolve the dilemma of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, is not merely citing a verse that Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish knows. Rather, he <b>too is stating</b> his proof <b>from the extraneous</b> formulation <b>of the verses. Since it is written: “But when water is placed upon the seed,</b> and any of their carcass falls upon it, it is impure for you” (Leviticus 11:38), <b>why do I</b> need the verse: <b>“Of all food which may be eaten,</b> on which water comes, shall be impure” (Leviticus 11:34)?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC