
### Part 1
one might ask: <b>Since</b> it is assumed that the list in <b>Deuteronomy comes to add</b> to the list in Leviticus, <b>what is different here,</b> in Leviticus, <b>that it is written: “<i>Da’a</i>,”</b> and <b>what is different here,</b> in Deuteronomy, <b>that it is written: “<i>Ra’a</i>,” and <i>da’a</i> is not written? Rather, conclude from</b> the presence of each on only one list that the <b><i>ra’a</i> and <i>da’a</i> are one species.</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara objects: <b>But still, there are twenty-five</b> birds, not twenty-four. <b>Abaye said: Just as</b> the <b><i>ra’a</i> and <i>da’a</i> are one</b> species, <b>so</b> too, the <b><i>ayya</i> and</b> the <b><i>dayya</i>,</b> the latter of which is mentioned only in Deuteronomy, <b>are one</b> species. <b>As, if it enters your mind that they are two</b> different species, one might ask: <b>Since</b> it is assumed that the list in <b>Deuteronomy comes to add</b> to the list in Leviticus, <b>what is different here,</b> in Leviticus, <b>that it is written: “After its kinds,” about</b> the <b><i>ayya</i>,</b> prohibiting some other kind of <i>ayya</i>, <b>and what is different there,</b> in Deuteronomy, <b>that it is written: “After its kinds,” about</b> the <b><i>dayya</i>?</b> Why is the <i>ayya</i> not mentioned? <b>Rather, learn from</b> the use of the same phrase with regard to the <b><i>ayya</i> and <i>dayya</i></b> that they <b>are one</b> species.

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And now that</b> the <b><i>ayya</i> and <i>dayya</i> are one</b> species, <b>why did</b> the Torah need <b>to write</b> both <b><i>ayya</i> and <i>dayya</i></b> in Deuteronomy? The Gemara responds: <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says:</b> Given that the two are one species, <b>I will read <i>ayya</i></b> and know that it is forbidden. <b>Why is <i>dayya</i> stated?</b> It is <b>so as not to give a claim to a litigant to disagree,</b> and <b>it should not occur</b> that <b>you call</b> it <b>an <i>ayya</i> and he calls</b> it <b>a <i>dayya</i></b> and eats it. Likewise, the Torah did not write only <i>dayya</i> so that it will not occur that <b>you call</b> it <b>a <i>dayya</i> and he calls</b> it <b>an <i>ayya</i></b> and eats it. <b>Therefore,</b> the Torah <b>writes in Deuteronomy: “And the <i>ra’a</i>, and the <i>ayya</i>, and the <i>dayya</i> after its kinds”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:13). Consequently, both the list in Leviticus and that in Deuteronomy enumerate twenty-four birds, in accordance with the statement attributed to Rav.

### Part 4
The Gemara <b>raises an objection</b> from a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Why</b> is the list <b>of</b> non-kosher <b>animals</b> in Leviticus <b>repeated?</b> It is <b>due to</b> the necessity of adding <b>the <i>shesua</i></b> (Deuteronomy 14:7), which was not listed in Leviticus. <b>And</b> the list <b>of</b> non-kosher <b>birds</b> is repeated <b>due to the <i>ra’a</i>. What, is it not</b> understood <b>from</b> the fact <b>that</b> the extra list of <b>animals there,</b> in Deuteronomy, is <b>to add</b> animals, that the list of <b>birds</b> is <b>also</b> repeated <b>to add</b> birds? The Gemara responds: <b>No, there,</b> i.e., with regard to animals, the list is repeated <b>to add,</b> but <b>here,</b> with regard to birds, it is repeated only <b>to explain.</b>

### Part 5
<b>And</b> the opinion that the <i>da’a</i> and <i>ra’a</i> are one species, and that the <i>ayya</i> and <i>dayya</i> are another species, <b>differs from</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Abbahu, as Rabbi Abbahu says:</b> The <b><i>ra’a</i> is</b> the <b><i>ayya</i>. And why is it called</b> the <b><i>ra’a</i>? Since it sees [<i>ro’ah</i>] most</b> vividly. <b>And so</b> the verse <b>states: “That path no bird of prey knows, neither has the eye of the <i>ayya</i> seen it”</b> (Job 28:7). And a Sage <b>taught:</b> The <i>ra’a</i> can <b>stand in Babylonia and see a carcass in Eretz Yisrael.</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara discusses Rabbi Abbahu’s statement: <b>Since</b> the <b><i>ra’a</i> is</b> the same as the <b><i>ayya</i>, by inference,</b> one may conclude <b>that</b> the <b><i>da’a</i> is not the</b> same as the <b><i>ra’a</i>;</b> otherwise, there are not twenty-four non-kosher birds. But <b>since</b> it is assumed that the list in <b>Deuteronomy comes to add</b> to the list in Leviticus, <b>what is different here,</b> in Leviticus, <b>that it is written: “<i>Da’a</i>,”</b> and <b>what is different there,</b> in Deuteronomy, <b>that <i>da’a</i> is not written? Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from</b> the discrepancy that the two are the same? If so, one must conclude that according to Rabbi Abbahu, the <b><i>da’a</i> and <i>ra’a</i> and <i>ayya</i> are</b> all <b>one</b> species.

### Part 7
<b>And</b> furthermore, <b>from</b> the fact that Rabbi Abbahu holds that the <b><i>ra’a</i> is</b> the same as the <b><i>ayya</i>, by inference,</b> one may conclude that the <b><i>dayya</i> is not</b> the same as the <b><i>ayya</i>.</b> But if so, one may ask again: <b>What is different there,</b> in Leviticus, <b>that it is written: “After its kinds,” about</b> the <b><i>ayya</i>, and what is different here,</b> in Deuteronomy, <b>that it is not written: “After its kinds,” about</b> the <b><i>ayya</i> but about</b> the <b><i>dayya</i>? Rather,</b> the <i>ayya</i> and <i>dayya</i> must be one species. And one may <b>learn from</b> the combination of the two disputes that according to Rabbi Abbahu, the <b><i>da’a</i> and <i>ra’a</i>, <i>dayya</i> and <i>ayya</i> are</b> all <b>one</b> species. Consequently, according to Rabbi Abbahu, there are only twenty-three non-kosher species.

### Part 8
§ With regard to the phrase: “The <i>ayya</i> after its kinds” (Leviticus 11:14), <b>it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Isi ben Yehuda says: There are one hundred non-kosher birds in the East, and they are all species of <i>ayya</i>. Avimi, son of Rabbi Abbahu, taught: There are seven hundred types of</b> non-kosher <b>fish, and eight hundred types of</b> non-kosher <b>grasshopper, and there are countless birds.</b> The Gemara protests: Are there countless non-kosher <b>birds?</b> But <b>there are</b> only <b>twenty-four</b> non-kosher birds mentioned in the Torah. <b>Rather,</b> Avimi must have meant: <b>And there are countless kosher birds.</b>

### Part 9
<b>It is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi <b>says: It is revealed and known before the One Who spoke and the world came into being that</b> the species of <b>non-kosher animals are more numerous than the kosher</b> ones. <b>Therefore, the Torah lists the kosher</b> animals, teaching that all the rest are non-kosher. On the other hand, <b>it is revealed and known before the One Who spoke and the world came into being that</b> the species of <b>kosher birds are more numerous than the non-kosher</b> ones. <b>Therefore, the Torah lists the non-kosher</b> birds.

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>What is</b> this <i>baraita</i> <b>teaching us?</b> The Gemara responds: <b>As Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav</b> says, <b>and some say</b> that <b>Rav Huna says</b> that <b>Rav says in the name of Rabbi Meir: A person should always teach his student in a concise manner,</b> just as the Torah is concise in its language.

### Part 11
<b>Rabbi Yitzḥak says: A kosher bird may be eaten on</b> the strength of <b>a tradition</b> that it is kosher, without inspecting for the signs listed in the mishna. And <b>the hunter is deemed credible to say: My teacher conveyed to me</b> that <b>this bird is kosher. Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And this</b> is the <i>halakha</i> only <b>when</b> the teacher <b>is familiar with</b> the non-kosher birds <b>and with their names.</b>

### Part 12
<b>Rabbi Zeira raises a dilemma:</b> Was Rabbi Yoḥanan referring to the hunter’s <b>teacher the Sage, or</b> to <b>his teacher the hunter,</b> i.e., the one who taught him how to hunt? The Gemara responds: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear</b> proof from that <b>which Rabbi Yoḥanan said: And this</b> applies only <b>when</b> the teacher <b>is familiar with them and with their names. Granted, if you say</b> this is referring to <b>his teacher the hunter,</b> this works out <b>well. But if you say</b> it is referring to <b>his teacher the Sage, granted,</b> a Sage will know <b>their names,</b> since <b>he has learned them, but does he recognize</b> the birds <b>themselves? Rather,</b> must one <b>not conclude from it</b> that Rabbi Yoḥanan referred to <b>his teacher the hunter?</b> The Gemara concludes: Indeed, <b>conclude from it</b> that this is so.

### Part 13
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>One may buy eggs from the gentiles anywhere, and one</b> need <b>not</b> be <b>concerned, neither with regard to carcasses,</b> i.e., that the egg may have been removed from a carcass of a bird and therefore forbidden, <b>nor with regard to</b> eggs from <b><i>tereifot</i>,</b> because neither of these possibilities is likely.

### Part 14
The Gemara objects: <b>But perhaps they</b> are from <b>a non-kosher bird. Shmuel’s father said:</b> The <i>baraita</i> is referring <b>to</b> a case where the gentile <b>says</b> they are <b>of such and such bird,</b> which is known to be <b>kosher.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> if the gentile is deemed credible, <b>let him say</b> only that they are <b>of a kosher bird.</b> Why does he need to name the species? The Gemara responds: <b>If so,</b> if he does not name the species, <b>he has</b> the opportunity to <b>deflect</b> scrutiny if he is dishonest; but if he names the species, one can bring other eggs of the same species to compare and validate the claim.

### Part 15
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> why must one rely on the gentile? <b>Let him inspect</b> the eggs <b>for signs, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>Like the signs of</b> kosher <b>eggs, so</b> too are <b>the signs of fish.</b> The Gemara interjects: Can it <b>enter your mind</b> that the <i>baraita</i> is referring to <b>the signs of fish? The Merciful One states</b> them explicitly in the Torah: <b>“Fins and scales”</b> (Leviticus 11:9). <b>Rather, say: So</b> too are <b>the signs of</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC