
### Part 1
The term “your house [<i>beitekha</i>]” is similar to the term: You enter [<i>bi’atkha</i>], indicating that one places the <i>mezuza</i> in the <b>way</b> that <b>you enter</b> the house. When a person lifts his foot to begin walking, he lifts his right foot first. Therefore, the <i>mezuza</i> is affixed <b>to the right</b> side of the doorway, as one enters.

### Part 2
Similarly, with regard to <b>tithe,</b> Rabbi Ilai concedes that joint owners of produce are obligated, <b>even though it is written: “The tithe of your grain [<i>deganekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:17), using the singular pronoun, from which one might have inferred that with regard to <b>your</b> grain, <b>yes,</b> one is obligated, whereas with regard to that <b>which is</b> owned <b>in partnership,</b> one is <b>not</b> obligated. The reason is that <b>the Merciful One writes:</b> “All <b>your tithes [<i>ma’asroteikhem</i>]”</b> (Numbers 18:28), using the plural pronoun, indicating that even partners are obligated in this mitzva. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>for what</b> purpose does the term: <b>“The tithe of your grain [<i>deganekha</i>],”</b> using the singular pronoun, <b>come?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to exclude</b> produce owned in <b>partnership with a gentile</b> from the obligation of tithes.

### Part 3
Likewise, with regard to the <b>gifts</b> to which members of the priesthood are entitled, i.e., the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw, Rabbi Ilai concedes that the joint owners of an animal are obligated, <b>even though the Merciful One writes:</b> “And this shall be the priests’ due from the people, from those who slaughter an animal, whether it be ox or sheep; <b>and he shall give</b> to the priest the foreleg, and the jaw, and the maw” (Deuteronomy 18:3).

### Part 4
The Gemara elaborates: <b>It is possible to say</b> that one should <b>derive</b> a verbal analogy between <b>giving</b> mentioned in the context of gifts to the priesthood and <b>giving from the first sheared wool.</b> The Torah states: “He shall give,” with regard to the gifts of the priesthood, and it states: “Shall you give him” (Deuteronomy 18:4), with regard to the first sheared wool; <b>just as there,</b> with regard to the first sheared wool, sheep owned <b>in partnership</b> do <b>not</b> render their owners obligated, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the gifts of the priesthood, an animal owned <b>in partnership</b> does <b>not</b> render the owners obligated. But <b>the Merciful One writes: “From those who slaughter an animal,”</b> in the plural, indicating that even the owners of an animal owned in partnership are obligated to give the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw.

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> according to this inference, <b>the reason</b> the joint owners of an animal are obligated in the gifts of the priesthood is <b>that the Merciful One writes: “From those who slaughter an animal,”</b> in the plural. <b>But</b> were it <b>not so, I would say</b> that they are exempt, as <b>derived</b> by means of a verbal analogy <b>from the first sheared wool. On the contrary,</b> since the term “shall you give him” is also referring to <i>teruma</i>, one should <b>derive</b> by means of a verbal analogy <b>from <i>teruma</i>:</b> Just as the obligation of <i>teruma</i> applies to those who own produce in partnership, so too, the requirement of the gifts of the priesthood applies to partners that own an animal together.

### Part 6
The Gemara explains: <b>Yes,</b> it <b>is indeed so;</b> the obligation of partners with regard to gifts of the priesthood is derived from <i>teruma</i>. But if so, <b>why do I</b> need the phrase <b>“from those who slaughter an animal”?</b> It is necessary <b>for that which Rava</b> taught, <b>as Rava said:</b> The priest issues his <b>demand</b> to receive the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw <b>from the butcher</b> who slaughtered the animal, not from the buyer.

### Part 7
Similarly, with regard to the <b>first fruits,</b> Rabbi Ilai concedes that the joint owners of produce are obligated, <b>even though it is written:</b> “And you shall take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which you shall bring in from <b>your land [<i>be’artzekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 26:2), using the singular pronoun. One might have inferred from the singular pronoun that with regard to <b>your</b> land, <b>yes,</b> one is obligated, whereas with regard to <b>that which is</b> owned <b>in partnership</b> one is <b>not</b> obligated.

### Part 8
Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “The first fruits of all that is in their land,</b> which they bring to the Lord, shall be yours” (Numbers 18:13). The use of the plural pronoun indicates that even from land owned in partnership one is obligated to bring first fruits. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the term <b>“your land [<i>be’artzekha</i>],”</b> using the singular pronoun? The Gemara answers: This serves <b>to exclude</b> produce grown <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael from the mitzva of the first fruits.

### Part 9
Likewise, with regard to the mitzva to attach <b>ritual fringes</b> to one’s garment, Rabbi Ilai concedes that a jointly owned garment is obligated, <b>even though the Merciful One writes:</b> “You shall make yourself twisted cords upon the four corners of <b>your covering [<i>kesutekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 22:12), using the singular pronoun. It might have been inferred from the singular form that with regard to <b>your</b> covering, <b>yes,</b> it is obligated, whereas with regard to <b>that which is</b> owned <b>in partnership</b> it is <b>not</b> obligated.

### Part 10
Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes:</b> “And they shall make for themselves fringes <b>in the corners of their garments, throughout their generations,</b> and they shall put with the fringe of each corner a thread of blue” (Numbers 15:38). The use of the plural pronoun indicates that even jointly owned garments are obligated. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the term <b>“your covering [<i>kesutekha</i>],”</b> using the singular pronoun? The Gemara answers: This is necessary <b>for that which Rav Yehuda</b> taught, <b>as Rav Yehuda said: A borrowed cloak is exempt from the</b> mitzva of <b>ritual fringes throughout</b> the first <b>thirty days.</b>

### Part 11
Similarly, with regard to the obligation of establishing <b>a parapet</b> around a roof, Rabbi Ilai concedes that the joint owners of a roof are obligated, <b>even though the Merciful One writes:</b> “When you build a new house, then you shall make a parapet <b>for your roof [<i>legaggekha</i>],”</b> using the singular pronoun, “and you shall not bring blood upon your house, if any man falls from there” (Deuteronomy 22:8). One might have inferred from the singular form that with regard to <b>your</b> roof, <b>yes,</b> one is obligated, whereas with regard to <b>that which is</b> owned <b>in partnership</b> one is <b>not</b> obligated.

### Part 12
Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes: “If any man falls from there,”</b> indicating that wherever the danger of falling from the roof exists, there is an obligation to erect a parapet. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>for what</b> purpose does the term <b>“your roof [<i>gaggekha</i>],”</b> using the singular pronoun, <b>come?</b> The Gemara answers: It serves <b>to exclude synagogues and houses of study.</b>

### Part 13
§ Rava maintains that although Rabbi Ilai holds that if a sheep is owned in partnership its owners are exempt from giving the first sheared wool to a priest, he concedes that partners are obligated with regard to all the other issues discussed above, including the mitzva of the firstborn animal and the gifts of the priesthood. <b>Rav Beivai bar Abaye said: These principles</b> stated by Rava <b>are not</b> accepted, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>An animal</b> owned by <b>partners is obligated in</b> the mitzva of <b>a firstborn,</b> i.e., its offspring is subject to firstborn status. <b>And Rabbi Ilai exempts</b> the animal from having its offspring subject to firstborn status.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>What is the reason for</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ilai? As it is written:</b> “And the firstborn of <b>your herd and of your flock [<i>bekarekha vetzonekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:17), using the singular pronoun, indicating that only privately owned animals are consecrated. The Gemara comments: <b>But it is</b> also <b>written:</b> “And the firstborn of <b>your herd and of your flock [<i>bekarkhem vetzonekhem</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:6), using the plural pronoun. The Gemara explains: This verse is referring to the obligation <b>of all Jews</b> to bring their firstborn animals to the Temple, but this applies only to animals with a single owner.

### Part 15
<b>Rav Ḥanina of Sura</b> also <b>said: These principles</b> stated by Rava <b>are not</b> accepted, <b>as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>An animal</b> owned by <b>partners is obligated,</b> i.e., renders its owners obligated, <b>to</b> take <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood from it, <b>and Rabbi Ilai exempts</b> the partners from the obligation. <b>What is the reason</b> for Rabbi Ilai’s statement? He <b>derives</b> a verbal analogy between <b>giving</b> mentioned in this context <b>and giving from the first sheared wool.</b> The Torah states: “He shall give” (Deuteronomy 18:3), with regard to the gifts of the priesthood, and: “Shall you give him” (Deuteronomy 18:4), with regard to the first sheared wool. <b>Just as there,</b> with regard to the first sheared wool, in the case of sheep owned <b>in partnership</b> the owners are <b>not</b> obligated according to Rabbi Ilai, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to the gifts of the priesthood, if the animal is owned <b>in partnership</b> the owners are <b>not</b> obligated.

### Part 16
Rabbi Ḥanina of Sura adds: <b>And if it enters your mind</b> to accept Rava’s statement that in the case <b>of <i>teruma</i></b> Rabbi Ilai <b>deems</b> partners <b>obligated,</b> this is not possible. The reason is that the term “shall you give him” is also used with regard to <i>teruma</i>. Accordingly, instead of deriving the <i>halakha</i> of an animal owned by partners with regard to gifts of the priesthood by verbal analogy from the first sheared wool, one should <b>derive</b> by verbal analogy between <b>giving</b> mentioned with regard to gifts of the priesthood and <b>giving from <i>teruma</i>,</b> as follows: Just as joint owners of produce are obligated to separate <i>teruma</i> from that produce, so too with regard to an animal owned in partnership, the owners are obligated to take the gifts of the priesthood from it. <b>Rather, conclude from</b> the <i>baraita</i> that <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i> too,</b> Rabbi Ilai <b>deems</b> partners <b>exempt,</b> and therefore their exemption from the gifts of the priesthood can be derived either from the first sheared wool or from <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 17
The Gemara raises a difficulty: <b>If</b> it is possible to derive <i>halakhot</i> of the gifts of the priesthood from <i>teruma</i> by verbal analogy, one could also say: <b>Just as</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>yes,</b> it applies, whereas <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael it does <b>not</b> apply, <b>so too,</b> with regard to the <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood, <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>yes,</b> they apply, whereas <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael they do <b>not</b> apply. <b>Rabbi Yosei of Neharbil said: Yes,</b> it is indeed so, <b>and it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Ilai says:</b> The <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood <b>apply only in Eretz</b> Yisrael. <b>And likewise, Rabbi Ilai would say:</b> The mitzva of <b>the first sheared wool applies only in Eretz</b> Yisrael.

### Part 18
<b>What is the reason for</b> the ruling of <b>Rabbi Ilai? Rava said:</b> He <b>derives</b> by means of a verbal analogy between <b>giving</b> mentioned in the context of the first sheared wool and <b>giving from <i>teruma</i></b> that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> the <i>halakha</i> is that <b>in Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>yes,</b> it applies, whereas <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael, it does <b>not</b> apply; <b>so too,</b> with regard to <b>the first sheared wool, in Eretz</b> Yisrael, <b>yes,</b> it applies, whereas <b>outside of Eretz</b> Yisrael it does <b>not</b> apply.

### Part 19
<b>Abaye said to</b> Rava: <b>If</b> one compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i> by means of a verbal analogy, one can say that <b>just as</b> with regard to the requirement to separate <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> it <b>produces</b> the halakhic status of forbidden <b>untithed produce, so too</b> the requirement to separate <b>the first sheared wool produces</b> the halakhic status of <b>untithed produce,</b> i.e., wool from which the first sheared wool has not been separated should be forbidden. Yet this is not the <i>halakha</i>. Rava <b>said to him</b> that the <b>verse states: “And the first sheared wool of your flock, shall you give him,”</b> i.e., the priest, which indicates that <b>you,</b> i.e., the priest, have a right <b>to</b> the first sheared wool <b>only from its</b> designation as <b>the first sheared wool and onward.</b> Since the first sheared wool does not belong to the priest prior to its designation, it does not render the rest of the wool forbidden.

### Part 20
Abaye continues to question Rava: <b>If</b> one compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i> by means of a verbal analogy, one can say that <b>just as</b> non-priests who partake of <b><i>teruma</i></b> intentionally are <b>liable</b> to receive the punishment of <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>and</b> those who do so unwittingly are obligated to pay an additional <b>one-fifth</b> of its value, <b>so too,</b> non-priests who derive benefit from <b>the first sheared wool</b> intentionally should be <b>liable</b> to <b>death</b> at the hand of Heaven, <b>and</b> those who do so unwittingly should be obligated to pay an additional <b>one-fifth</b> of its value.

### Part 21
Rava replies: The <b>verse states</b> with regard to a non-priest who partakes of <i>teruma</i>: “Lest they bear sin for it, <b>and die because of it,</b> if they profane it…and if a man eat of the holy thing through error, <b>and he shall add</b> its fifth part <b>to it,</b> and shall give to the priest the holy thing” (Leviticus 22:9–14). Rava infers: “He shall add its fifth part <b>to it,” and not to the first sheared wool. “And die because of it,” and not because of the first sheared wool.</b> Consequently, a non-priest is liable to death at the hand of Heaven or to pay an additional one-fifth for partaking of <i>teruma</i>, but not for deriving benefit from the first sheared wool.

### Part 22
Abaye further questions Rava: <b>If</b> one compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i> by verbal analogy, one can say that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> the <b>first and second</b> tithes are separated from the produce <b>after</b> <i>teruma</i> is separated, <b>so too</b> with regard to the <b>first sheared wool, first and second</b> tithes should be separated from the fleece <b>after it.</b> Rava replies: The <b>verse states</b> that the first sheared wool is <b>“the first.”</b> Since the verse already stated “first” with regard to <i>teruma</i>, its repetition indicates that in this case there is no second separation. One <b>does not have</b> any separation <b>in this</b> case <b>other than the first</b> one.

### Part 23
Abaye continues to question Rava: <b>If</b> one compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i> by means of a verbal analogy, one can say that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i></b> one may <b>not</b> separate <b>from</b> the <b>new</b> produce of this year <b>on</b> behalf of <b>the old</b> produce from last year, <b>so too,</b> one may <b>not</b> separate <b>the first sheared wool from</b> the <b>new</b> shearing of this year <b>on</b> behalf of <b>the old</b> shearing from last year. On this occasion Rava replied: <b>Yes,</b> that is the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 24
Rava proves his point: <b>And it is</b> likewise <b>taught</b> that this is Rabbi Ilai’s opinion, through a contradiction between two <i>baraitot</i>. One <i>baraita</i> teaches: A person <b>had two sheep;</b> he <b>sheared</b> them <b>and left</b> the shearing in his possession, and the following year he again <b>sheared</b> them <b>and left</b> the shearing in his possession, and continued in this manner for <b>two or three years.</b> Although the accumulated wool is equivalent to the wool of five sheep, to which the obligation of the first sheared wool applies, the wool <b>does not accumulate</b> to constitute the minimum amount, as only two sheep were shorn. This indicates that if the wool is from <b>five</b> sheep, then it <b>accumulates,</b> and one is obligated to give the priest the first sheared wool, despite the fact that the wool was shorn in different years.

### Part 25
<b>But isn’t it taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that even wool from five sheep shorn in different years <b>does not accumulate</b> to create an obligation? <b>Rather, conclude from</b> this contradiction that <b>this</b> second <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Ilai,</b> who compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, he holds that wool from separate years does not accumulate. <b>And that</b> first <i>baraita</i> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who do not compare the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i>. Therefore, they maintain that wool from separate years does accumulate.

### Part 26
Abaye asks Rava: <b>If</b> one compares the first sheared wool to <i>teruma</i>, one can say that <b>just as</b> with regard to <b><i>teruma</i>,</b> if a Jew purchased a field from a gentile then produce that <b>grew under</b> the ownership of a Jew, who is <b>obligated</b> to separate <i>teruma</i> from his produce, is <b>obligated,</b> whereas produce that <b>grew under</b> the ownership of a gentile, whose produce is <b>exempt,</b> is <b>exempt</b> even after purchase by a Jew; <b>so too,</b> with regard to the <b>first sheared wool,</b> the fleece that <b>grew under</b> the ownership of a Jew, who is <b>obligated</b> in the first sheared wool, is <b>obligated,</b> whereas the fleece that grew <b>under</b> the ownership of a gentile, who is <b>exempt,</b> is <b>exempt</b> even after purchase by a Jew.

### Part 27
Abaye adds: <b>And with regard to <i>teruma</i>, from where do we</b> derive that produce that grew when owned by a gentile is exempt? <b>As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to <b>a Jew who purchased a field in Syria from a gentile,</b> if he bought the field <b>before</b> the produce <b>reached one-third</b> of its growth, he is <b>obligated</b> to separate <i>teruma</i>. If he bought the field <b>after</b> the produce <b>reached one-third</b> of its growth, <b>Rabbi Akiva deems him obligated</b> to separate <i>teruma</i> <b>from the</b> growth <b>added</b> after he bought the field, <b>and the Rabbis deem</b> him <b>exempt.</b> All agree, though, that he is exempt with regard to the part of the produce that grew under the gentile’s ownership.

### Part 28
<b>And if you would say: Indeed,</b> Rabbi Ilai holds that wool that grew under the ownership of a gentile is exempt from the mitzva of the first sheared wool, that is difficult, as <b>didn’t we learn</b> in the mishna (135a): <b>One who purchases the fleece of</b> the <b>sheep of a gentile</b> is <b>exempt from</b> the obligation of the <b>first sheared wool?</b> It can be inferred from the mishna that if one purchased the gentile’s <b>sheep</b> when they were ready <b>for shearing,</b> he is <b>obligated</b> in the mitzva of the first sheared wool. Rava replied: <b>The mishna</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC