
### Part 1
<b>one may be registered</b> as part of a group that will eat the <b>Paschal offering on their account,</b> i.e., even if those sinews are the only part of the lamb he will eat. Evidently, such sinews are regarded as flesh. <b>And furthermore, the Torah spared the money of the Jewish people,</b> and one must tend toward leniency.

### Part 2
<b>Rav Pappa said to Rabba:</b> But <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish</b> disagrees with Rabbi Yoḥanan and holds that one may not be registered for those sinews, as they will eventually harden and are therefore not considered flesh. <b>And</b> therefore, the broken bone in this case is not covered by flesh and the animal is <b>prohibited by Torah law</b> as a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>and</b> yet <b>you say: What concern</b> is there <b>with</b> the sinews in <b>this</b> case? Rabba <b>was silent.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>And why was</b> Rabba <b>silent? But doesn’t Rava say</b> that <b>the <i>halakha</i></b> is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion <b>of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish</b> in his disputes with Rabbi Yoḥanan only <b>with regard to these three</b> matters, i.e., three matters that are mentioned in <i>Yevamot</i> 36a, and not in other cases? If so, Rabba could simply have replied that the <i>halakha</i> is not in accordance with the opinion of Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish with regard to this issue.

### Part 4
The Gemara answers: <b>Here,</b> with regard to sinews that will ultimately harden, <b>it is different, as Rabbi Yoḥanan retracted his</b> ruling <b>in favor of</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, as</b> when Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish raised a difficulty against Rabbi Yoḥanan’s opinion, Rabbi Yoḥanan <b>said to him: Do not provoke me</b> by asking questions to refute my opinion that the fact that the sinews will ultimately harden is disregarded, <b>as I teach it</b> in explanation of <b>a lone opinion</b> (see <i>Pesaḥim</i> 84a). Even Rabbi Yoḥanan conceded that the opinion he expressed was only according to one Sage, but is not the <i>halakha</i>.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates: There was <b>a certain</b> case in <b>which a bone</b> in an animal’s leg <b>broke and protruded outward.</b> This bone was mostly covered with flesh and skin, but <b>a small piece [<i>kurtita</i>]</b> of the bone <b>had been removed from it.</b> The case <b>came before Abaye,</b> who <b>delayed</b> his response until <b>three</b> pilgrimage <b>Festivals</b> had passed, when the Sages gathered together and he could ask them.

### Part 6
<b>Rav Adda bar Mattana said to</b> the owner of the animal: <b>Go before Rava, son of Rav Yosef bar Ḥama, whose knife is sharp,</b> i.e., he has insight into halakhic matters and decides matters quickly, and ask him to decide your case. The owner <b>came before</b> Rava to seek his opinion. Rava <b>said</b> to him: <b>Since we learned</b> in the <i>baraita</i> (76b): If <b>the bone broke and protruded outward,</b> if skin and flesh cover a majority of the bone the animal is permitted, <b>what</b> difference is there <b>to me</b> if the bone <b>fell</b> out, and <b>what</b> difference is there <b>to me</b> if <b>it is in</b> its place? In either case, the animal is permitted.

### Part 7
With regard to a case where flesh covers the majority of a broken bone, <b>Ravina said to Rava:</b> If the flesh was torn in pieces and spread over the area, and if <b>gathered</b> it would constitute a majority, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Similarly, if the flesh was <b>pulverized</b> and thin, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If it was <b>decomposed, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> of this case in which the flesh is <b>decomposed? Rav Huna, son of Rav Yehoshua, said:</b> This is referring to <b>any</b> kind of flesh <b>that the doctor cuts away [<i>kodro</i>]</b> and removes to enable the surrounding area to heal.

### Part 8
<b>A dilemma was raised before</b> the Sages: If the flesh that covers the bone <b>was perforated, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? Likewise, if the flesh <b>was peeled</b> off the bone, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If it <b>was cracked, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? If <b>the bottom third</b> of the width of the flesh, i.e., the part that is adjacent to the bone, <b>was removed, what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>?

### Part 9
The Gemara suggests: <b>Come</b> and <b>hear, as Ulla says</b> that <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan says: Skin is like flesh.</b> This would appear to indicate that any covering is sufficient. The Gemara refutes this proof: <b>Perhaps</b> Rabbi Yoḥanan was referring to a specific case where there was never flesh on the bone, but only skin, e.g., adjacent to the knee, where <b>the skin holds its own</b> place close to the bone. This ruling may not apply in an area where there was flesh. Perhaps in such a place the bone must be covered by flesh that is still healthy.

### Part 10
<b>Rav Ashi said: While we were</b> studying <b>in Rav Pappi’s study hall, we raised a dilemma:</b> If the flesh and skin were <b>cut in the shape of a ring</b> around the break, and yet most of the circumference of the bone is surrounded by flesh, <b>what is</b> the <i>halakha</i>? <b>And we resolved</b> this dilemma <b>from this</b> statement that <b>Rav Yehuda says</b> that <b>Rav says: I asked</b> about <b>this matter to the Sages and to the doctors,</b> what to do when a bone breaks and the surrounding flesh has been cut away, <b>and they said: One makes an incision in it with</b> a sharp piece of <b>bone</b> to help the blood flow and then congeal, <b>and</b> in this manner the wound <b>will heal.</b> The Gemara notes: <b>But</b> one should not make the incision with <b>an iron</b> implement, <b>as it will cause inflammation. Rav Pappa said: And this</b> advice should be implemented only in a case where one can see that <b>the bone is holding</b> firmly onto <b>its</b> flesh, as only in such a case will the flesh heal.

### Part 11
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slaughters an animal and finds a placenta in its</b> womb, one with <b>a hearty soul [<i>nefesh hayafa</i>],</b> i.e., who is not repulsed by it, <b>may eat it,</b> as its consumption was permitted by virtue of the slaughter of the mother. Nevertheless, since generally speaking, people do not consume such placentas, it is not regarded as food <b>and</b> so it <b>cannot become impure</b> with <b>the ritual impurity of food</b> even were it to come into contact with a source of impurity. <b>And</b> furthermore, it does <b>not</b> impart <b>the ritual impurity of animal carcasses</b> as it was permitted by virtue of the slaughter of the mother. But if <b>one intended to</b> eat <b>it,</b> one thereby elevated it to the status of food, and the placenta <b>becomes impure</b> with <b>the ritual impurity of food</b> if it comes into contact with a source of impurity. <b>But</b> even so, it still does <b>not</b> impart the <b>ritual impurity of animal carcasses.</b>

### Part 12
With regard to <b>a placenta, part of which emerged</b> from the womb before the mother was slaughtered, its <b>consumption</b> is <b>prohibited</b> even after the mother animal is slaughtered because the emergence of the placenta is <b>an indication of a fetus in a woman and an indication of a fetus in an animal.</b> Accordingly, there is a concern that the head of the fetus might have emerged in that part of the placenta, thereby rendering the fetus as having been born, a status that precludes it from being permitted by the slaughter of its mother. Since the offspring is prohibited, its placenta is likewise prohibited.

### Part 13
If <b>an animal that was giving birth to its firstborn expelled a placenta, one may cast it to the dogs,</b> and one does not need to be concerned that the placenta came from a male fetus that has the consecrated status of a firstborn. <b>But in</b> the case of <b>sacrificial</b> animals the placenta <b>must be buried,</b> because it came from a fetus that is assumed to have been sacred. The mishna adds: <b>But one may neither bury it at an intersection, nor may one hang it on a tree,</b> superstitious rites intended to prevent the animal from miscarrying again, <b>due to</b> the prohibition against following <b>the ways of the Amorite,</b> which prohibits Jews from practicing the superstitious rites observed by gentiles.

### Part 14
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> With regard to the ruling that a placenta is permitted by virtue of the mother’s slaughter, the Gemara asks: <b>From where is this matter</b> derived? <b>As the Sages taught:</b> “And <b>every</b> animal that parts the hoof, and has the hooves wholly cloven in two, and chews the cud, <b>of the animals, it you may eat”</b> (Deuteronomy 14:6). The verse is the source of the <i>halakha</i> that a fetus is permitted by virtue of the mother’s slaughter (see 69a). The word “every” at the beginning of the verse serves <b>to include the placenta</b> as well as the fetus. One <b>might</b> have thought that a placenta is permitted <b>even if part of it emerged</b> from the womb before slaughter. Therefore, <b>the verse states: “It</b> you may eat,” i.e., you may eat <b>it,</b> the slaughtered animal, <b>but not its placenta,</b> if it partially emerged.

### Part 15
The Gemara objects: <b>Now</b> the assumption is that there is <b>no placenta without a fetus.</b> Therefore, if part of the placenta emerged, there is a concern that the head of the fetus might have emerged in that part of the placenta, thereby rendering the fetus as having been born. Such a status would preclude it from being permitted by the slaughter of its mother. <b>Why do I</b> need a verse to teach this? The Gemara explains: The <b>verse is a mere support</b> for the <i>halakha</i>, but not the source for it.

### Part 16
§ The mishna states: <b>And</b> a placenta found inside a slaughtered animal <b>cannot become impure</b> with the ritual impurity of food and does not impart the ritual impurity of animal carcasses. In a related discussion, <b>Rabbi Yitzḥak bar Nappaḥa raises a dilemma: A donkey hide that one cooked</b> and it became softened, <b>what is</b> its halakhic status? The Gemara asks: <b>With regard to what</b> issue did he raise this dilemma? <b>If</b> it was <b>with regard to the ritual impurity of food, we</b> already <b>learn</b> this <i>halakha</i> in a <i>baraita</i>,

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC