### Part 1
<b>exclusions are written</b> in these two cases, which indicate that this <i>halakha</i> applies to them alone. <b>Here,</b> with regard to the removal of ashes, <b>it is written: “And he shall put it”</b> (Leviticus 6:3), indicating that this <i>halakha</i> applies to “it,” and nothing else. <b>There,</b> with regard to the heifer whose neck is broken, <b>it is written: “Whose neck was broken”</b> (Deuteronomy 21:6). This superfluous description teaches that the <i>halakha</i> that the prohibition of misuse of consecrated property is in effect even after the performance of a mitzva applies solely to this case and should not be extended to others.

### Part 2
The Gemara returns to the three phrases from Leviticus 17:11 cited above as teaching that the blood of offerings is not subject to the prohibition of misuse of consecrated property: <b>And why do I</b> need all <b>three verses</b> stated <b>with regard to blood?</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara answers: <b>One</b> term serves <b>to exclude</b> blood <b>from</b> the prohibition of <b><i>notar</i>.</b> If one consumed the blood of such an offering, he is not liable for consuming <i>notar</i> as one who consumed the flesh would be. Rather, he is liable for violating only the prohibition against consuming blood. <b>And one</b> term serves <b>to exclude</b> blood <b>from</b> the prohibition against <b>misuse</b> of consecrated property, <b>and one</b> other term serves <b>to exclude</b> it <b>from</b> the prohibition of consumption of offerings in a state of <b>ritual impurity.</b> If one consumed this blood in a state of ritual impurity, he is liable only for consuming blood, but not for consuming consecrated food while ritually impure.

### Part 4
<b>But no verse is required</b> to exclude this blood <b>from</b> the <i>halakha</i> of <b><i>piggul</i>,</b> an offering sacrificed with intention to consume it beyond its designated time, consumption of which is punishable by <i>karet</i>, as this exception is already derived from another source. <b>As we learned</b> in a mishna (<i>Zevaḥim</i> 43a): Concerning <b>any</b> item <b>that has permitting factors, either with regard to</b> consumption by <b>a person or with regard to</b> burning on <b>the altar, one is liable for</b> eating <b>it due to</b> violation of the prohibition of <b><i>piggul</i>. But</b> the permitting factor itself is not subject to <i>piggul</i>, and the <b>blood</b> of an offering <b>is itself a permitting factor,</b> as consumption of the offering by a person or by the altar is only permitted after the blood has been sprinkled on the altar. Therefore, the blood is not subject to the prohibition of <i>piggul</i>.

### Part 5
end of chapter

### Part 6
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> All foods that became ritually impure through contact with a source of impurity transmit impurity to other food and liquids only if the impure foods measure an egg-bulk. In that regard, the Sages ruled that even if a piece of meat itself is less than an egg-bulk, <b>the</b> attached <b>hide,</b> even if it is not fit for consumption, joins together with the meat to constitute an egg-bulk. <b>And</b> the same is true of <b>the</b> congealed <b>gravy</b> attached to the meat, although it is not eaten; <b>and</b> likewise <b>the spices</b> added to flavor the meat, although they are not eaten; <b>and the meat residue</b> attached to the hide after flaying; <b>and the bones; and the tendons; and</b> the lower section of <b>the horns,</b> which remains attached to the flesh when the rest of the horn is removed; <b>and</b> the upper section of <b>the hooves,</b> which remains attached to the flesh when the rest of the hoof is removed.

### Part 7
All these items <b>join together</b> with the meat to constitute the requisite egg-bulk <b>to impart the impurity of food.</b> Although if any of them was an egg-bulk they would not impart impurity of food, when attached to the meat they complete the measure. <b>But</b> they do <b>not</b> join together to constitute the measure of an olive-bulk required to impart <b>the impurity of animal carcasses.</b>

### Part 8
<b>Similarly,</b> there is another item that imparts impurity of food but not impurity of animal carcasses: In the case of <b>one who slaughters a non-kosher animal for a gentile and</b> the animal <b>is</b> still <b>twitching</b> and comes into contact with a source of impurity, the animal becomes impure with impurity of food and <b>imparts impurity of food</b> to other food, <b>but</b> does <b>not</b> impart <b>impurity of animal carcasses until</b> it <b>dies, or until one severs its head.</b> The mishna summarizes: The Torah <b>included</b> certain items <b>to impart impurity of food beyond those which it included to impart impurity of animal carcasses.</b>

### Part 9
<b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> With regard to <b>the meat residue</b> attached to the hide after flaying <b>that</b> was <b>collected, if there is an olive-bulk of it in one place</b> it imparts impurity of an animal carcass, and one who contracts impurity from it and then eats consecrated foods or enters the Temple is <b>liable</b> to receive <i>karet</i>. By collecting it in one place, the person indicates that he considers it as meat.

### Part 10
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The mishna teaches that the attached hide joins together with the meat to constitute the requisite egg-bulk to impart the impurity of food even though it is not fit for consumption. This is because the hide acts as a protective cover for the meat. But it does not join to constitute the measure of an olive-bulk required to impart the impurity of animal carcasses. The Gemara notes: <b>We learn</b> in the mishna <b>that which the Sages taught</b> explicitly in a <i>baraita</i>: An appendage that serves as <b>protection</b> joins together with food <b>with regard to a light</b> level of <b>impurity,</b> such as the impurity of food, which can be transmitted only to food but not to people or vessels. <b>But protection</b> attached to food does <b>not</b> join together with food <b>with regard to a severe</b> level of <b>impurity,</b> such as the impurity of an animal carcass, which can be transmitted even to people and vessels.

### Part 11
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>protection</b> joins together with food <b>with regard to a light</b> level of <b>impurity?</b> The Gemara answers that it is derived from a verse, <b>as the school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> With regard to the <i>halakhot</i> of imparting impurity of food, the verse states: “And if anything falls from their carcass <b>upon any sowing seed</b> that is sown, it is pure. But if water is put upon the seed, and any of the carcass falls on it, it is impure for you” (Leviticus 11:37–38). The phrase “upon any sowing seed” indicates that the entire seed is susceptible to impurity when it is in a state where it is <b>typical for people to take it out</b> to the field <b>for sowing:</b> This applies to <b>wheat in its shell, and barley in its shell, and lentils in their shells.</b> This demonstrates that shells and other components that protect the food are considered part of the food with regard to a light level of impurity.

### Part 12
The Gemara asks: <b>From where do we</b> derive that <b>protection does not</b> join together with the food <b>with regard to a severe</b> level of <b>impurity?</b> The Gemara answers that it is <b>as the Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: With regard to the impurity of a carcass, the verse states: “And if any animal of which you may eat dies, one who touches <b>its carcass</b> shall be impure until the evening” (Leviticus 11:39). This indicates that only one who touches the flesh of the carcass becomes impure, <b>but</b> one who touches the <b>hide</b> of the carcass <b>upon which there is not an olive-bulk of flesh</b> does <b>not</b> become impure.