
### Part 1
<b>And</b> in addition, he holds that these <b>distinguishing characteristics</b> apply <b>by Torah law,</b> such that they may be relied upon to allay concerns of violating even a prohibition that is mandated by Torah law.

### Part 2
§ <b>The Sages taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (see <i>Tosefta</i> 5:1): The prohibition against slaughtering an animal <b>itself and its offspring applies to</b> the offspring of <b>diverse kinds</b> of animals, such as a goat and a ewe, <b>and to the <i>koy</i>,</b> even though the prohibition does not apply to undomesticated animals. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says:</b> With regard to <b>a hybrid</b> that <b>results from</b> the mating of <b>a goat and a ewe,</b> the prohibition of <b>a mother and its offspring applies;</b> with regard to <b>a <i>koy</i>,</b> the prohibition of <b>a mother and its offspring does not apply. Rav Ḥisda says: What is the <i>koy</i> about which Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis disagree?</b> It is <b>that which results from</b> the mating of <b>a goat and a doe.</b>

### Part 3
The Gemara asks: <b>What are the circumstances</b> surrounding the birth of this <i>koy</i>? <b>If we say</b> that it is the result <b>of a goat that mates with a doe, and she gives birth, and one slaughters her and her offspring</b> on the same day, that is difficult: <b>But doesn’t Rav Ḥisda say: All concede in</b> the case where <b>she is a doe and her offspring is a goat,</b> because she mated with a goat, <b>that</b> one who slaughters them both on the same day <b>is exempt</b> from lashes for violating the prohibition of a mother and its offspring? He is exempt because <b>the Merciful One states:</b> “And whether it be a bull or <b>a sheep,</b> you shall not slaughter it <b>and its offspring</b> both in one day” (Leviticus 22:28), indicating that the prohibition applies to a domesticated animal and its offspring, <b>but not</b> to an undomesticated animal and its offspring, such as <b>a doe and its offspring.</b>

### Part 4
<b>Rather,</b> perhaps this <i>koy</i> is the product <b>of a deer that mates with a female goat, and she gives birth, and one slaughters her and her offspring</b> on the same day. <b>But doesn’t Rav Ḥisda say: All concede</b> that <b>in</b> the case where <b>she is a goat and her offspring is a deer</b> because she mated with a deer, <b>that</b> one who slaughters them both on the same day <b>is liable?</b> He is liable because <b>the Merciful One states</b> in the Torah: <b>“A sheep</b>…and its offspring” (Leviticus 22:28), indicating that the prohibition applies to a domesticated animal such as a sheep <b>and its offspring</b> of <b>any</b> species, even if it is an undomesticated animal.

### Part 5
The Gemara responds: <b>Actually,</b> the dispute between Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis is in the case <b>of a goat that mates with a doe, and she gives birth to a female offspring,</b> a <i>koy</i>, <b>and</b> this <b>female offspring gives birth to a male offspring, and one slaughters her and her male offspring</b> on the same day.

### Part 6
<b>The Rabbis hold: One</b> needs <b>to be concerned with its paternity,</b> and therefore the <i>koy</i> is partially a goat due to its father, <b>and</b> the word <b>“sheep”</b> in the verse means that <b>even</b> if it is <b>partially a sheep,</b> i.e., a domesticated animal, it may not be slaughtered with its offspring in a single day. <b>And Rabbi Eliezer holds: One</b> need <b>not be concerned with its paternity,</b> and the status of the <i>koy</i> is unaffected by the fact that its father is a goat, <b>and</b> therefore, in this case <b>we do not say</b> that the word <b>“sheep”</b> mentioned in the verse means that <b>even</b> if it is <b>partially a sheep</b> it may not be slaughtered with its offspring in a single day, as the father’s component is ignored.

### Part 7
The Gemara challenges: <b>And let them disagree</b> with regard to any animal of mixed breed <b>about</b> whether <b>one</b> needs <b>to be concerned with its paternity,</b> i.e., <b>with regard to</b> the issue that is the subject of <b>the dispute between Ḥananya and the Rabbis,</b> whether the prohibition against slaughtering an animal and its offspring on the same day also applies to a father and its offspring because one needs to be concerned with an animal’s paternity.

### Part 8
The Gemara responds: <b>If they would disagree</b> only <b>about that</b> issue, <b>I would say:</b> With regard to <b>this</b> issue of a doe mother and a goat father, <b>even the Rabbis concede that we do not say</b> that the word <b>“sheep”</b> mentioned in the verse means that <b>even</b> if an animal is <b>partially a sheep,</b> i.e., a domesticated animal, it may not be slaughtered with its offspring in a single day. Therefore, the <i>baraita</i> teaches us that according to the Rabbis, not only does one need to be concerned with paternity, but the word “sheep” indicates that even if it is partially a sheep, i.e., a domesticated animal, it may not be slaughtered with its offspring.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: <b>But that which we learned</b> in a mishna (83b) appears to contradict this: <b>One may not slaughter a <i>koy</i> on a Festival,</b> because covering its blood entails the performance of prohibited labor that is permitted only if there is a definite obligation to do so. <b>And if one slaughtered</b> a <i>koy</i> on a Festival after the fact, <b>one does not cover its blood,</b> as the Sages prohibited transporting soil on a Festival where it is uncertain that a mitzva by Torah law exists.

### Part 10
The Gemara explains the question: <b>What are we dealing with? If we say</b> that we are dealing <b>with a goat who mates with a doe, and she gives birth,</b> then <b>whether according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis or according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, let him slaughter</b> the <i>koy</i> on the Festival <i>ab initio</i> <b>and cover</b> the blood, as the mother of the <i>koy</i> is <b>a deer, and</b> the <i>koy</i> therefore may be termed an undomesticated animal, whose blood requires covering. This should be so <b>even</b> if it is <b>partially a deer,</b> i.e., it has an undomesticated animal component from only one parent, since all agree that the offspring’s species derives from its mother.

### Part 11
<b>Rather,</b> we must be dealing <b>with</b> a case of <b>a deer that mates with a female goat, and she gives birth.</b> This, too, is difficult: <b>If</b> the mishna is <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis</b> that one needs to be concerned with paternity, <b>let him slaughter</b> this <i>koy</i> on the Festival <i>ab initio</i> <b>and cover</b> the blood, as it is partially an undomesticated animal due to its father. <b>If</b> the mishna holds <b>in accordance with</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer</b> that one need not be concerned with paternity, <b>let him slaughter</b> the <i>koy</i> on the Festival <i>ab initio</i> <b>and not cover</b> the blood, as it should be considered a domesticated animal, whose blood does not require covering due to its mother who is a goat.

### Part 12
The Gemara concludes that <b>actually</b> this mishna is in accordance with the opinion of the Rabbis, and it is referring to a case <b>of a deer who mates with a female goat, and the Rabbis</b> do not say with certainty that in determining the species of an animal one must be concerned with paternity, but rather the Rabbis <b>are</b> simply <b>uncertain whether one</b> needs <b>to be concerned with its paternity or one</b> need <b>not be concerned.</b> Therefore, they rule that one should not slaughter it on a Festival, <i>ab initio</i>, in order to avoid a possible prohibition, and if one did slaughter it, he should not cover the blood, to avoid violating a prohibition in order to perform an uncertain mitzva.

### Part 13
The Gemara infers: <b>And from</b> the fact <b>that the Rabbis are uncertain,</b> and therefore they rule that the prohibition of: Itself and its offspring, applies to a <i>koy</i>, it can be inferred that <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who rules that the prohibition of: Itself and its offspring, does not apply to a <i>koy</i>, it is <b>obvious</b> that, with regard to a <i>koy</i> resulting from a deer mating with a female goat, one need not be concerned with its paternity at all.

### Part 14
The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> according to this, <b>that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> (see <i>Tosefta</i> 9:1) presents a difficulty: The mitzva to give <b>the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw</b> of non-sacred animals to a priest <b>applies</b> both <b>to a <i>koy</i> and to</b> the offspring of <b>diverse kinds</b> of animals. <b>Rabbi Eliezer says: A hybrid</b> that <b>results from</b> the mating of <b>a goat and a ewe is obligated to</b> have <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood given from it; a hybrid that results <b>from a <i>koy</i> is exempt from</b> having <b>gifts</b> of the priesthood given from it.

### Part 15
The Gemara analyzes the <i>baraita</i>: <b>What</b> type of <i>koy</i> <b>are we dealing with? If we say</b> that we are dealing <b>with a goat who mates with a doe, and she gives birth, granted,</b> this is consistent <b>according</b> to the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer, who deems</b> it <b>exempt</b> from having gifts of the priesthood given from it. As <b>he holds</b> that <b>we do not say</b> that the word <b>“sheep”</b> (see Deuteronomy 18:3) means that <b>even</b> if it is <b>partially a sheep</b> one must give gifts of the priesthood from it, as paternity is ignored and this <i>koy</i> is considered solely the offspring of a doe, exempting it from having gifts given from it.

### Part 16
<b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> even if it is <b>granted that they hold</b> that the word <b>“sheep”</b> means that <b>even</b> if it is <b>partially a sheep,</b> or any other type of domesticated animal, one is obligated to give gifts of the priesthood from it, why should the owner of this <i>koy</i> be required to give the gifts to a priest? <b>Granted, he does not give</b> the priest <b>half</b> of the gifts, since half of the <i>koy</i>, i.e., the mother’s component, is an undomesticated animal; but with regard to <b>the other half,</b> as well, <b>let him say to</b> the priest: <b>Bring proof that one</b> needs <b>to be concerned with its paternity and take</b> that half; otherwise receive nothing.

### Part 17
<b>Rather,</b> we are dealing <b>with</b> the case of <b>a deer who mates with a female goat and she gives birth. Granted,</b> this is consistent <b>according to</b> the opinion of <b>the Rabbis,</b> who say that one is obligated to give gifts of the priesthood from it, as <b>what</b> is meant by: <b>Obligated?</b> It means: It is obligated <b>in half of the gifts,</b> since on its mother’s side the goat component is subject to the obligation to give the gifts, but with regard to the other half of the gifts he can tell the priest: Bring proof that one need not be concerned with paternity, and take it. <b>But according to</b> the opinion of <b>Rabbi Eliezer,</b> who says that one need not be concerned with paternity at all, such that this <i>koy</i> would be considered a domesticated animal like its mother, <b>let</b> the owner <b>be obligated in all of the gifts.</b> Why, then, does Rabbi Eliezer deem him exempt?

### Part 18
The Gemara answers: <b>Actually,</b> it is referring <b>to a deer who mates with a female goat, and she gives birth, and Rabbi Eliezer is also uncertain whether,</b> in determining the species of an animal, <b>one</b> needs <b>to be concerned with its paternity or not.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>But since</b> the conclusion is <b>that the Rabbis are uncertain and Rabbi Eliezer is uncertain, in what</b> case <b>do they disagree</b> where Rabbi Eliezer deems the owner exempt from giving the gifts entirely?

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC