
### Part 1
<b>of the skinners, and some say in the market of the Sages, he would see</b> these lungs <b>that were full of jugs,</b> i.e., they were covered in large cysts full of liquid, <b>and he</b> would <b>not say anything to</b> the butchers. Evidently, he held that the animals were kosher.

### Part 2
The Gemara relates that <b>Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Asi were passing through the market of Tiberias. They saw these</b> lungs <b>that were full of rocks,</b> i.e., large, hard growths, <b>and they did not say anything to</b> the butchers. Evidently, they held that the animals were kosher.

### Part 3
§ It <b>was stated</b> that the <i>amora’im</i> disagree with regard to <b>a needle that was found in the lung</b> of a slaughtered animal: <b>Rabbi Yoḥanan and Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Ḥanina deem</b> the animal <b>kosher,</b> while <b>Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish and Rabbi Mani bar Pattish and Rabbi Shimon ben Elyakim deem</b> it <b>a <i>tereifa</i>.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara suggests: <b>Let us say</b> that <b>they disagree about this: That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., those who deem it a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b>a deficiency on the inside</b> of the lung, created by the needle, <b>is considered a deficiency,</b> rendering the animal a <i>tereifa</i>; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., those who deem it kosher, <b>holds</b> that <b>it is not considered a deficiency.</b> The Gemara responds: <b>No, everyone</b> holds that <b>a deficiency on the inside is not considered a deficiency. And here,</b> in the case of a needle, the Sages <b>disagree with regard to this:</b> One <b>Sage,</b> i.e., those who deem it kosher, <b>holds</b> that the needle <b>took the respiratory route and came</b> into the lung without perforating the membrane; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> i.e., those who deem it a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>holds</b> that <b>it perforated</b> its way out of the digestive system <b>and came</b> through to the lung by perforating its membrane.

### Part 5
The Gemara relates that <b>a certain needle was found in a piece of lung</b> after it had been cut into pieces. People there <b>brought it before Rabbi Ami,</b> and <b>he thought to deem it kosher. Rabbi Yirmeya, and some say Rabbi Zerika, raised an objection to</b> this possible ruling from the mishna: <b>The lung that was perforated or that was missing</b> a piece renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>. Now, <b>what</b> is the case of a lung that was <b>missing</b> a piece? <b>If we say</b> that it was missing a piece <b>on the outside, this is</b> the same as if it <b>was perforated,</b> since any missing piece of the lung wall constitutes a perforation. <b>Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> referring to a missing piece <b>on the inside?</b> If so, <b>learn from</b> the mishna that <b>a deficiency on the inside</b> of an organ <b>is considered a deficiency,</b> and the needle certainly caused a deficiency inside the lung.

### Part 6
Rabbi Ami did not decide the matter, so <b>they then sent</b> the lung <b>before Rabbi Yitzḥak Nappaḥa. He,</b> too, <b>thought to deem it kosher. Rabbi Yirmeya, and some say Rabbi Zerika, raised an objection to this</b> from the mishna: <b>The lung that was perforated or that was missing</b> a piece renders the animal a <i>tereifa</i>. Now, <b>what</b> is the case of a lung that was <b>missing</b> a piece? <b>If we say</b> that it was missing a piece <b>on the outside, this is</b> the same as if it <b>was perforated. Rather,</b> is it <b>not</b> referring to a missing piece <b>on the inside?</b> If so, <b>learn from</b> the mishna that <b>a deficiency on the inside</b> of an organ <b>is considered a deficiency.</b>

### Part 7
<b>They then sent</b> the lung <b>back before Rabbi Ami, and he deemed</b> the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>. They said to him: But don’t the Rabbis,</b> i.e., Rabbi Yoḥanan, Rabbi Elazar, and Rabbi Ḥanina, <b>deem it kosher?</b> Rabbi Ami <b>said to them: They deemed it kosher since they knew for which reason they deemed it kosher.</b> They were confronted with a whole lung and could see that it had no perforation. But <b>we, for which reason shall we deem it kosher?</b> We see only part of the lung. <b>Perhaps if the</b> whole <b>lung was before us</b> we would see that its membrane <b>was perforated.</b>

### Part 8
The Gemara asks: One can infer that the <b>reason</b> he deemed it a <i>tereifa</i> is <b>that</b> the entire lung <b>was not</b> before him, <b>but</b> if it <b>had been</b> before him <b>and</b> the membrane <b>had not been perforated,</b> then he would have deemed the animal <b>kosher. But doesn’t Rav Naḥman say: This bronchus of the lung that was perforated</b> renders the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>?</b> Accordingly, even if the needle entered the lung through a bronchus the animal ought to be a <i>tereifa</i>. The Gemara responds: <b>That</b> statement of Rav Naḥman <b>was stated</b> in reference <b>to</b> a case where a needle pierced from one bronchus into <b>another.</b> Since the bronchi are hard, one bronchus cannot seal a perforation in another. By contrast, when a needle perforates the bronchi and continues into the flesh of the lung, soft tissue left behind can seal the perforation.

### Part 9
The Gemara asks: <b>But doesn’t Rav Naḥman say:</b> If <b>this spiral colon was perforated against another</b> coil of the intestine, the other coil <b>protects it</b> by sealing the perforation? If so, why does a bronchus not seal a perforation in another bronchus? <b>Rav Ashi said: Are</b> you <b>comparing <i>tereifot</i> to one another? One cannot say with regard to <i>tereifot</i>: This is similar to that, as one cuts</b> an animal <b>from here,</b> in one place, <b>and it dies,</b> while <b>one cuts it from there,</b> in another place, <b>and it lives.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara recounts the case of <b>a certain needle that was found in the large,</b> i.e., main, <b>bronchus of the lung. They brought it before the Rabbis who deem</b> an animal <b><i>tereifa</i></b> if a needle is found in the lungs, i.e., Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish, Rabbi Mani bar Pattish, and Rabbi Shimon ben Elyakim. <b>They did not say</b> that <b>it</b> was <b>prohibited, nor</b> that it was <b>permitted. They did not say it</b> was <b>permitted, in accordance with their ruling,</b> but <b>they also did not say it</b> was <b>prohibited since</b> the needle <b>was found in the large bronchus,</b> and one can therefore <b>say</b> that it likely <b>took the respiratory route and came</b> into the lung rather than perforating through from the digestive system.

### Part 11
§ The Gemara relates that there was <b>a certain needle that was found in a piece of liver. Mar, son of Rav Yosef, thought to deem</b> the animal <b>a <i>tereifa</i>. Rav Ashi said to him: If</b> a needle <b>had been found in the flesh, like this case</b> where it was found in the liver, <b>would</b> the <b>Master have deemed it a <i>tereifa</i>?</b> A perforated liver, like perforated flesh, does not in itself render the animal a <i>tereifa</i>, as is evident from the mishna (42a). <b>Rather, Rav Ashi said</b> that <b>we see: If the eye</b> of the needle faces <b>outward,</b> toward the stomach cavity, one must presume that <b>it perforated</b> its way out of the gullet, rendering the animal a <i>tereifa</i>, <b>and</b> thereby <b>came</b> to the liver. <b>If the eye</b> of the needle faces <b>inward,</b> buried in the liver, and the sharp end of the needle is facing outward, one may presume that <b>it took hold of</b> a blood <b>vessel and came</b> to the liver through it, rather than through the gullet, and the animal is kosher.

### Part 12
The Gemara adds: <b>And this statement</b> applies only <b>to a thick</b> needle, the eye of which is not sharp enough to cause a perforation by itself. <b>But</b> if the needle is <b>thin,</b> it <b>is no different if the eye</b> faces <b>inward</b> and it <b>is no different if the eye</b> faces <b>outward,</b> and one must presume that <b>it perforated</b> its way out of the gullet <b>and</b> thereby <b>came</b> to the liver.

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> in <b>what</b> way <b>is</b> this case <b>different from</b> that of <b>a needle that is found</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC