
### Part 1
<strong>MISHNA:</strong> In the case of <b>one who slaughters</b> by cutting <b>one</b> <i>siman</i>, i.e., the windpipe or the gullet, <b>in a bird, and two</b> <i>simanim</i> <b>in an animal, his slaughter is valid, and</b> the halakhic status of <b>the majority of one</b> <i>siman</i> <b>is like</b> that of the entire <i>siman</i>. <b>Rabbi Yehuda says:</b> The slaughter is not valid <b>until he cuts the veins [<i>haveridin</i>],</b> i.e., the major blood vessels in the neck. If one cut <b>half of one</b> <i>siman</i> <b>in a bird or one and a half</b> <i>simanim</i> <b>in an animal, his slaughter is not valid.</b> If one cut <b>the majority of one</b> <i>siman</i> <b>in a bird or the majority of two</b> <i>simanim</i> <b>in an animal, his slaughter is valid.</b>

### Part 2
<strong>GEMARA:</strong> The Gemara infers from the term: <b>One who slaughters,</b> that if one slaughtered, then <b>after the fact, yes,</b> the slaughter is valid; but <b><i>ab initio</i>, no,</b> it is prohibited. The Gemara asks: Is the ruling with regard to the cutting of <b>two</b> <i>simanim</i> <b>in an animal</b> that <b><i>ab initio</i>, no,</b> it is prohibited? If so, <b>how much</b> is one expected <b>to continue and cut</b> the <i>simanim</i>, <i>ab initio</i>? There are only two relevant <i>simanim</i> to be cut. The Gemara answers: <b>If you wish, say</b> that the reference is <b>to</b> the cutting of <b>one</b> <i>siman</i> <b>in a bird,</b> as one is required to cut both <i>simanim</i> in a bird <i>ab initio</i>. <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that the reference is <b>to</b> the passage in the mishna that states that the halakhic status of <b>the majority of one</b> <i>siman</i> <b>is like</b> that of the entire <i>siman</i>, as one is required to cut the entire <i>siman ab initio</i>.

### Part 3
§ <b><i>Kaf</i>, <i>mem</i>, <i>shin</i></b> is <b>a mnemonic</b> for the sources of the statements cited in the discussion that follows: Rav Kahana, Rav Yeimar, and the school of Rabbi Yishmael.

### Part 4
<b>Rav Kahana says: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to slaughter that it is</b> performed <b>from the neck?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “And he shall slaughter [<i>veshaḥat</i>] the young bull</b> before the Lord” (Leviticus 1:5), which is interpreted homiletically: <b>From the place where</b> the animal <b>bends [<i>shaḥ</i>], purify it [<i>ḥattehu</i>]</b> through slaughter. The Gemara asks: <b>From where</b> does one ascertain <b>that this</b> term, <b><i>ḥattehu</i>, is an expression of purification?</b> The Gemara answers: It is ascertained from a verse, <b>as it is written: “And he shall purify [<i>veḥitte</i>] the house”</b> (Leviticus 14:52). <b>And if you wish, say</b> instead that it is ascertained <b>from here: “Purge me [<i>teḥatte’eni</i>] with hyssop and I will be pure”</b> (Psalms 51:9).

### Part 5
The Gemara challenges: <b>And say</b> that slaughter is <b>from its tail,</b> which is also a place in the animal’s body that is bent. The Gemara responds: From the term: <b>Bends [<i>shaḥ</i>],</b> one can conclude <b>by inference that we require</b> a part of the animal’s body that can stand <b>erect</b> and that bends; <b>and this,</b> the tail, <b>is bent perpetually</b> and is never erect. The Gemara challenges: <b>And say</b> that slaughter is <b>from its ear,</b> which is erect and bends. The Gemara explains: <b>We require</b> that slaughter be performed on a part of the animal’s body from which <b>blood of the soul</b> is spilled, <b>and</b> when one cuts the ear <b>there is no</b> blood of the soul spilled.

### Part 6
The Gemara asks: <b>And say that one rends</b> the animal starting from the ear <b>and continues until the blood of the soul</b> is spilled. <b>And furthermore,</b> with regard to those actions that invalidate slaughter, i.e., <b>interrupting</b> the slaughter, <b>pressing</b> the knife, <b>concealing</b> the knife in the course of an inverted slaughter, <b>diverting</b> the knife from the place of slaughter, <b>and ripping</b> the <i>simanim</i> from their place before cutting them, <b>from where do we</b> derive them? <b>Rather,</b> these disqualifications are learned through <b>tradition,</b> i.e., a <i>halakha</i> transmitted to Moses from Sinai. The requirement of <b>slaughter from the neck is also</b> learned through <b>tradition,</b> and has no biblical source.

### Part 7
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if the <i>halakha</i> is derived through tradition, <b>what</b> <i>halakha</i> does <b>the verse:</b> “And you shall slaughter,” <b>come to</b> teach? The Gemara answers: The verse serves to teach <b>that</b> one should <b>not</b> sever the head completely from the animal’s body and <b>render it a broken</b> animal. He cuts only the windpipe and the gullet, which are adjacent to the major blood vessels.

### Part 8
<b>Rav Yeimar says:</b> From where is it derived that slaughter is performed from the neck? It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “And you shall slaughter [<i>vezavaḥta</i>]</b> of your herd and of your flock” (Deuteronomy 12:21), which is interpreted homiletically: <b>From the place where</b> the blood <b>flows [<i>shezav</i>], break it [<i>ḥattehu</i>],</b> i.e., cut it. The Gemara asks: <b>From where may</b> it <b>be inferred that this</b> term, <b><i>ḥattehu</i>, is an expression of breaking?</b> The Gemara answers: It is inferred from a verse, <b>as it is written: “Neither fear nor be dismayed [<i>teḥat</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 1:21); ensure that your spirit will not be broken.

### Part 9
The Gemara challenges: <b>And say</b> that an animal is slaughtered <b>from its nose,</b> from which mucus flows, as the verse did not mention blood. The Gemara responds: <b>We require</b> a fluid that <b>flows by means of breaking, and this</b> mucus <b>flows on its own.</b> The Gemara challenges: <b>And say</b> that an animal is slaughtered <b>from its heart</b> by means of stabbing. <b>And furthermore,</b> with regard to those actions that invalidate slaughter, i.e., <b>interrupting, pressing</b> the knife during slaughter, <b>concealing</b> the knife in the course of an inverted slaughter, <b>diverting</b> the knife from the place of slaughter, <b>and ripping, from where do we</b> derive them? <b>Rather,</b> these disqualifications are learned through <b>tradition.</b> The requirement of <b>slaughter from the neck is also</b> learned through <b>tradition.</b>

### Part 10
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if the <i>halakha</i> is derived through tradition, <b>what</b> <i>halakha</i> does the phrase in <b>the verse:</b> “And you shall slaughter” <b>come to</b> teach? The Gemara answers: The phrase serves to teach <b>that</b> one should <b>not</b> sever the head completely from the animal’s body and <b>render it a broken</b> animal. He cuts only the windpipe and the gullet.

### Part 11
<b>The school of Rabbi Yishmael taught:</b> From where is it derived that slaughter is performed from the neck? It is derived from a verse, as it is stated: <b>“And he shall slaughter [<i>veshaḥat</i>]”</b> (Leviticus 1:5). <b>Do not read</b> it as: <b><i>Veshaḥat</i>; rather,</b> read it as: <b><i>Vesaḥat</i>,</b> which literally means: And he shall squeeze, which is interpreted homiletically: <b>From the place where</b> the animal <b>speaks [<i>saḥ</i>], purify it [<i>ḥattehu</i>].</b> The animal’s voice emanates from its throat; therefore, it is slaughtered from the neck.

### Part 12
The Gemara objects: <b>And say</b> that slaughter is <b>from its tongue.</b> The Gemara explains: <b>We require</b> that slaughter be performed on a part of the animal’s body from which <b>blood of the soul</b> is spilled, <b>and</b> when one cuts the tongue <b>there is no</b> blood of the soul spilled. The Gemara objects: <b>And say that one rends</b> the animal starting from the tongue <b>and continues until the blood of the soul</b> is spilled. <b>And furthermore,</b> with regard to those actions that invalidate slaughter, i.e., <b>interrupting, pressing</b> the knife, <b>concealing</b> the knife, <b>diverting</b> the knife, <b>and ripping, from where do we</b> derive them? <b>Rather,</b> these disqualifications are learned through <b>tradition.</b> The requirement of <b>slaughter from the neck is also</b> learned through <b>tradition.</b>

### Part 13
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if the <i>halakha</i> is derived through tradition, <b>what</b> <i>halakha</i> does the phrase in <b>the verse:</b> “And you shall slaughter,” <b>come to</b> teach? The Gemara answers: The phrase serves to teach <b>that</b> one should <b>not</b> sever the head completely from the animal’s body and <b>render it a broken</b> animal. He cuts only the windpipe and the gullet.

### Part 14
<b>And a <i>tanna</i></b> who recited <i>mishnayot</i> and <i>baraitot</i> in the study hall <b>cites</b> the source for the <i>halakha</i> that slaughter is performed from the neck <b>from here: As it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i> that <b>Rabbi Ḥiyya says: From where</b> is it derived <b>with regard to slaughter that it is</b> performed <b>from the neck?</b> It is derived from a verse, <b>as it is stated: “And Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall arrange the pieces,</b> the head, and the fat…upon the altar” (Leviticus 1:8).

### Part 15
Rabbi Ḥiyya explains: <b>As</b> there is <b>no</b> need for <b>the verse to state: “The head, and the fat.” What</b> is the meaning when <b>the verse states: “The head, and the fat”? Weren’t the head and the fat</b> included <b>in</b> the <b>category of all the pieces,</b> mentioned earlier in the verse? <b>For what</b> purpose did <b>they emerge</b> from the category and warrant individual mention? This is <b>due to</b> the fact <b>that it is stated: “And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it</b> into its pieces” (Leviticus 1:6). One might have thought that <b>I have</b> derived that <b>only the pieces that are</b> included <b>in the category of flaying</b> must be arranged on the altar. <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>to include the head, which was already</b> partially <b>severed</b> when the animal was slaughtered, and is not flayed? It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “With its head and its fat, and</b> the priest <b>shall arrange</b> them” (Leviticus 1:12).

### Part 16
The <i>tanna</i> concludes: <b>From</b> the fact <b>that</b> Rabbi Ḥiyya <b>says: The head, which was already</b> partially <b>severed,</b> one learns <b>by inference that slaughter is from the neck,</b> as the neck connects the head to the body.

### Part 17
The Gemara questions the formulation of the <i>baraita</i>. <b>And the <i>tanna</i></b> of the <i>baraita</i> <b>opened with</b> a question about the extraneous phrase written with regard to a bull burnt offering: <b>“The head, and the fat”</b> (Leviticus 1:8), <b>and concludes with</b> an explanation of the phrase written with regard to a sheep burnt offering: <b>“Its head and its fat”</b> (Leviticus 1:12). The Gemara answers that <b>this</b> is what the <i>tanna</i> <b>is saying: From where</b> is it derived <b>to include the head, which was already</b> partially <b>severed?</b> It is derived from a verse, as <b>the verse states: “The head, and the fat”</b> (Leviticus 1:8).

### Part 18
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the verse cited at the end of the <i>baraita</i>: <b>“Its head and its fat”?</b> The Gemara answers: The verse <b>is necessary for that which is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: <b>From where</b> is it derived <b>that the head and the fat precede all the</b> other <b>pieces</b>when the sacrificial portions are sacrificed on the altar? <b>The verse states: “With its head and its fat, and</b> the priest <b>shall arrange</b> them” (Leviticus 1:12).

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC