
### Part 1
The Gemara asks further: <b>And</b> how do <b>the Rabbis</b> respond to Rabbi Ilai’s claim? The Gemara answers: The Rabbis do not accept that the conjunction “and” goes back and combines the two matters together, as, if that were so, <b>let the Merciful One write neither “and” nor “the first.”</b>

### Part 2
The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> how does <b>Rabbi Ilai</b> respond to this contention? The Gemara answers that Rabbi Ilai would say that the first sheared wool and <i>teruma</i> are essentially different obligations, as the first sheared wool is merely a monetary obligation with no inherent sanctity. By contrast, it is prohibited for non-priests to partake of <i>teruma</i>. <b>Since this</b> case of the first sheared wool involves only <b>sanctity</b> that inheres in its <b>value, and that</b> case of <i>teruma</i> referred to in the beginning of the verse involves <b>inherent sanctity,</b> the verse <b>separated them</b> through the repetition of the term “the first,” <b>and</b> then the verse <b>went back and combined them</b> through the term “and,” so that their <i>halakhot</i> could be derived from one another.

### Part 3
The Gemara provides an alternative explanation as to why the Rabbis do not derive the exemption of sheep owned in partnership with a gentile from the case of <i>teruma</i>. <b>If you wish, say</b> instead that <b>with regard to <i>teruma</i>, the Rabbis</b> hold that one who owns produce in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile</b> is in fact <b>obligated, as it is taught</b> in a <i>baraita</i>: If there were <b>a Jew and a gentile who purchased a field in partnership,</b> the produce grown in that field is considered to be <b>untithed produce,</b> which is subject to the <i>halakhot</i> of <i>terumot</i> and tithes, <b>and non-sacred</b> produce, which is exempt from the requirements of <i>terumot</i> and tithes, <b>mixed together;</b> this is <b>the statement of Rabbi</b> Yehuda HaNasi. <b>Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says:</b> The portion <b>of the Jew is obligated</b> in <i>teruma</i> and tithes, <b>but</b> the portion <b>of the gentile is exempt.</b>

### Part 4
The Gemara explains the inference. <b>They disagree only with regard to</b> the following issue: <b>That</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel, <b>holds</b> that <b>there is</b> retroactive <b>clarification,</b> which means that when they divide the produce it will be clarified who owned which produce from the outset; <b>and</b> one <b>Sage,</b> Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, <b>holds</b> that <b>there is no</b> retroactive <b>clarification,</b> and because it grew in a mixed state, it retains that status even after they divide the produce. <b>But</b> with regard to produce that a Jew owns in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile, everyone agrees</b> that it is <b>obligated</b> in <i>teruma</i>.

### Part 5
The Gemara presents an alternative explanation of Rabbi Ilai’s opinion: <b>If you wish, say</b> instead that Rabbi Ilai does not derive only the exemption of sheep owned in partnership with a Jew from the term “your flock” while he derives the exemption of sheep owned in partnership with a gentile from the term “your grain.” Rather, <b>according to Rabbi Ilai both</b> exemptions are <b>derived from</b> the term <b>“your flock.”</b>

### Part 6
The Gemara explains why both exemptions can be derived from a single phrase: With regard to <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile, what is the reason</b> that one is exempted from the obligation of the first sheared wool? It is due to the fact <b>that</b> the sheep is <b>not exclusively his.</b> In the case of a partnership <b>with a Jew too,</b> the sheep is <b>not exclusively his.</b> The Gemara asks: <b>And</b> what do <b>the Rabbis</b> reply to this claim of Rabbi Ilai? The Gemara answers: The Rabbis hold that partnership with a Jew cannot be compared to partnership with a gentile, as <b>a gentile is not obligated</b> in the mitzva of the first sheared wool, whereas <b>a Jew is obligated.</b>

### Part 7
§ <b>Rava said</b> with regard to the dispute between the Rabbis and Rabbi Ilai: Although <b>Rabbi Ilai</b> holds that two partners who own a sheep are exempt from the first sheared wool, he <b>concedes</b> that jointly owned produce is obligated <b>in <i>teruma</i>.</b> This is the <i>halakha</i> <b>even though it is written</b> with regard to <i>teruma</i>: <b>“Your grain”</b> (Deuteronomy 18:4), using the singular pronoun, from which one may infer that with regard to <b>yours, yes,</b> one is obligated, whereas with regard to that <b>which is</b> owned <b>in partnership,</b> the partners are <b>not</b> obligated.

### Part 8
The Gemara explains that the joint owners of produce are nevertheless obligated in <i>teruma</i>, as <b>the Merciful One writes:</b> “There will I require <b>your <i>terumot</i>”</b> (Ezekiel 20:40). The use of the plural pronoun in this verse indicates that even partners who own produce are obligated in <i>teruma</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the term: <b>“Your grain,”</b> using the singular pronoun? The Gemara answers: This serves <b>to exclude</b> produce owned in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile.</b>

### Part 9
Similarly, with regard to <b><i>ḥalla</i>,</b> the portion of dough that one is required to separate and give to a priest, Rabbi Ilai concedes that joint owners are obligated in this mitzva, <b>even though</b> one could claim otherwise, <b>as it is written:</b> “Of <b>the first</b> of your dough you shall set apart a cake for a gift” (Numbers 15:20), <b>and it is possible to say</b> that one <b>should derive</b> a verbal analogy between the term <b>“the first”</b> in this context and the term <b>“the first” from the first sheared wool: Just as there,</b> with regard to the first sheared wool, if the sheep are owned <b>in partnership</b> the owners are <b>not</b> obligated, <b>so too here,</b> with regard to <i>ḥalla</i>, if the dough is owned <b>in partnership</b> they are <b>not</b> obligated. Nevertheless, <b>the Merciful One writes: “Your dough,”</b> using a plural pronoun, indicating that even joint owners of dough are obligated to separate <i>ḥalla</i>.

### Part 10
The Gemara challenges: <b>But</b> according to this claim, <b>the reason</b> joint owners of dough are obligated to separate <i>ḥalla</i> is <b>that it is written “your dough,”</b> using a plural pronoun. It can be inferred from here that <b>were that not</b> the case <b>I would say</b> that they are exempt, as <b>derived</b> by a verbal analogy between the term <b>“the first”</b> mentioned with regard to <i>ḥalla</i> and the term <b>“the first” from the first sheared wool. On the contrary,</b> one <b>should derive</b> a verbal analogy between the term “the first” with regard to <i>ḥalla</i> and the term “the first” <b>from <i>teruma</i>:</b> Just as the obligation to separate <i>teruma</i> applies to produce owned in partnership, so too, the obligation to separate <i>ḥalla</i> applies to dough owned in partnership. It is preferable to compare <i>ḥalla</i> to <i>teruma</i>, because their halakhic status is similar in that they are both prohibited to non-priests. If so, the inference from the term “your dough” is unnecessary.

### Part 11
The Gemara explains: It <b>is indeed so;</b> the obligation of produce owned in partnership in the case of <i>ḥalla</i> is derived from the case of <i>teruma</i>. <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the term <b>“your dough”?</b> This teaches that the quantity of dough to which the obligation of <i>ḥalla</i> applies <b>is equivalent to</b> the quantity of <b>your dough,</b> i.e., the quantity of dough kneaded daily by the Jewish people when they were in the Sinai Desert, when the mitzva was given. This is one <i>omer</i> for each person (see Exodus 16:16), which is a tenth of an ephah (see Exodus 16:36).

### Part 12
Likewise, with regard to <b><i>pe’a</i>,</b> produce in the corner of the field that is left for the poor, Rabbi Ilai concedes that the joint owners of produce are obligated, <b>even though it is written</b> in the verse cited below: <b>“Your field [<i>sadekha</i>],”</b> using a singular pronoun, from which it can be inferred that with regard to <b>your</b> field, <b>yes,</b> one is obligated, whereas with regard to that <b>which is</b> owned <b>in partnership,</b> one is <b>not</b> obligated. The reason is that <b>the Merciful One writes: “And when you reap [<i>uvekutzrekhem</i>] the harvest of your land,</b> you shall not entirely reap the corner of your field” (Leviticus 19:9). The term “when you reap” uses the plural pronoun, which indicates that even partners of land are obligated in <i>pe’a</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the term <b>“your field”</b> in the singular? The Gemara answers: This serves <b>to exclude</b> land owned in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile</b> from the obligation of <i>pe’a</i>.

### Part 13
Similarly, with regard to the <b>firstborn</b> status of a male firstborn kosher animal, Rabbi Ilai concedes that jointly owned animals are sanctified, <b>even though it is written: “All the firstborn that are born of your herd [<i>bivkarekha</i>] and of your flock [<i>tzonekha</i>]</b> that are male you shall sanctify to the Lord your God” (Deuteronomy 15:19). Once again it might have been inferred from the singular pronoun in the terms “your herd” and “your flock” that <b>your</b> firstborn, <b>yes,</b> are sanctified, but the firstborn <b>that is</b> owned <b>in partnership</b> is <b>not</b> sanctified.

### Part 14
Therefore, <b>the Merciful One writes:</b> “And there you shall bring there your burnt offerings, and your peace offerings, and your tithes, and the gift of your hand, and your vows, and your gift offerings, <b>and the firstborn of your herd [<i>bekarkhem</i>] and of your flock [<i>tzonekhem</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 12:6). The pronouns in the terms “your herd” and “your flock” in this verse are in the plural, which indicates that firstborn animals owned in partnership are sanctified. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>why do I</b> need the terms <b>“your herd” and “your flock”</b> (Deuteronomy 15:19), where the pronouns are in the singular? The Gemara again answers: This serves <b>to exclude</b> animals owned in <b>partnership</b> with <b>a gentile,</b> which are not sanctified.

### Part 15
Likewise, with regard to <b>a <i>mezuza</i>,</b> Rabbi Ilai concedes that the house of two partners is obligated, <b>even though it is written:</b> “And you shall write them upon the doorposts of <b>your house [<i>beitekha</i>]”</b> (Deuteronomy 6:9), with a singular pronoun, from which one might have inferred that with regard to <b>your</b> house, <b>yes,</b> it is obligated, whereas a house owned by two people <b>in partnership</b> is <b>not</b> obligated. Consequently, <b>the Merciful One writes</b> with regard to the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>: <b>“So that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children”</b> (Deuteronomy 11:21). The use of the plural pronoun in the terms “your days” and “your children” in this verse indicates that partners are obligated in the mitzva of <i>mezuza</i>. The Gemara asks: <b>But</b> if so, <b>for what</b> purpose does the term <b>“your house [<i>beitekha</i>]” come?</b> The Gemara answers: It is necessary <b>for that which Rabba</b> derived, <b>as Rabba said:</b>

>Credit : William Davidson Edition
>License : CC-BY-NC